M2660 12812581 94112
Imprimatur. Sam. Parker. ERRATA. In the Pref. to the Exposit. pag. 4. l. 2. Interims, read, in terms. In the Exposit. p. 11. l. 1. r. the Church in Thyatira. p. 53. l. 21. r. in Thyatira. p. 107. l. 26. r. event. In the Antidote. p. 11. l. ult. for at, r. all. p. 27. l. 17. r. impossible, or. p. 91. l. 24. r. .
AN EXPOSITION OF THE SEVEN EPISTLES TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES; Together with A Brief Discourse of IDOLATRY; with Application to the Church of ROME. By HENRY MORE D. D. PROV. 12. 19. The lying tongue is but for a moment: but the lip of Truth shall be established for ever. London, Printed by James Flesher. 1669.
To the Right Honourable, John Lord Robarts, Baron of Truro, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and one of his Majestie's most Honourable Privy COUNCIL. My Lord, WHat things single are usu∣ally thought sufficient to determine ones choice of a Patron to any publick Writing, whether it be private Obligation from particular Favours, or the Desire of leaving to Posterity a just and honourable Te∣stimony to the Parts and Vertues of some excellent Person, or the design
of obtaining the Patronage and countenance of such a Person, to what we adventure to make publick, as is able by his Learning, Judgement and publick Repute to protect it from Injury; all these do so hap∣pily conspire in your Lordship, that I should have thought it an Omission unpardonable if I had not taken this opportunity of paying your Lord∣ship this due respect, and of doing that right to the Truth I here pro∣fesse as to put it under the wings of so fit and able a Patron. Which still ought to be done with the greater alacrity, there being that Providentiall Coincidence of things, that I should have a Book ready in the Presse at that very time that our Gracious Sovereign did think good to conferre upon your
Lordship that great Honour and Trust of being Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Which conjuncture of Cir∣cumstances could not but excite me with greater readinesse to make your Lordship this congratulatory Pre∣sent upon your new Honour. Which all good Christians that know the inflexible uprightnesse of your spirit, and cordiall adherence to the Apo∣stolick Faith and just Interest of Reformed Christendome, cannot but congratulate. For this it is indeed, My Lord, that has begot in me a more special esteem of your Lordship, that in this instable and uncertain Age you have with that steadinesse of minde and clearnesse of Judgement stuck to the Truth and Purity of the Protestant Religion, as discerning the vast dif∣ference
betwixt it and Popery, which yet too many now-adays, either be∣cause they are removed too great a distance from all Religion, or else because their sight is extreme∣ly dim in matters of this nature, can not, or will not, discern. But this is spoke with a more particu∣lar regard to the second part of this small Volume I present your Lord∣ship withall. But the first also has its speciall sutablenesse to the Circumstances your Lordship is placed in. For by how much more power any one is intrusted with by any Protestant Prince, by so much the more he is concerned to understand how sacred a Province he undertakes, and how expresly that Religion and Professi∣on is owned in the Holy Prophecies
Christ has delivered to his Church, above and against the barbarous and idolatrous Tyrannie of the Church of Rome. Which things are set out with that plainnesse, evidence and easiness in this Ex∣position of the Epistles to the Seven Churches that I hope no impartial Reader can fail of being made ex∣ceeding sensible of the Sacrednesse of the Protestant Religion and In∣terest by the perusall thereof. Be∣sides, that there are some notable Hints in these Oracles for the more happy and secure management of the Affairs of Reformed Christen∣dome. I shall onely name that passage to the Sardian Church, Remember how thou hast received, and heard, and hold fast, &c. The Verse runs
out into a dreadfull Commination of heavy Judgements to the Angel of the Church of Sardis for his loose∣nesse and slipperinesse in those points of Apostolick Doctrine which the Reformers had recovered into the knowledge of so great a part of the world. And amongst the things that they had heard, that voice of the Angel, Apoc. 18. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, &c. was not the least articulate. Whereby the Church of Rome was openly decla∣red to be that Babylong the Great, the Mother of Fornications and the Abominations of the Earth; as also the Pope with his Clergie to be that notorious Antichrist. This the Sardian Church had re∣ceived from their Evangelicall
Predecessours. And it had been their everlasting establishment ne∣ver to have for got it, never to have let it die, or smothered it. But what mischief the halting betwixt two Opinions is apt to doe, and the not taking notice how sacred a thing the Protestant Religion is in the sight of God, and how rejectane∣ous that of the Church of Rome, I believe neither your Lordship nor any one else that has his eyes opened either into History or the Affairs of the world can be igno∣rant of, or, if he be a good Chri∣stian, make the observation with∣out regrett and sorrow. But the Prospect of what is to come is more pleasing and com∣fortable; which is the state of the Church of Philadelphia, into
which the Sardian Church, that is to say, Reformed Christendome or the Protestant Churches, are to passe, as being the next succes∣sive Intervall. Which therefore cannot but be a Note of main im∣portance for all Reformed States and Kingdomes to stear their Af∣fairs by, namely, to bend their course thitherward whither they are pointed to by the Finger of God himself in his Holy Oracles. For they sail as it were with winde and tide whose carriage of Af∣fairs approaches the nearest to the purpose of Divine Fate. Which is lively pourtray'd all along in this stupendious Book of Prophe∣cies written by S. John. The most pleasing and enra∣vishing part whereof is that which
is typify'd or prefigured by the Church of Philadelphia, the Church of Brotherly love. Which is the next Scene Divine Provi∣dence has designed to introduce. And which all those do most grosly oppose who for difference in matters not revealed in holy Scripture, nor necessary to Salva∣tion, think they have pretense e∣nough with all unchristian keen∣nesse and bitternesse of spirit to reproach and inveigh one against another, to nourish the highest Animosities, and to watch all op∣portunities of persecuting, rui∣ning, and trampling one another into the Dirt. As this is extremely unchristi∣an in it self, so is it also diame∣trically opposite to that Dispensa∣tion
that God intends to intro∣duce into his Church as the chief∣est Blessing he has in store for her, and is as it were knocking at the door to enter, if the lovd noise of hot and quarrelsome Brawls about matters of smaller moment (as indeed all things are exceeding small, unlesse of A∣postolicall Institution, if they stand in competition with that Royal Law of Love,) did not drown the voice thereof, that it cannot so easily be heard. But assuredly, my Lord, the letting this Philadelphian Dis∣pensation in, or the approaching as near unto it as we can, will prove the most effectuall healing and consolidating the Interest of Reformed Christendome, as well
in the whole as in the parts there∣of, as we can desire or expect. Which therefore I humbly conceive, that all persons the more Power they are intrusted with in any of the Pro∣testant Dominions, are the more ob∣liged to consider by how much more they are obliged to endeavour to promote the Interest of their Prince and Countrey whose Affairs they administer. And therefore the right understanding of the Vision of the Seven Churches so mani∣festly giving this aim for the pro∣sperous steering of Affairs, I thought this my Exposition of the said Churches no unsutable Pre∣sent in these Circumstances to be made unto your Lordship. Of the Usefulnesse whereof I having spo∣ken more particularly in my Pre∣face,
I leave the whole to your Lordship's judicious and favou∣rable perusall, and wishing you all good Successe in the great Charge his Majesty has intrusted you with, I cease to give you any farther trouble then in subscribing my self, My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and affectionate Servant, HENRY MORE.
The PREFACE to the Reader, declaring the Occasion, Solidity and Use∣fulnesse of the ensuing Exposition. Reader, HOW unexpected this of mine may prove to thee I know not, but sure I am, it cannot be more then to my self, who, as I have never yet affected to bestow my pains on these kind of Subjects, so I thought my self secure, since the edition of the late Dialogues touching the Kingdome of God, from ever being engaged in them any more. For I made account that what was contained in Mr. Mede's Writings, and in Synopsis Prophetica, and the above-said Dialogues, might afford all usefull satisfaction to any sober Enquirer into these Mysteries▪ And I find neither my will nor my abi∣lities
to reach to the service of men in needlesse Curiosities. And therefore thou maist be sure I did not deem the Propheticall Exposition of these Se∣ven Epistles to the Seven Churches in Asia to be such, but rather that there was no such Exposition that belonged unto them, and therefore rested in the Literal sense, and an usefull Moral Application of them as they might sute any particular Church in any Age of the world placed in like Circumstances with any of these Seven Churches. And these things methought were so obvi∣ous, that it would have been a need∣lesse labour to have attempted any thing in so facil a matter, where others have done sufficiently well before. 2. But having sent the above-said Dialogues to a Gentleman in the Coun∣trey, to whom they were not unaccep∣table, as being curious of Subjects of this nature; after his civil acknow∣ledgements for my sending him the Book, and some pertinent Reflexions on the main matter, at last he falls up∣on this business of the Seven Churches
in these words: I find not, saith he, any late Writer apply the Seven Chur∣ches mystically, Revel. 2. and 3. Chap∣ters; Mr. BRIGHTMAN ha∣ving failed in his Application. But I suppose the farther enquiry into that point may be worth your pains. I shall now onely hint, that the Seven Churches may represent the State of the whole visible Church from Christ's time to the Day of Judge∣ment: viz. Ephesus, till Anno Christi 110; Smyrna, till 306; Pergamus, declining towards Popery, till the WALDENSIAN Separation, about Anno 1160; Thyatira, emerging from Popery, till the Pacification at Passaw in Germany 1552. and King ED∣WARD the Sixth's Reformation in England; Sardis, the state of Re∣formed Christendome, (the King∣dome of God,) since whole Nations fell from Rome, and untill Rome shall be totally subdued; Philadelphia, when Truth, Peace and Holinesse shall universally prevail, and the name of the New Jerusalem shall be
written upon the Church, as is ex∣presly promised Chap. 3. 12. Interims too august for such a poor Church as that was literally taken. And this may be a Key for all the rest. And lastly, Laodicea, when towards the end of the Thousand years Satan shall be again let loose a little space, and Gog and Magog shall trouble the Church, then luke-warm as in the days of Noah. This was the whole (verbatim) of what that Gentleman writ touching this matter. And this, Reader, was the Occasion of my undertaking, and the advantage I had for the more easily performing this Task of expounding these Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches. For the Intervalls here suggested, though they are most-what different from what up∣on due deliberation with my self I thought fittest to pitch upon, yet it is manifest that they could not but give aim toward a more speedy hitting the intended Mark, and a more quick dis∣patch of this Exposition which I pre∣sent thee with.
Indeed, upon my endeavouring to frame out the same, and my searching into Commentatours, I found that P. Galatinus interprets these Seven Chur∣ches of seven Intervalls of the Church from the beginning to the end thereof. This Cornelius à Lapide notes, but not a word of the Limits of these Inter∣valls. And since my compleating this Exposition, a learned Friend of mine shew'd me a passage in Mr. Mede, Lib. 5. c. 10. where he argues for a mysti∣call sense of these Seven Churches, and seems to insinuate that they should Pro∣phetically sample unto us a seven∣fold successive Temper and Condi∣tion of the whole visible Church, ac∣cording to the severall Ages thereof, answering to the Pattern of the Se∣ven Churches here, and that à prin∣cipio ad finem, and takes notice of the fitly placing of PHILADEL∣PHIA partly about the time the Beast is falling, and partly after his Destruction, accordingly as we had al∣ready set down in our Exposition. But the bounds of these successive Inter∣valls
he has not attempted to define. That Advantage therefore I had onely from the party I above mentioned, as well as the first Invitation to under∣take this present Design. 3. But now as to the Solidity of the Performance, although I must confess the clearnesse of the matter appeared so great to me at last, as that it infinitely exceeded my first expectations of it, and proved satisfactory to my self beyond what I thought possible; yet I will not here pre-ingage thy judgement or belief, but freely remit thee to the Exposition it self, the Preparations to it in the first and second Chapters, and the brief Re∣capitulation of the strength of it in the last. Onely, that thou maist have no∣thing to stumble at, I will endeavour to prevent thee in some Exceptions, the greatest I am aware of, and yet in my own judgement not considerable. 4. As first, I would not have thee, according to the manner of some, let thy minde dwell upon any thing that may seem less strong alone. As that Chap. 2. Sect. 11. where I intimate,
that because, in the Apoc. 1. 20. interpreting the Seven golden Candlesticks, they are not apply'd nominatim to the seven parti∣cular Churches in Asia that are said to be writ to, it is an Invitation to the thinking of a more released sense, and that some other seven Churches in ano∣ther kinde of meaning (as well as they, if not rather then they,) may be aimed at; this ought to be no prejudice to the other Arguments in the same Chapter that are so cogent, but rather those other to afford strength to this, which is added as an easy Probability, not a convictive Demonstration, and there∣fore is not considerable but in conjun∣ction with the rest, as is intimated in the very place. And I will onely adde here, That if there were no other sense then the Literal to be look'd after, that in all likelihood, for sureness to keep men from Errour, and from doing wrong to any Church by a false Interpretation, the Spirit of God would have expresly said, that the seven Candlesticks were the seven Churches of Asia that were there writ to, and that the seven Stars
were the seven Bishops of those very Churches. I must confess, in my own judgement, I think there is some such thing hinted at as I have declared, which made me not omit it. But I am also as sensible that it can signifie little to those that are averse, and are given to cavill, who are prone to dwell on what seems weak, that they may ease their minds of what is more strong and stringent. Which is a fault that is punishment e∣nough to him that commits it, he usu∣ally losing Truth by thus indulging to his own ill humour. 5. I know not whether thou mayst mistake me also in the Allusion I mem∣tion of Ephesus to , as if it soun∣ded like Aphesus, which I would war∣rant from  (one of the Matres lectio∣nis before the use of Points) standing for both A and E; whence I would ar∣gue the affinity of those two sounds: when as thou maist object, that Marti∣nius expresly speaking of these three Ma∣tres lectionis, , saith, that the first stands for A, the second for E
and I, and the third for O and U. But in Hebrew Writings without Points there is nothing more familiar then  standing for E, as in , and the like. And in the Greek tongue  and  and  and  are frequently changed into one another, according to diversity of Dia∣lect: so that there can be no difficulty touching this thing. 6. Thirdly, It may haply be objec∣ted against our interpreting the Ten days of Affliction predicted to the Church in Smyrna, of the Ten famous Persecutions, that some reckon more then ten, adding an eleventh under Constantius the Arian, a twelfth un∣der Julian the Apostate, and a thir∣teenth under the Arian Emperour Va∣lens. But Prophecy being an antici∣patorie History, it is sufficient that it speak according to the usual lan∣guage of Historians, whose reports run up on these Ten so famously and distinctly taken notice of. And there are no more then ten in the Inter∣vall we set for the Church of Smyrna.
After which conspicuously comes in the Scene of Pergamus, Christianity ha∣ving got the conquest over the old perse∣cuting Paganism. And Julian reigned not two years, and his Attempts were most-what of another kinde, and none considerable so as to break this number. Besides that it happened in an Inter∣vall notoriously of another nature and denomination, and therefore is not to be taken notice of, it bearing no propor∣tion at all to the contrary Affairs of that Period. Indeed the Arrian Persecutions are very considerable, but they are of ano∣ther nature from these Ten. The Church being  became proud, as well as exalted out of the dust, and contentious, as well as proud, according to that of the wise man, Prov. 13. 10. Onely by pride cometh con∣tention, but with the well-advised is wisedome. Christ was therefore faith∣full in his promise to the Church in Smyrna, and procured them the Crown of life, and Safety from the Pagan Cru∣elty and Persecution. But that the
Church afterwards in Pergamus fell out amongst themselves, was their own fault, none of his, that taught them expresly, That by this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love John 13, 35. one another. 7. Fourthly, It may perhaps seem hard to thee, that I interpret the eating of things offered to Idols of communi∣cating with the Church of Rome in Apoc. 2. 14, 20. their Idolatrous Masse. For how can that consecrated Bread be said to be offered to an Idol? It is true, he that they pretend to of∣fer it to is no Idol, but the true God. But by their Idolatrous practices, communi∣cating Divine Worship to what is not God, they debase the nature of the true God so far, as that they seem to lose the true Notion of him, and in stead of him to worship an Idol of their own brain. For the true God is not so mean a Being that any others can partake in his Worship. And therefore, according to the cutting and searching strain of the Prophetick style, those that mingle Ido∣latry
with the Worship of the true God are represented as having no true Knowledge of him; and therefore what∣ever religious Worship they doe, they being devoid of the knowledge of the true God, they must necessarily be con∣ceived to doe it to some Idol. Accor∣ding to which sense is that of Amos, O ye house of Israel, have ye offe∣red Chap. 5. 25. to me victimes and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wil∣dernesse? yea, ye took up the taber∣nacle of Moloch, &c. Where the true God, by reason of their Idolatry in wor∣shipping other Objects, denies they at any time worshipped him, though questionless they thought they did offer Victimes and Sacrifices unto him. This is express and direct to the Scruple propounded. But in our Exposition it is onely in∣sinuated, that there is a Propheticall Dio∣rism, or a Synecdoche, whereby Ido∣latry in the general is signify'd by that particular species thereof, the eating things offered unto Idols. Which is used here with the greater fitness and elegan∣cy, because that the Idolatry is committed
in that part of their Religion that is per∣formed in the eating of what is conse∣crated. And if we do but consider that the Lord's Supper is a Feast upon a Sa∣crifice, according to that of S. Paul, Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for 1 Cor. 5. 7. us; therefore let us keep the Feast, (which Notion is made out with abun∣dant evidence by a late learned and ju∣dicious See Dr. Cudworth's Discourse of the Lord's Supper. Writer on that Subject,) we once supposing the eating of this Sacrifice con∣taminated with Idolatry, what can be a more natural and apposite reproach to it, then to parallel it to the Feasts upon the Pagan Idolothyta, the eating of things offered unto Idols? Wherefore there is not the least harshnesse imaginable in this Interpretation. 8. Fifthly, That it may be no preju∣dice to thy judgement touching the In∣terpretation of Antipas, and its signi∣fying as much as one against the Pope, because that learned and reverend Ex∣positour Dr. Hammond has styled it a wanton and vain phancy in Mr. Bright∣man, who presumed so to interpret it, thou art to consider, that this Censure
of that Passage was not so much built upon any weakness in the Passage it self, as that it was found in a farrago of Conceits that were not so well mana∣ged as to support and countenance one another. And therefore for the gene∣ral Mr. Brightman's Exposition of these Seven Epistles being not so convictive, that judicious Doctour was the more bold to speak so slightly of this passage thereof. Which if it had been accom∣panied with other parts of his Exposi∣tion of these Epistles that had had the like unexceptionablenesse, it would ne∣ver have been found fault with by so judicious a Writer, as indeed there is no reason it should. For no name can be so fit and sig∣nificant for this purpose as this of . For  and , or , sig∣nifie one and the same thing, as Eu∣stathius and others from him usually do affirm. And it is most certainly true that they are both , as Hesychius speaks. And there∣fore  and , or , have exquisitely the same significa∣tion.
But to have found  for  in this supposed Prophecy had been quite against the laws of the Apocalyptick style, that is as re∣gardfull of due Concealment as of cer∣tainty of Revealment. So that so plain a Passage would have stood out very coursly and harshly above the rest of that smooth and delicate Contexture of these Visions, and occasioned a too∣early intelligence of the meaning of these Prophecies. Besides that Antipa∣pas is no proper name of any man, and that the very literal Story requires it should be Antipas. Wherefore the In∣dication both for sense and for sound in this word Antipas is as exquisite as, considering the nature of the Apoca∣lyptick style, it either could or ought to have been. So that he that would cavill at this interpretation must of ne∣cessity deny the Hypothesis, and say there is no Propheticall sense at all of these Seven Epistles. 9. Nor needest thou scruple at my applying that Passage of the Martyr An∣tipas to the Albigenses and Walden∣ses,
that were slain in the field, as if they were not rightly termed Martyrs. For he that can save his Life by re∣nouncing the Truth, and yet parts with it, (though it be in the field,) is right∣ly deemed a Martyr. Which was the case of these men. And that is remark∣able for this purpose which Mr. Mede takes notice of, That when Simon, Earl of Monfort, had routed them, and made a great slaughter of them, and that the Bishop of Tolouse there present took thereupon the opportunity of exhorting them to return to the Ro∣man Church, they seeing so plainly that the wrath of God was kindled against them for their Separation from the Church; they answered in plain terms, that they were the people of God over∣come by the Beast, (Apoc. 13. 7.) and knowing this to be their fate, yet would not flinch from the Truth: and there∣fore the Army returning upon them, they had all their throats cut in the field. Whence it is manifest that they were Martyrs properly so called, according to our Definition thereof: As there were
also severall Antipas's in this Inter∣vall that suffered Martyrdome in that way that thou canst not except against, that is to say, such as were merely pas∣sive, and made no resistence. Some of them are named by Mr. Brightman, who if he had done as well on the other five Churches as he has on this of Pergamus and that of Thyatira, his Exposition of the Seven Churches had been conside∣rable. 10. And lastly, to arm thee against the authority of the above-named Vene∣rable person touching the reason of the name of Thyatira, as if it were as much as Thygatira, a young Daughter; for which he perstringes Mr. Brightman, condemning the Conceit for a mere groundless Phancy; I say, it is not evi∣dent that he so much reprehends him for the Notation of the word, as for the application of it to such a sense as he there expresses: which is much different from that sense we have proposed, and far more dilute. But as for my self, I must confesse I could not but conceit that the Notation
of the word Thyatira was alluded to, after I had read that Passage in Corne∣lius à Lapide on the Text: which, for thy fuller satisfaction, I shall transcribe. Verùm Strabo, lib. 13. Plinius, lib. 5. cap. 9. & alii, passim tradunt eam (that is, the City Thyatira) primitùs nuncupatam à Seleuco, filio Nicanoris, , ob laetum nuncium natae sibi filiae, unde nomen Thyatirae. Thyati∣ra ergò Graecè significat filiam; quod aptè competit Jezebeli illici, quae hîc arguitur. This of Cornelius made me secure of the Authentickness of this No∣tation, he so precisely qùoting Strabo and Pliny for the same. And therefore I could not but persuade my self that the Church of Rome was here called Thyatira with some Allusion to . Had it not been for this, I should have contented my self with the Allusion to  onely. But these Authorities made me search into the State of the Church of Rome in this Intervall: and I found many things abundantly answerable to the Title in the sense of this Notation. A∣mongst
which if thou chance to think my Reflexion upon the multitude of Monks or Friers in those days to bear the least strength with it, consider but what Polydore Virgil writes of that one Order of Franciscans, who, as some De rerum Invent. lib. 17. cap. 4. others, were the peculiarly-devoted to the blessed Virgin: Totum terrarum orbem, saith he, una haec implevit Fa∣milia, ut vulgus jam tum stupefactum suspicaretur non tam Pietatem, quàm Otium & Ignaviam interdum multis cordi esse. And to have such swarms of men that had renounced their Viri∣lity, and led an idle life, and went gad∣ding and gossipping up and down, tel∣ling odd Stories to the people, as old Wives and Nurses do to Children, ha∣ving most of them Chins as smooth as Womens, and their Faces mob'd in Hoods, and long Coats like Petticoats, as if they had a greater ambition to appear the Pedissequae or Handmaids of the Virgin Mary, (whom the Doctours of that Church love to call the Daughter of God,) then the Men-servants and Souldiers of Jesus Christ, who in this
Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, on purpose, one would think to reproach the Roman Church for this Idola∣trous Corrivalry, or rather Prelati∣on, of the Virgin in religious Wor∣ship before Christ, expresly calls him∣self the Son of God; This, I say, Apc. 2. 18. must assuredly be a consider able acces∣sion to the Womanishnesse or Daugh∣terlinesse, if I may so speak, of the Church of Rome, which is here perstringed in this Period by an Allu∣sion to Thygatira, which signifies a Daughter. 11. And although upon search af∣ter those places cited out of Strabo and Pliny I could not find what I sought for, yet I found no reason to recede from this part of my Inter∣pretation. First, Because this pas∣sage Cornelius cites may haply be found in some other place in those Au∣thours, though it be not in these. Secondly, because there need be no such account of the Notation of the word, sith paronomasticall Allusion is suffici∣ent, and Thyatira of it self sounds
near enough to Thygatira, as must be generally allowed by all those that give their suffrage for the derivation therefrom. And it is not hard to prove it from the easie Elision is made of the letter G out of sundry words. Those in the English Tongue are obvi∣ous. It is more pertinent to instance in the Greek, where  amongst the Poets is srequently for . And also in the middle of words, the Boeotians pronouncing  and  for . And∣from the Latine magis is the French word mais, and from Magister Mai∣ster. And Caninius in general pro∣nounces, Alia sunt innumerabilia quae deperdunt G: which implies it to be but a weak melting Conso∣nant, and such as easily degenerates into Y, and, as it may be placed, is easily quite lost. Which argues that the sound of  and  are near enough for paronomasti∣call Allusion in any indifferent man's judgement whatsoever. And that  is the same that , besides that common Analogie
of making nomina parasyllaba (as they are called) from the fifth Declension, as from , there is an example exqui∣sitely answering this of  from , namely,  from . So that the word is unexceptionable. And lastly, though we should give it for granted that neither Pliny nor Stra∣bo has any such Passage as Cornelius pretends, yet Stephanus Byzantius ex∣presly has in his , whose very words I will transcribe for thy bet∣ter satisfaction.  that is to say, THYATIRA, a City of LY∣DIA, was first called PELOPEA and SEMIRAMIS; but SELEUCUS the son of Nicanor waging war with Lysimachus, and hearing that he had a Daughter born to him, called the City THYGATIRA. And it ought to be spoken in the feminine gender, though now they make it of the neu∣ter.
All this surely will abundantly war∣rant and secure a paronomasticall Al∣lusion in Thygatira, which signifies a Daughter. 12. And this may suffice for the ma∣king good the Solidity of our Expositi∣on. And I say Solidity, rather then Perfection, affirming onely all to be right so far as we have gone, but not de∣nying but that others better versed in History may more fully verifie what we have attempted. Nor did all things occurr that my self had read, and should have noted if they had come to my minde. As those notorious ten years of the most bloudy Persecution of all un∣der Diocletian, which, I think, may in special be alluded to by the ten days mentioned in the Church of Smyr∣na, as well as the ten Persecutions in general, by a Propheticall Henopoeia. The Notation also of the names of Balaam and Balac are very accommo∣date to Pergamus; Pergamus signi∣fying what is high, and Balaam the Lord of the People. Which Balaam being also the false Prophet, and set
here for the Pope and his Clergy, agrees excellently well with the Lordlinesse of him in this Pergamenian Period, wherein he trode upon the Necks of Em∣perours, and kicked their Crowns off with his feet. And Balac, which is here the Secular Sovereignty, whether it signifie Destruction or Emptinesse, sutes very well with the state of that time, when the power of the Pope had so overmastered all, that the Secular Magistrate was either but the bloudy Executioner of his Edicts, or else stood for a mere Cypher, the Tem∣poral Power being quite in a manner evacuated by the Rampancy of the Spi∣ritual. And seeing all the names in this Pro∣phecy are so significant, I leave to the enquiry of the learned whether there may not be some proper significancy in the name of Jezebel also; for it seems not uncapable of a fitting Etymologie, and that according to the Pattern of a severe Critick in the Hebrew Tongue; Gregr. ranc. xic. anct. tt. 07. who in his account of the name  (which is just such another Composition
as ,) says, that it may be com∣pounded of either  ubi, or  vae, or  non, and  gloria. So therefore say I may  be com∣pounded of either  or  and , which signifies Habitaculum; or else of  and , which in the Chaldee (which is but a Dialect of the Hebrew) signifies Stercus; or of  Insula, and  Stercus. Which last is lesse accom∣modate to our purpose, unlesse Insula here signifie symbolically, as Mr. Mede sometimes interprets it of a Church as a place separate, as Islands are by the Sea, and holy, in that it is separate. And then the Reproach will be upon the holy Church of Rome in this Thyatirian Intervall, as if it had become an Island of Filth and Dung. Which was too true of them, for all their outward Gildings and Paintings. But the other Notations methinks are more simple and easie, and fitly accord with both the History of Jezebel and the Fate of the Roman Church at the end of the Thyatirian Intervall. For if we derive  from  ubi, or
non, and  habitaculum, it will plainly glance at Jezebel's being slung out at the window from her habitation; but most fitly prefigure the dispossession of the Roman Priests and Friers at the beginning of the Reformation, that they would be cast out of their Habitations, and that their places should know them no more. So that the very Name of Je∣zebel bears in it the Fate of that Church at the close of that time. But if we derive  from  vae or heu, and  stercus, both the Fault and the Punishment of the Ro∣man Church will be found written in this Name; her Filth and Corruptions being compared to Dung, and her Punish∣ment intimated not unlike that of Je∣zebel's, as it is written, And the car∣casse 2 Kings 9. 37. of Jezebel shall be as the dung on the face of the earth. So that the Notation of the name denotes with what foul Reproach the Papal Power and Su∣perstition would be put down in those places out of which it was to be extermi∣nated; that it should be troden down into the very Dirt. So that upon him
that was in the Pergamenian Intervall  the Lord of the People, (the Papal Hierarchy domineering over all,) at the close of this Thyatirian In∣tervall this insulting Lamentation might be taken up with a paronomasticall Al∣lusion, not much unlike the foregoing Etymologie in the sense thereof, and near enough to the sound of , namely, , Alas the Dung or Dirt of the Papal Lordlinesse! How is it troden down as the Mire in the streets! Which was notoriously perfor∣med in the actings of Martin Luther against the Pope and Roman Clergy. But whether this or what else may be alluded to by the sound of the Name, I am not very solicitous, the Story of the Person being sufficient to warrant the meaning I have given of the Text, as any one may see by perusing the Expoliti∣on. And our Performance; I hope, will appear solid enough without descending to such curious Niceties. We will there∣fore now onely adde something briefly touching the Usesulnesse thereof, and so conclude.
13. And certainly our Exposition of these seven Epistles to the seven Churches has an equal Usefulnesse with any other Exposition of the Apocalyp∣tick Visions, and the more considerable, in that it is a more compendious compre∣hension of the main drift of them all. First then, it serves for the confirma∣tion of our faith in the particular Pro∣vidence and Watchfulnesse of Christ o∣ver his Church, it being so manifest from this Exposition with what care and steddiness he hath carried on things hitherto in the first five Intervalls, and that they have been no otherwise then He himself has predicted in these Pro∣pheticall Epistles. But then again, in the second place, here is an ample and timely Testimony in the behalf of the Protestants, I mean such as have declared against and for∣saken the Communion of the Church of Rome, from the time of the Waldenses to the first Reformers usually so called; the Waldenses being acknowledged the faithfull Martyrs of Christ, and those other that lived within the Intervall of
the Church in Thyatira carrying away no lesse Encomium, as being thus de∣scribed in the Epistle to that Church; I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, Apoc. 2. 19. and thy works, and the last to be more then the first. So that they ap∣proved themselves more and more, even till they broke out at last into a Natio∣nal Reformation. And shall not our first Reformers then be thought worthy of having the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses applied to them, who have so Apoc. 11. 11, 12. ample a testimony from Christ himself, whom the Father has constituted the Judge of the whole World? And shall not they rightly be said to have ascen∣ded into Heaven in a Politicall sense, to whom was made good that Promise to the Church in Thyatira, To him Apoc. 2. 26. that overcomes will I give power over the Nations, &c? This there∣fore of the Church in Thyatira does farther ratifie what we have Synops. Prophet. Book 2. C. 22. sect. 12. elsewhere delivered touching the Rising of the Witnesses, that the Completion of that Prophecy was in that wonderfull Re∣formation
God unexpectedly brought a∣bout by Luther and others. Whence it will follow, that the sound of the sixth Trumpet is over, and that the Forty two months, the One thousand two hundred and sixty days, or the Time and Times and Half a time, are expired as to the fulfilling of Prophecy; and consequently, that it is in vain for any to compute any Futurities upon the sup∣posall of their Expiration to come; and that those that doe so will finde them∣selves confuted by the unsutablenesse of Events, and thereby expose the endea∣vour of interpreting Prophecies to re∣proach and scorn, and weaken mens be∣lief even of those Expositions that are true, and give great advantage to the common Adversary. But as it is most true in it self, so it is most for the Interest of Reformed Christendome, to take notice, that the Protestant Reformation is the fulfilling of the Vision of the Rising of the Wit∣nesses, and of their Ascending into Heaven; that men may have that va∣lue for the Reformation that is due
thereto, (it having thereby so plain a Ratification from Divine Testimony of the rightfulnesse thereof against the Ty∣rannies and Idolatries of the Church of Rome,) and that both Magistrate and People may every-where be the better so∣dered together upon this consideration, and that all Sects that keep the Foun∣dation may have the better esteem for one another, and not vilifie and hate one another in such sort as usually they do, but be in a readinesse for Christian Unity and Love. For it is this Dispen∣sation of Spirit that must give Anti∣christ that most deadly Blow that is to come, and not a flaming Sword out of the mouth of the Rider of the white Horse literally understood, or large streams of fire spouted out of Heaven upon him, or any such miraculous as∣sistence, as some ignorantly expect at the finishing of the 1260 days. Which groundlesse Supposition is fit for nothing but to engender vain Heats and pre∣sumptuous Conceits, to which no answer will be given but Shame and Frustra∣tion.
But the plain Truth understood as it is, naturally tends to the begetting in all Reformed Christendome a mutuall e∣steem of one another, and the suppressing that vain Presumption in Parties, as if they were the sole people that the Vision of the Witnesses belonged to, and so ought to expect marvellous things for themselves conjoined with the destru∣ction or suppression of all the rest that are not of their own Party. Which fond, or rather unchristian, Conceits are quite expunged by the true and faithfull Interpretation I have pub∣lished to the world of the Rising of the Witnesses; which puts them in a way rather of duly prizing one another, and of jointly endeavouring in the spirit of Sobriety to advance the common Inte∣rest of whole Reformed Christendome, then for any one Party so vainly to presume of themselves above all the rest. And finally, this groundlesse expe∣ctation of any such wonderfull events upon the expiration of the 1260 days being thus wiped away, that time as to any fulfilling of Prophecies being al∣ready
expired, and no set time being defined for the future, but onely the order of things in the Vision of the Vials, it is left for the Protestants to compute the approach of the final Ruine of Antichrist and the blessed Millennium according to their own progresse in the Mysterie of real Regeneration and in∣dispensable Duties of Christianity. By how much more holy, by how much more harmlesse, by how much more humble, by how much more Heavenly-affected they finde one another, by how much more discreet, by how much more faith∣full and obedient to the publick Magi∣strate, by how much more kinde and lo∣ving to one another, and by how much more seriously affected for the ad∣vancing the publick good and the en∣deavouring the common welfare of all mankind, (which will introduce the Philadelphian Intervall,) by so much more near they may reckon the approach of the downfall of Antichrist, and the glorious Reign of Christ in his Saints at the happy Millennium. But what o∣ther Indications there be besides these
in the Visions of the Prophets, whereby we may compute the nearnesse of those Times, I must ingenuously confesse I know not. But this was a sudden Ex∣cursion. We will return again into the way. 14. But thirdly, In that it is said, Notwithstanding, I have a few things Apoc. 2. 20. against thee, because thou sufferest that Woman Jezebel, which calleth her self a Prophetesse, to teach and seduce my servants to commit For∣nication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, &c. this is a perfect clearing of the Protestant Reformers from that hainous Crime of Schism that the Church of Rome so magiste∣rially lays to their charge, it plainly implying that their Separation from the Church of Rome was not onely no Fault, but a Vertue, and an indispen∣sable point of Obedience to the com∣mand of Christ, and that it had been Disobedience and Rebellion against Christ not to have separated, and therefore was impossible to be any Schism. Which is a thing worthy
of our notice and consideration. As is also this, (contrary to the opinion of some, otherwise learned,) That to depart from the Church of Rome upon the very account of I∣dolatry is not Schism before God, but onely in the sight of men, and those, it is to be feared, of none of the purest minds, but rather such as have a greater sense of the carnal Interest of the Church then of the Glory of God, and the purity of his Worship. For Christ, who is God blessed for ever, does here blame the Church in Thyatira, that she suffers the Woman Jezebel any longer, and does not cast her off, (as the Eunuchs cast her out of the window in the Type,) and that for this very cause, because she is a Teacher of Idolatry, and an A∣bettour and Countenancer of spi∣ritual Fornication; as is manifest in the Text. So that before God, or in the sight of God, both the Church of Rome stands guilty of Idolatry, and also the Protestants leaving her Communion upon that account are
acquitted from any the least taint or suspicion of Schism. And that the Spirit of God does but witnesse with our spirits in the truth of this mat∣ter, if thou hast not lost the free use of thy Reason, that brief Treatise of Idolatry added to this present Expo∣sition will, I hope, abundantly satisfie thee: which therefore I have adjoined as a sutable Appendage thereunto. 15. Fourthly, In that Reformed Christendom (especially after their Re∣missnesse in Life and Manners, and Contentionsnesse about Trifles,) is re∣presented (under the Type of the Church in Sardis) to be in such an imper∣fect Condition, though emerged out of the grossnesse of the Popish Idola∣try, (for there is no farther complaint of either the Doctrine of Balaam or of Jezebel here,) this should teach us to be humble, and not over-fierce and confident in our Opinions and Doctrines, but meekly to bear one with another, and be ready to be instructed by one another for the clearing up the Truth.
But in the mean time things being no better then they are, sith they are no worse then they were predicted, we are hence to learn, that it is our Duty never to suffer our mindes to relapse towards the Flesh-pots of AE∣gypt, or think we had as good goe back again to Rome, as to be no bet∣ter then we are. For this Sardian state is like the wandring in the Wil∣dernesse betwixt AEgypt and the pro∣mised Land, which is the Philadel∣phian state, into which there is no entrance till after the seven Vials, that is, till the last of them be poured out, or at least a-pouring. As it is said in the fifteenth of the Apoca∣lypse; And the Temple was filled with smoak from the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the Temple till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. Where no man, according to the Apocalyptick style, signifies, that that company of men that were to enter into, and make up, that state of the Church which
is here styled , the living Tem∣ple of God, would not appear in that eminent condition till after the Vials, the last either current or complete. Which agrees admirably with that pas∣sage in the Epistle to Philadelphia, Him that overcometh will I make a Apoc. 3. 12. Pillar in the Temple of my God. So that these Philadelphians shall not onely enter into the Temple after the smoak of the Vials, but never goe out of it again, according to the sense we have explained it in. Wherefore because we are in a kinde of Wildernesse-condition, we ought with Faith and Meeknesse and Pati∣ence to abide till God shall bring us into that good Land, and not to mur∣mur against him, and reproach his Providence, who hath thought fit to carry on things with such leisure∣ly steps, nor peevishly and falsly to say that we had as good return to Rome again, and that it is a que∣stion whether the Reformation has done more good or hurt. For such thoughts or speeches are false, injudicious,
and ingratefull Reproaches against the sacred Providence of God, whose ways these bitter, shallow and unsanctify'd spirits understand not, because the spirit of the world has blinded their eyes. And forasmuch as there is no com∣plaint of Idolatry in the Epistle to this Sardian Church, nor the least hint to make any Separation, as before, all the Churches of Reformed Christen∣dom, and all the particular Sects and Members thereof, ought to have a ten∣der regard how they divide from one another or break Communion for dif∣ference of Ceremony or Opinion; but holding all the indispensable Founda∣tion, and bearing joint Testimony a∣gainst the grosse Idolatries and wilde Enormities of the Church of Rome, to study Peace and mutuall Compli∣ance, that the Body of Reformed Christendome may be more strong and compact to stand against the com∣mon Enemie. But above all, we are with might and main to endeavour to perfect Ho∣linesse
in the fear of God, and to purge our selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, that we may prevent the extremity of that Judgement which is threatned as suddenly and unexpec∣tedly to come upon the Church of Sar∣dis. And these, I think, are main Apoc. 3. 3. Usefulnesses discoverable in the In∣terpretation of the Epistle to the Sardian Church. 16. And fifthly, As for the Expo∣sition of the Church of Philadelphia, it is of main Importance for the ma∣king of the world good. For it is the ordinary excuse for the reigning of Impiety and Immorality in the world, that men will be men as long as the world lasts, and that things are more likely ever to grow worse and worse then better: and therefore very few there are that will either attempt the amending of their own Lives, or the encouraging others so to doe. When notwithstanding it is plain, accor∣ding to the Propheticall sense of the Epistle to the Church of Philadelphia, that there will be a time when Righ∣teousnesse
and true Holinesse will have a most glorious reign upon earth. But those that are averse from this belief are usually averse also from believing any certitude in the Exposi∣tions of Prophecies. They will not, forsooth, be so presumptuous as to pretend they can understand them, e∣specially such as either chastise the ab∣ominable Wickednesses of the Roman Church, or such as promise Times transcendently better. Which is a piece of Hypocrisie much like that of Ahaz, when the Prophet bid him ask a Sign of the Lord his God; but he, good modest Hypocrite, would not ask a Sign, neither would he tempt the Isa. 7. 12. Lord. The meaning whereof was, that he would not amuze nor distract his thoughts, nor render himself more obnoxious by taking notice of a su∣pernatural Evidence against the na∣tural Sentiments and persuasions of his own carnal minde, under whose Go∣vernment he was resolved to be, and not be dissettled by the Inlets of any
higher Light. The application is very easie and obvious. 17. And lastly, Admitting the Propheticall meaning of the Epistle to the Church of Laodicea, it is of great use for the establishing our Faith in that grand Point, That this Ter∣restriall Scene will have an end, and that at the close of all Christ will visibly come in Judgement to reward all men according to their works; That he will judge both the quick and the dead according to the Orthodox sense of the Apostolick Do∣ctrine. To all which we may adde, that as the Expositions of these Seven E∣pistles to the Seven Churches in Asia are in a manner as convincing as any other Visions in the whole Apoca∣lypse, so they are far more easie, and reach the main Design in a lesse compasse of words, and have not that operosenesse of Synchronisms ne∣cessarily hanging on them as the o∣ther have for the clearing of the sense; but are onely seven Intervalls
manifestly succeeding one another, whose Bounds so far as things are past are easily determinable. And we know that the Intervall of Sardis ends where that of Philadelphia begins, and Laodicea is the close of all. Which Facility and Comprehensible∣nesse must needs improve the Useful∣nesse of these Expositions very consi∣derably. And there wanting nothing but the Significations of the Names to be ad∣ded for the easie Applicability of the Events to each Intervall, I will, for the satisfaction of the Reader, brief∣ly furnish them that have no skill in the original Languages with the sense and meaning of the Names of all the Seven Churches aforehand. 18. Ephesus therefore, with an Al∣lusion to the Greek word Ephesis, signifies Desire, the first moving Principle that drives on an Activity for the attaining the main Scope we aim at. But with an Allusion to A∣phesis, it signisies Remissnesse, for which this Church of Ephesus is Apoc. 2. 4.
blamed: or else, alluding again to A∣phesis, it signifies the starting or letting loose the Racers at the be∣ginning of the Race. Which agrees very fitly with this Ephesine Intervall, which is the beginning of the Church, and of the whole course of Providence concerning the same to the end of the world. Smyrna signifies Myrrh, intimating the bitter Affliction of the Primitive Church under the Ten Pagan Persecu∣tions. Pergamus signifies Sublimity or Exaltation, intimating the raising of the Church out of her former dejected and afflicted condition under the a∣foresaid Persecutions into a glorious Triumph over Paganism; as it fell out upon the Conquest of Constantine the great. It signifies also, or prefigures, the enormous Haughtinesse of the Church of Rome in that Intervall. Thyatira, in Allusion to Thygatira a Daughter, intimates the more-then-ordinary Womanishness of the Church of Rome in that Intervall: But in
Allusion to Thyateria, Altars of Incense or sweet Odours, it signifies the more-then-ordinary frequentness of burning the blessed Protestant Martyrs with fire and faggot in this Period. Which Cruelty though it was abominable in re∣spect of that bloudy and barbarous Church that committed it; yet the suf∣fering of those holy Martyrs in this manner out of Fidelity to Christ and his Truth was a Sacrifice of sweet O∣dours to him, and very gratefully ac∣cepted of him. Sardis, in Allusion to Sarda or la∣pis Sardius, (the same that Carna∣lina,) signifies the imperfect and car∣nal Condition of that Intervall of the Reformed Church that is called Sar∣dian. Philadelphia, which signifies Cha∣rity in general, and particularly a more special love to them of the true Houshold of Faith, intimates the Reign of the Spirit, which is the Spirit of Love. For God is 1 John 4. 16. Love, and he that abideth in Love abideth in God, and God in him.
This is that illustrious Reign of Christ in his Millenniall Empire of Love, when the Christian life shall take place, and Opinions and Persecutions shall be done away. And lastly, Laodicea signifies a popular Politicall or externally-Le∣gal Righteousnesse, the outward form of the former Philadelphian state, but, as in old age, the spirit much decay'd, though the outward figure of the body much-what the same. It sig∣nifies also the arraigning and judge∣ing of the people, that is, the Na∣tions of the world, when Christ shall come to judge both the quick and the dead; because this is to be performed at the close of this Laodicean Inter∣vall. 19. The significancy of the Names of these Seven Churches reckoned al∣ways in such an order, as that seven Intervalls of the Church, from the be∣ginning to the end of all, answer ex∣actly in the Affairs of the Church both to these Names in this order they are reckoned, and to the Conditions of
the Seven Churches as they are order∣ly described in the Seven Epistles to them, is a plain Demonstration to them that are not extremely refracto∣ry, (especially if you adde the Cer∣tainty that there must be a Propheti∣call meaning of these Epistles, as is made good in the first and second Chapters of the ensuing Book,) I say, it is a plain Demonstration, that our Exposition is true, as well as so ea∣sie and comprehensible, and there∣fore of an universal Usefulnesse as well to the Illiterate as the Learned. Which I hope, Reader, will be a suf∣ficient Excuse for the Authour, that he has either invited thee to the pains of reading, or given himself the trou∣ble of compiling, this present Trea∣tise. Farewell.
A Propheticall EXPOSITION OF THE SEVEN EPISTLES Sent to THE SEVEN CHURCHES IN ASIA, From Him THAT IS, AND WAS, AND IS TO COME. SIRACIDES. Ch. 59. He that giveth his minde to the Law of the most High, and is occupied in the medi∣tation thereof, will seek out the wise∣dome of all the Ancient, and be occu∣pied in Prophecies.
A Propheticall EXPOSITION OF THE SEVEN EPISTLES Sent to THE SEVEN CHURCHES in Asia. CHAP. I. A Preparation toward the Mysticall or Propheticall Interpretation of the Seven Epistles to the Seven Chur∣ches of Asia. 1. WE shall first premise, That as those two fol∣lowing Prophecies of the Seven Seals, and of the opened Book, reach from the beginning to the end of the Church; so this of the Seven Churches reaches also from the beginning of the Church to the end of all. Which
seems congruous both from the na∣ture of the Vision it self, and from the following Examples of the Pro∣phecies of the Seven Seals and the opened Book. We shall premise in the second place, That as it is conspicuous that four of the names of these seven Churches are directly significant of some State and Condition they are in, viz. Smyrna, Pergamus, Philadelphia and Laodicea; so it is exceeding cre∣dible that the other three names may allude to some thing that may set out their Nature and Condition also, viz. Ephesus, Thyatira and Sardis; as we shall take more express notice in the process of our Exposition. Lastly, which might as well (if not better) have been noted at first, This more mysticall sense, which we are now a-rendring of the Seven Churches, doth not at all clash with the Literal sense of the same, nor ex∣clude that usefull Applicability of them for the Reproof or Praise of any Churches particular in any time or
Age of the Christian world, that are for the like things obnoxious or com∣mendable. But the distinct Providence of God, and his watchfulness and fore∣sight of the Affairs of his Church, may haply be more illustrated and display'd by this mystical way of Ex∣position then by that Literal or Moral. 2. We will therefore distinguish the whole Duration of the Church of Christ, (especially so far forth as it is within the limits of the Roman Empire, which also the other Pro∣phecies in the Apocalyps seem chiefly to regard) into Seven Intervalls, and will suppose the first Intervall to end where the second begins, viz. in the tenth year of Nero, or Anno Christi 63. 3. Which Period therefore of the Ephesine Church ending so early, even about thirty years before St. John's writing the Apocalypse, agrees excel∣lently well with that passage Ch. 1. v. 18, 19. where, after Christ's de∣claring himself the first and the last; (as before in the same Chapter he is called He that was, and is, and is to
come) and his mentioning his own Death and Resurrection, and how that he will be alive to the end of the world to carry on the Affairs of his Church; he presently inferrs, Write therefore what things thou hast seen, what things are, and what things shall be hereafter, (which he expresly and immediately calls the Mystery of the seven Stars and the seven golden Candlesticks, ver. 20. which is worth the noting.) What things thou hast seen already, in the times of thy life past, namely, the state of the Ephesine Church: what things are now present, viz. the Smyrnian state of the Church in which thou art, and tastest of the bitterness of it in this thy Exile here in Patmos (for the Ten Persecutions were then already begun, and John was in the Second of them:) and what things shall be hereafter, namely, to the end of the world, in the residue of the period of the Smyrnian Church, and in the periods of the Remainder of the Seven Churches succeeding. And questionless the Vision of the
Rider of the  Apoc. 6.  white Horse respects what was then past, namely, Christ's first Warfare upon his conquest of Death, and his being mounted into his glorify'd Body; who after from on high sent down Succours to his A∣postles and Disciples, and assisted and and managed that illustrious Battel in the beginning of the Apostolick Times so successfully and gloriously, that infinite numbers of men were brought under the obedience of the Gospel, even within the space of the Ephesine Period. 4. So that there can be no scruple of the Church of Ephesus represent∣ing a State of the Church past; but onely that it seems improper to di∣rect an Epistle to a Church then out of being. But this can be no argu∣ment with them that hold the Seven Churches to be seven successive Con∣ditions of the Church to the worlds end. For make the Exitus of the E∣phesine Church reach beyond S. John's time, suppose to Anno Christi 100, or thereabout; the rest of the Epistles
will be writ to Churches not yet in being, and some many hundreds, nay thousands of years ere they shall be: which yet they must not count ab∣surd. 5. The briefest account therefore of this matter is this, That the Spirit of God seems to drive on two main designs in the Vision of these Seven Churches at once. The one, most effectually to animate and encourage the Church to doe well, to stick to Truth and Holiness through all the Trials and Calamities of this present life; as also to deterre them from all kind of Sin and wickedness of what nature soever, whether Apostasie from the Faith, Idolatry, Sensuality, or what-ever Remissness in Manners: For which design this Epistolar way is exceeding accommodate, it bear∣ing the form of personally speaking to people, and so the more forcibly makes them take notice, in a manner whether they will or no, of what is said unto them. The other design, and that so laid as not to foregoe the
former advantage, is to instruct the Church in the Providence of God and his Foresight, to shew how all things lie bare before his eyes in such order and succession as they are in time to come to pass. In the Literal sense of these Epistles to the Seven Churches, that former design is plainly pursued and attained, understanding them di∣rected to these Seven Churches in Asia then in being; and in a very great measure in the Moral sense. These Epistles, I say, being so appli∣cable to any part of the Catholick Church in any Age thereof, placed in the same or like circumstances of Condition with these Asiatick Chur∣ches, this Epistolar way will have a considerable efficacy and influence upon them, for either Animation or Reproof. 6. But now the great Question is, Why the Prophetical design discove∣rable in the mystical Interpretation should have been couched in this E∣pistolar way, especially the Epistle to Ephesus, being writ after the Ephe∣sine
Period was expired. To which I answer, that this Propheticall design was not intended for the Ephesine Church in this mysticall sense, but for future Ages; and therefore, it is ta∣ken in onely to make up the entire∣ness of the whole Succession of the Church in its several distinct states from the beginning to the end of all. But this Epistolar way is still retained in this mysticall sense, for the same usefulnesse it had in the Literal to the Seven Churches in Asia then really in being. For so soon as any of these Letters by this mysticall sense is un∣derstood to be directed to any suc∣cessive part of the Church, as now, for example, (as will appear anon) the Epistle to the Church of Sardis is directed to the Protestant Church or Reformed Christendome, this Suc∣cession of the Church ought to be as much concerned, as that particular Church of Sardis was in Asia mi∣nor. And this intention of the Holy Ghost being once understood, it will
be of the like usefulness to the Phila∣delphian Church especially, and also to the Laodicean. Wherefore the Objections were but small, considering the Usefulness of this Epistolar way, though there were no other sense of these seven E∣pistles and the seven Churches but the mysticall. For as in an entire Vi∣sion, where the beginning is touch∣ing something past or present, all goes under the Title of Propheticall, though that part that respects things past is but Historicall Representati∣on: so in this entire Epistolar Vision, though the first part be Epistolar, yet it is but Historicall Representation, ex∣hibiting times and persons past (as if they were present to be writ to) and that for uniformity sake in the form of an Epistle, as what is past in Hi∣story under the form of Propheticall Vision, as the Rider of the white Horse, which is the first in the Vision of the Seals; though the Represen∣tation was of what was partly past, and partly present. But what is to
come is the proper object of all Vi∣sion Propheticall. But now besides all this, in the Li∣teral sense there being then a Church in Ephesus when that Epistle was wrote to it, and in a Moral sense it being applicable to any Church that does Ephesize in any part of Christen∣dome and at any time; the Objecti∣on, in my judgment has melted into less then nothing. And therefore, not∣withstanding this exception, we will not stick to place the end of the In∣terval of the Ephesine Succession in the tenth of Nero's Reign, and in the year of Christ 63. Till then let the Church of Christ be represented under the Title of E∣phesus; from that time, till about three hundred and odd years after Christ, under the name of Smyrna: from thence, to the latter end of the Persecution of the Albigenses and Waldenses, let her be the Church dwelling in Pergamus: from that time, till whole Nations fell off from the Pope, let the same Church bear
the name of Thyatira: from that time Protestantisme became the Re∣ligion of Nations, till the last Vial, let this Church bear the Title of the Church in Sardis: from that time till the fourth Thunder, let it wear the name of Philadelphia: See Di∣vine Dia∣logues, Dia∣logue 5. sect. 38. from the fourth Thunder till Christ come visibly to Judgement in the clouds, let the Church bear the name of Laodicea. These are the seven Intervals, which how well they will fit with the Titles of these distinct successive States of the Church and the things spoken of them in the Vision, I will anon endea∣vour to unfold.
CHAP. II. A farther Preparation out of the first Chapter of the Apocalypse, where∣by this Propheticall meaning of the Vision of the Seven Churches is more clearly assured. BUT in the mean time, for the greater assurance of this Prophe∣ticall or Mysticall sense, we will first make some farther Remarks upon the first Chapter of the Apocalypso. Where we will make onely this one modest Supposition; that the Spi∣rit of God sets down nothing imme∣thodically nor in vain, or at least no∣thing vainly immethodicall. Where∣fore upon the very first Verse, which bears the Title of the whole Book; The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto Apoc. 1. 1. his servants things which must shortly come to pass, that is, things to come to pass; some shortly, and other some in succession of time, as all Interpre∣ters
agree; I cannot but note this, That if the Spirit of God do but re∣spicere Titulum, (as most certainly he will) he will set down no entire Vi∣sions, as this of the Seven Churches is, but they must in the main be of things to come to pass, not of things present merely, and not hid, but ob∣vious to the eyes of men, as the State of the Churches here mentioned was to the world at that time. And there∣fore something farther must be meant by them then can be contained in the Literal sense; which is not of things to come, as the Title requires, but onely of things present, or some Pro∣mises or Threatnings that do not pro∣perly amount to the nature of Prophe∣tical prediction, no more then the Law of Moses to which they are annexed. 2. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the word of this Prophecy, for Verse 3. the time is at hand. This again plain∣ly shews that this Book is all of it, I mean all the entire Visions thereof, a Book of Prophecies; which, as I in∣timated before, mere Promises and
Threatnings cannot make it no more then they do those Laws of Moses to which they are adjoyned. And though the several States of the Seven Chur∣ches may be applicable to several states of particular Churches of af∣ter-Ages in Christendome l yet it cannot properly be in this Literal sense by way of Prediction, but of Example of Vertue or Vice, of pious or impious Actions, which repeatedly happen in all History. Whence if there be no more in it then thus, these Epistles to the Seven Churches can∣not be deemed any Prophecy, and therefore are heterogeneous to the Scope and Title of the Book. 3. But upon the so expresly cal∣ling Verse 4. this a Book of Prophecies for John to salute the Seven Churches in Asia with this Salutation, Grace be un∣to you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; methinks it does even forcibly drive a man to conceive that the Vision of the Seven Churches which he so im∣mediately falls upon, is a Prophecy,
according to the title immediately mentioned in the foregoing Verse. Besides that the description of the party in whose name he salutes them, which is, and which was, and which is to come, does very naturally insinuate that he is treating of what reaches from the beginning of the Church to the latest Ages thereof. Which he insists more upon in the seventh Verse; (after he has spoken of the person of Christ) Behold, he cometh Verse 7. with the clouds, (this reaches the last Period of Laodicea, when God will judge all people,) and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him, (for the Earth shall then be burnt up with the works thereof:) Even so, Amen. This will certainly come to pass about the se∣venth Thunder, (in that dark hollow Dungeon, where there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth,) let the sons of Infidelity or Unbelief conceit what they will to the contrary. Wherefore the minde
and scope of the spirit of Prophecy seems here to be carried out even to the utmost Ages of the world. 4. According as he declares in the next Verse, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Verse 8. Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. That Wisedome and Power that reaches from one end to another mightily and sweetly orders all things. This methinks strongly insinuates that the Vision of the Seven Churches (as well as the Vision of the Seven Seals and of the opened Book) reaches from the beginning of the Church to the end of all things. Which consideration is so repeated to us, that certainly it must not stand for nought, but is to give infallible aim at a higher mean∣ing of the Seven Churches then we are at first aware of. For the sum∣mary of the Vision, before he descends to the particular Churches, begins and ends with this, v. 11. and 18. I am the First and the Last, and have the keyes of Hell and of Death. Which
undoubtedly respects the execution of the final Sentence under the se∣venth Thunder. 5. But there is first this not able to be observed in the Tenth verse: I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and Verse 10. heard behind me a great voice as of a Trumpet. This pompous entrance with the sound of the Trumpet into this Vision of the Seven Churches, and the glorious appearance of the Son of man walking in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks with se∣ven Stars in his right hand, comes up so near to that splendid Preamble to the Vision of the Seven Seals, that any sagacious man cannot but suspect that both the Visions be of like ex∣tent and importance, and not of such private concern as merely to respect those Seven Churches in Asia. For at the beginning of both these Visi∣ons there is the glorious appearance of Christ in the midst of the Church: in the first, standing or walking in the midst of the seven golden Can∣dlesticks; in the latter, sitting in the
midst of the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders: and both these Pre∣ambles to the future Visions ushered in with the sound of the Trumpet. Wherefore the Pomp being equal, the concern of each Vision in all like∣lihood is equal. Nor can it be pre∣tended that the Pomp before the Vision of the seven Churches was de∣signed as a fair Frontispice to the whole Book of Prophecies, because at least as splendid a Frontispice is again erected before the Vision of the Seven Seals. Wherefore that former was entirely intended for the Visions of the Seven Churches, and therefore portends some mighty con∣cerning Mysterie therein, and such as the present Affairs of those seven particular Churches in Asia could not reach nor exhaust. But we pro∣ceed. 6. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and what thou Verse 11. seest write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which be in Asia. Here again, immediately before his
sending to the seven Churches of Asia, he displays those Titles of him∣self that least of all suit with the small continuance of those particular Chur∣ches. But the holy Catholick Church endures from the beginning to the end of all. Upon which therefore I cannot doubt but the Spirit of Pro∣phecy had his eye at this time, and in the Mystery understood by the seven Churches in Asia the holy Catholick Church divided into seven successive Intervalls, according to the opinion of Petrus Galatinus. For indeed in all reason, (if there was not some grand Mysterie underneath,) why should onely seven Churches in Asia be writ to, when there were others, many others, either there, or at least in other parts of the Empire, in all likelihood as notorious for either the Faults, the Vertues, or the Sufferings that are noted in these? 7. You'll say haply, that Asia mi∣nor was the special Diocese as it were of S. John. But they that answer thus forget that John was merely passive
in these Visions, and wrote no other∣wise then he was moved by the Holy Ghost, which is no respecter of per∣sons. Besides that there were cer∣tainly other Churches in Asia besides these seven. Why therefore just Se∣ven? and why these? But that seven signifies Universality, is obvious in the Prophetick style. Therefore to the seven Churches in Asia is as much as to all the Churches in Asia. But it's much that all the Churches in Asia minor should be thus carefully salu∣ted by the Holy Ghost, and the rest of the Churches in the Christian world be taken no notice of: As if it were according to the Proverb, that kissing goes by favour; whenas yet it is expresly said in the Scripture, that God is no respecter of persons, as I in∣timated before. 8. But you will farther urge, that we cannot possibly make it any more then all the Churches in Asia, unlesse Asia were turned into an Appellative. Which consideration will put a bar to all attempts for any Mysticall Inter∣pretation,
so that we must necessarily rest in the Literal. But Hugo Grotius, who interpreteth all the Churches al∣so Mystically from the reason of their Names, yet takes no notice of any Allusive signification in the word Asia. So that in this learned man's judgement that sequel is not so firm. But besides, though I do not love to play with words more then needs must, I think it not hard to finde out an Allusive signification apposite e∣nough in the name of Asia to the My∣sticall sense intended. For both  and  (the former signifying Fun∣damentum, the latter Actio or Effectio) as to their paronomasticall sound are as near Asia as the nicest criticall ear can require in these cases. And for the sense of them both, it is extremely accommodate to the present purpose. For then will this Superscription, To the Seven Churches in Asia, either sig∣nifie, To all the Churches in the foun∣dation, that is, that keep to the Apo∣stolick Foundation in matter of Do∣ctrine and Profession; or else, To all
the Churches in Action, that is to say, these Epistles are writ to them with an intended censure of their Actions. And it is said expresly by the Logici∣an touching the Topick of Effects and Actions, Hujus loci sunt Laudes & Vituperationes: upon which all these Pet. Ram. lib. 1. c. 9. Epistles altogether run. And, I know thy works, begins every Epistle. Be∣sides that they are directed to none but such as profess the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and nothing repugnant thereunto; as will appear in our Interpretation of them. Nor is it strange that S. John, though wri∣ting in Greek, should (himself being a Jew) make an Allusion to Hebrew words; nor is it without example. For the Son of Sirach does plainly in that passage in the Greek Text, , allude to the He∣brew Eccles. 6. 22. word  to hide, as if  were as much as . 9. These verbal Allusions are so frequent in the Prophetick Style, that there is no need farther to take no∣tice thereof: nor any doubt, I think,
but the Spirit of God would not in this Book of Prophecies, where all things are so comprehensive and ma∣jestick, salute onely seven particular Churches of all the Churches of the World, and that with such pompous Circumstances; nor when he had be∣gun so magnificently a Book of Pro∣phecies, and so expresly intitled it so, that he would immediately after∣wards, as if he had forgot what he was about, bring in a large Vision consisting of seven parts, wherein there is nothing at all Propheticall, but onely the Reproof or Praises, the Comminations or Promises to a few particular Churches. This is not according to the steddy order and method of Divine Wisedome, e∣specially in this Book, then which there never was nor ever will be any thing more accurately written. 10. And he had in his right hand Verse 16. seven Stars. Methinks it is extreme∣ly harsh to conceit that these seven Stars are merely the seven Bishops of any seven particular Churches of
Asia, as if the rest were not suppor∣ted nor guided by the hand of Christ, or as if there were but seven in his right hand, but all the rest in his left. Such high Representations cannot be appropriated to any seven particular Churches whatsoever. But seven must signifie all in both Coex∣istence and in Succession to the end of the world. Which is a sense wor∣thy so sublime a Book as this of the Apocalypse, and correspondent to the meaning of the rest of the Septenaries that occur in this Book of Prophecy, they signifying an entire Succession of some seven things or other which they are brought in to represent. 11. The seven Stars are the Angels Verse 20. of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks which thou samest are the seven Churches. Though according to the Literal sense these seven Chur∣ches and the seven Angels are easily applicable to those particular seven Churches of Asia above specify'd; yet I cannot but conceive, that he not calling them here the seven
Churches of Asia, but seven Chur∣ches in general, it is an invitation to the searching out some more large Propheticall sense, such as we drive at; as also, in that he says the An∣gels of the seven Churches at large, and not of Asia, nor names the Chur∣ches by name; but especially in that he calls them Angels, in stead of Bi∣shops or Pastours. For he continuing so in the Propheticall style proper to this Book, that ascribes all to the Ministry of Angels, it is a sign that the Letters to the seven Angels of the Churches have also a Prophe∣ticall sense as well as a Literal, or rather that that is the sense that is most chiefly of all intended. 12. All these Intimations put toge∣gether out of this first Chapter to∣ward the Assurance of a Propheti∣call meaning of the Seven Churches of Asia have that force with me, that though I could not my self produce such a continued Mysticall or Prophe∣ticall sense which would be all along easie and natural, yet I could not but
vehemently suspect that there is some such sense, though it were not in my power to reach it. But if I have through the Divine Assistence light on such a sense as is both continually coherent, important, and according to the Analogie of the Propheticall style, I hope this Preparation will even ex∣tort the belief thereof from the Reader. But such as it is I shall now present to his view. CHAP. III. The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Ephesine Church. 1. IT was intimated out of the last verse of the foregoing Chap∣ter, that the Omission of the appro∣priating the seven Churches to Asia by name was a fair invitation to us to suspect a more large and released sense of this Vision of the Seven Churches. And indeed this Releasement is more free in the Greek Copy then in our
English Translation. For the Origi∣nal runs thus; , And the seven Can∣dlesticks Chap. 1. v. 20. which thou sawest are seven Churches: not the seven Churches which in the Literal sense one might be prone to imagine to be none o∣ther then those situate in Asia minor; but this Division of the Churches in∣to Seven in the Mysticall sense is ra∣ther distributio ex adjunctis then è sub∣jectis, the whole Catholick Church in its Succession from the beginning to the end being cast into seven In∣tervalls, according to seven notorious Qualifications or Conditions thereof. For so we say, the Primitive Church, the Apostatized Church, the Refor∣med Church, &c. denoting not their Place, but rather their Time and Qua∣lity; which the Genius of the Prophe∣tick style, if it were to express them, would exhibite as so many Churches distinctly situate. 2. But besides this, it is farther to be noted, that the omission of the appropriating these Seven Chur∣ches
to Asia does also fairly quit the Mysticall Interpreter of giving any account of the signification of that name, it being omitted in the In∣terpretation of the seven golden Candlesticks. Which I thought worth the noting, t all pretense of Cavill might be taken from them that may haply prove lesse satisfy'd with our giving an account of that Greek name from an Hebrew Allusion, though their Cavill to the more ju∣dicious I hope will seem altogether groundless. 3. Nor, lastly, does the return∣ing of the Spirit of Prophecy to the Seven Churches by name, in these E∣pistles written to them, determine the Vision solely and adequately to those seven Churches of Asia topi∣cally understood; forasmuch as the names of all those Churches at least by an easie Allusion have an Appella∣tive signification, and manifestly de∣note their Quality and Condition; as we shall see in the process of our Ex∣position.
4. First therefore of the Church of Ephesus, which Christ salutes after this manner: Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write; These things saith he that holdeth the seven Stars in Apoc. 2. 1. his right hand, and who walketh in the midst of the seven golden Candle∣sticks. That by Angels, according to the Apocalyptick style, all the A∣gents under their Presidency are re∣presented or insinuated, I have al∣ready noted: and it is so frequent and obvious in the Apocalypse, that none that is versed therein can any ways doubt of it. Wherefore Christ his writing to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus in this Mysticall sense, is his writing to all Bishops, Pastours and Christians in this first Apostoli∣call Intervall of the Church. And that particularly in this E∣pistle to this Church (I mean, in the Mysticall sense thereof) he recom∣mends himself to them under the character of him that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and who walk∣eth in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, the sense, stripp'd of this Propheticall Pomp, is, that I am he that supports all my Bishops and Pa∣stours, and all that labour for the Interest of my Kingdome, from this time for ever: I am present with them, and uphold them. As he said at the first founding of the Church, Goe ye therefore and teach all Nations, Matth. 28. 19, 20. baptizing them in the name of the Fa∣ther, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. He is in the midst of his Church where-e∣ver two or three are gathered toge∣ther in his Name: He walks through, in the midst of the Successions of the seven Intervalls of the Church, the seven golden Candlesticks, till the end of all. This is to encourage the beginning of his Church, and is methodically put in the first place, as being general, and running through all the Intervalls thereof till the end of the world.
But that the Frontispice, as I be∣fore called it, to this Vision of the Se∣ven Churches, which was the glori∣ous Character of our blessed Saviour, is made use of by piece-meal for an entrance into the parts of this Vision, as it is in them all; I cannot but take notice how fitly it answers to the Vision of the Seals, where the parts of the Frontispice are also made use of to usher in four of the Seals; for the four Beasts one after another (and that with apposite significancy, as here,) at the opening of the four first Seals are introduced uttering this voice, Come and see. Where∣fore there being the like contrivance Apoc. 6. in both Visions, it is a shrewd inti∣mation that they are Visions of like importance, that is, very reachingly and comprehensively Propheticall; as I endeavoured to evince out of the first Chapter. 5. And how accommodate that part of the Character of our blessed Saviour is to this part of the Vision that concerns the Ephesine Church, is
already declared. We shall now con∣fider the fitnesse of the paronomasti∣call Allusion in the Name. For that the Propheticall style does affect such Allusions, both Grotius and Mr. Mede, and all Interpreters that I know, are agreed upon. And Gro∣tius does particularly give the reason of the names of all these Churches in his Commentary on the Apocalypse. So that there is nothing of Levity or Indiscretion in the attempting of the same. In Ephesus therefore, for ought I know, there may be a double Allusion, both to  and . For that , being one of the three ma∣tres Lectionis, as they are called, con∣tained in it both E and A, it does plainly intimate, that the sound of E and A are not so extremely diffe∣rent one from another. But as for the sense of , it is hugely well and peculiarly accommodate to this Church, it being the first Intervall of the Seven, as it were the , (and  signifies the same,) the Careeres or Lists from whence the
Race begins of the Succession of all the Seven Churches, which ends in the end of the world. And S. Paul compares the calling of Christians to a Race. 6. But as for the other word, , which Grotius also expresly takes notice of, and pitches upon, the Al∣lusion thereto is unexceptionable both as to sound and signification. For it denotes that great servour and zealous desire the Church in those first Primitive and Apostolick Times had to the Affairs of Christ, and to the Interest of his Kingdome; that they did sincerely and earnestly, un∣der the conduct of that Heros on the white Horse, with his bow and arrow in his right hand, aim at and press toward the mark of the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Je∣sus; they were inflamed with the desire of enlarging the Kingdome of Christ here, and of obtaining that im∣marcescible Crown hereafter, and of eating the fruit of eternall life in the celestiall Paradise of God. This was
the first love of this Church, this was their , their vehement and sincere desire, and onely scope of their Actions, that they might serve Christ here, and enjoy him after∣wards in his heavenly Kingdome. And therefore out of this fervent love to Christ, and sense of their own happinesse, they did at first easily de∣vour all Difficulties. 7. As it is noted in the two fol∣lowing verses: I know thy works, and Verse 2, 3. thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear with such as are evil. For those that are sincerely and fervently good, it cannot but make them have an Antipathy against what is evil, and discern them that bear themselves never so Apostoli∣cally, and yet are not right at the bottome, to be but Hypocrites and Liers. And thou hast tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not. That there were false Apostles, deceitfull workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, in the Apostles
time, (within which the Period of this Church is,) the Apostle Paul takes notice 2 Cor. 11. 13. which therefore is very agreeable to the Intervall of this first Church. For when should any pretend to be A∣postles sent from God, but in that Age there were Apostles sent into the world by him? And hast born, and hast patience, and for my Name's sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted. What is here is much-what the same sense and words as were in the foregoing verse: but it is not repeated in vain. For these words I suppose, , have a special correspondence to the re∣ward promised in the 7. verse. He that will not labour shall not eat: but he that labours very much, and breaks not off by reason of any lazy fainting or culpable lassitude, is wor∣thy to be fed with the bread of life. But besides, this labour and patience in the highest circumstances is here repeated, the better to set off the pre∣sent
remissness of some in this Ephesine Church, as it is in the next Verse. 8. Neverthelesse, I have something Verse 4. against thee, because thou hast left thy first love, . Grotius and Dr. Hammond ex∣pound it, because thou hast remitted of thy first love, and so allow  to signifie relaxation and remission in a contrary sense to intension of de∣grees: whence there may be another ground of Allusion in Ephesus to , and in counter distinction to  so that this Ephesine Church may have its name from its first intense Love and its after Remission thereof, by this double Allusion. But as the Al∣lusion to  is more perfect then that to , so questionless this first Intervall of the Church was more fa∣mous for their sincere and real Love to Christ, then for their Remissnesse therein. Which serves something for the countenancing of the term of this Intervall. Because thou hast left thy first love: that is to say, because thou hast
ceased to be so fervent in spirit as at the first. Which first Love, being according to the measure of Christ's own Prescript, was certainly such as made the Ephesine Church love Christ more then Father, or Mo∣ther, or Wife, or Children, or any worldly Interest whatsoever, accor∣dingly as he requires. But towards the end of the Intervall of this first Suc∣cession of the Church this Love and Courage it seems began to abate, and too many began to Gnosticize, as it is called, in that point, and think it a small thing to deny the Faith in the time of Persecution, even those that yet professed themselves of the Church, and were Believers. That this was within the Intervall of the Ephesine Church (in our sense) se∣veral Reproofs and Exhortations in the Epistles of the Apostles do plain∣ly evince. See Dr. Hammond's Notes on this Church, which fully reach our design. And the Epistles of Paul, and the first of Peter, and that to the Hebrews, were all writ within
that Intervall we have set for the E∣phesine Church, and their Faults com∣mitted before. Which Defaults this Vision rebukes and threatens them for, by way of instruction for future Ages, as it is in the following Verse. 9. Remember therefore from whence Verse 5. thou art fallen, and repent, and doe the first works. He bids them return to their first Love, which was more strong then death. And it was fit to give this command and encourage∣ment to the Church, because of greater Trials to come in her Smyr∣nian Condition. For before the Ten Persecutions Martyrdome was more rare. Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. That is, by an Hypallage, I will remove thee from thy Candlestick: which there∣fore is directed more especially to the Bishops or Pastours of the Church at that time, as threatning them for falling into such a remiss de∣gree of Love themselves, or suf∣fering
their Charges so to fall. For the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, Ch. 1. v. 20. and the seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Chur∣ches, that is to say, the Bishops and Pastours of the Church. Wherefore this Commination to them may by an Hypallage signifie their being remo∣ved from the Church by some Judge∣ment or other, that is, as many of them as were thus carelesse and re∣misse. But to any Members of the Church the removing of the Candle∣stick from them may be their amissi∣on of their Church-membership; as eripere alicui, or adimere alicui Civita∣tem, is to make him cease to be a Citizen any longer. Which sense is also competible to the Bishops or Pastours; Christ may cut them off in foro Divino from being any longer Members of his Church, and conse∣quently from Salvation. But there is yet another sense which pleaseth me best of all, in which Victorinus, Andreas, Lyranus and Alcazar do all agree, who interpret the removing
of the Candlestick out of its place, of the commination of some Com∣motion or Storm that should over∣take this Church; not that this Church should be carried quite a∣way, but moved or agitated as in a Storm or Earthquake. This they understand of the Ephesine Church in Asia literally: which is an argu∣ment that the Interpretation seemed very easie and genuine unto them. And it is as easily applicable to our Mysticall sense. But I would raise the Storm a little higher, and make it sig∣nifie the storm of that dreadfull Per∣secution that was to befall the Church in the Smyrnian Intervall thereof. For it is look'd upon still as the Aposto∣lick Church from the beginning to the end, though distinguished into these several Intervalls. And it is ob∣servable, that there is in every Epistle to the respective Church some Prediction to be fulfilled in the Intervall of the following Church. Which I thought fit here to note at once, and shall particularly, as we proceed, take no∣tice
thereof in their proper places. The sense therefore seems to be this; That unless the Church in this Ephe∣sine Intervall would be raised to an higher pitch of Zeal, and Love, and Activity for the propagating of his Kingdome, Christ would excite their Courage, and exercise it with such hot Persecutions (sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae) as would be more ef∣fectual for the bringing to pass his de∣sign. And it sell out accordingly in the Ten Persecutions within the Smyrni∣an Period of the Church. 10. But this thou hast, that thou ha∣test Verse 6. the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. The Church by this time had grown so soft and remisse, that there was not that zealous painful∣nesse as heretofore in several of them, nor that resolved Courage in suffering all things for Christ's sake: yet they were not grown so corrupt and beastly as to be given up to the impurity of the Nicolaitans, which in after-times some exercised from a mistake of an indiscreet act of one
Nicolas a Deacon in these very times of the Apostles. And from him were these beastly fellows called Nicolai∣tans. But little or nothing of this Im∣purity appeared within the Period of this Ephesine Church, which yet the Spirit of God foresaw would become detestably frequent and notorious in such Wretches as, though they called themselves Christians, the Apostolick Church would not own. This is al∣lowed the Ephesine Church for their comfort and credit, that they are free from Nicolaitism: and that they may adde to their Purity invincible Pa∣tience and Fortitude, he adds, To him that overcometh will I give Verse 7. to eat of the tree of Life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. For their works and labour and pains-ta∣king here is eating and refreshing promised them; for their Patience and hardship, a Paradise of Pleasure; for their laying down their lives for the Gospel, the enjoyment of eternal Life in the Kingdome of Christ. Lord, remember me when thou comest Luke 23. 42, 43.
into thy Kingdome. Verily I say unto thee, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. But we had almost forgot the for∣mer part of the seventh Verse: He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. Which being a common Epiphonema to all these seven Epistles, repeated in them from the first to the last, certainly must bear no small importance with it. Two things therefore I con∣ceive driven at by the affixing this Epiphonema to each Epistle. The one, to give us notice, that though there be a Literal sense of these Epistles, yet that they are every one of them also a Parable; which is intimated from this repeated form of speech which Christ in his life-time usually added at the end of Parables, He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Besides that the very sense of the E∣piphonema implies so much; which is, He that has an understanding to reach the depth of the meaning of these Epistles, let him reach it. For
it is not within the reach of every man's wit to find out the drift of them. The other thing driven at is, to inti∣mate to us that there is a meaning lodged under these seven Paraboli∣call Epistles of exceeding great mo∣ment and concernment to the Church. From whence I would inferre, that that Interpretation of them that is of the greatest consequence is the most likely to prove true. And such I conceive this will approve it self to the judicious which we are now a∣framing. And thus much of the first Succes∣sion of the Church, under the Title of Ephesus. CHAP. IV. The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Smyrna. 1. AND unto the Angel of the Apoc. ch. 2. v. 8. Church in Smyrna write. We come now to the second Succession
of the state of the Church, whose Title is, the Church in Smyrna, and whose Intervall is from the tenth of Nero, or Anno Christi 63. till Anno Christi 324. when Constantine the Great, a zealous Professour of Chri∣stianity, had subdued the most po∣tent enemies of it and himself. For then the Church was raised out of the dust, or rather out of the mire and bloud that she was troden down into by the Ten cruel Persecutions, and began to be the Church , the Church in sublimity and exaltation, according to the significa∣tion of that word. But in this In∣tervall of their Afflictions and Mar∣tyrdome she was the Church in Smyrna. Now  and  are all one, and signifie Myrrh; which whether you respect the Plant it self, which grows in sandy, dry and uncultivated places, and is it self rough and thor∣ny with sharp pricking leaves, or else the gumme of the Tree, which is bi∣ting and bitter to the taste, and has
its very name from thence in the Sy∣riack,  quia amara, as Martinius notes, it is very significative of this Intervall of the Church that suc∣ceeds, wherein those horrible Pa∣gan Persecutions raised against the Christians are comprehended. So that Smyrna signifies the bitter Afflicti∣on and Persecution of the Church, as that Lamp named Wormwood does the sad Calamity of the Western Caesareate. 2. To which you may add that Smyrna, that is to say, Myrrh, was a main Ingredient in the embalming of the bodies of the dead: which again reflects upon the many Funerals, or rather Deaths and Martyrdoms, of the Members of the Church which would be caused by the Persecutions of those times. Besides that, as Myrrh keeps the body from Corruption, it may be a Symbol of the eternizing of the memory of the Martyrs to all Posterities. Not to take notice of their conserving of their very Bodies themselves, which they call Reliques;
though this Allusion can be no coun∣tenance to the abuses in those things. And lastly, this Allusion to Myrrh is still the more emphaticall, in that the body of our Saviour, that faithfull Witness, as he styles himself, after his martyrdome on the Cross is said to be embalmed with Myrrh, John 19. 3. These things saith the First and the Last, who was dead, and is alive. The Titles that Christ adorns him∣self with when he speaks to the Church of Ephesus are, He that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and who walketh in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, namely, through all the Successions of them; like that Promise, Behold, I am with you to the end of the World; intimating thereby the presence of his Spirit, through which he would in all Difficulties su∣stain the Bishops and Pastours of his Church. Which general signifi∣cation seems well enough propor∣tioned or fitted to the Condition of the Church of Ephesus, he expresly requiring of them no more then Zeal
and Courage in the general: But now he speaks to the Church in Smyrna, and there enters a more bloudy Scene and terrible, he seems to encourage them with higher and more palpa∣ble and particular Animations in the very entrance of his discourse; These things saith the First and the Last, the same that began the War for this Kingdome we strive for, and will be the last in the field to assist my friends and discomfit mine enemies, as well as I was the first. And be not afraid of dying for the Truth; for though I was crucify'd my self, yet, behold, I am now alive. And I tell you it for a pledge unto you of the same Happinesse, if you lay down your lives (as the Times will shortly re∣quire it) for me and for my Gospel. This is very particular and apposite to the Condition of the Church in this Smyrnian Intervall, wherein there were to be so many and so blou∣dy Persecutions. 4. I know thy works and tribula∣tion and poverty: that is to say, I know Verse 9.
the great Affliction and misery thou art oppressed withall, being destitute of all the Comforts of this present life, and in danger of death every moment. Which is a right Smyrnian Condition indeed, according to the Title of the Church in Smyrna. But thou art rich: namely, with those spiritual Graces of Meeknesse, of Patience, of Christian Courage and Fortitude, and of sincere and in∣vincible Love of the Lord Jesus even to the death it self. And I know the Blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. That is, I take notice of the reproach that those men cast upon Christianity, who call themselves Christians, and yet make nothing of dissembling and denying the Faith upon the arising of any Persecutions for my Name's sake; as if a Christian could be such a vile, false and abject Hypocrite. This is to blaspheme them that are called by my Name. The right Christian is the true Jew, whose heart is circumcised,
and therefore he will not lie with his tongue; and whose Faith is so strong in me, and hopes so firm of a better life, that he can, if the cause of my Gospel so require, willingly part with this for the Love of me and for the Interest of my Kingdome. These are the true Members of my Church who are for suffering, the other the Synagogue of Satan; as I told Peter, when he would have disswaded me from undergoing the death of the Cross, Get thee behind me, Satan, for Matt. 16. 23. thou savourest not the things of God. That the Jews signifie the Chri∣stian Church, there is nothing more frequent in the Apocalyptick style then that. And this mention of these false Christians in opposition to these Smyrnian Sufferers does plain∣ly insinuate that sense which I have given. 5. Fear none of those things which Verse 10. thou shalt suffer. Do not imitate the base Cowardise of this Synagogue of Satan, these Hypocrites and Dis∣semblers. After that sharp repre∣hension
of Flinchers from the Faith, he returns to encourage and corrobo∣rate the Church in Smyrna: Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days. The red Dragon, that old Serpent, in his fight with Michael, (for the things of that Vision are co-incident with this Smyrnian Intervall of the Church,) I say, the Pagans incensed by the old Serpent, will cast several of you into prison, that your Faith may be tried, and God may receive the glory of your Fortitude and Constancy. This you shall have for ten days, that is, till the time of consummation that Victory and Redemption be wrought for you, or that you die. Or rather thus, You shall have tri∣bulation for ten days: There will be ten Seasons of bloudy Persecutions which you must run through; those ten Persecutions so famous in Church-History, and so frequent in the mouths of all men. Which conside∣ration, among others, does not a lit∣tle
ratifie this our Exposition of the Church of Smyrna, and consequent∣ly gives strength to the whole Hypo∣thesis of the seven successive Inter∣valls. Be ye faithfull unto death, and I will give you the Crown of Life. That is to say, Stand out till the con∣summation of the Ten Persecutions wherewith ye will be tried, and ye shall have the Crown of Life: I will crown you with the Imperial Crown, which shall prove a Crown of Life unto you. Christianity shall become at length the Religion of the Empire, which will save you for the future from the deadly Persecutions of the red Dragon. You shall be no longer subject to the Cruelty of Ro∣man Paganism for the profession of your Religion. This therefore will be a Crown of Life unto you. This is according to that Apoc. 21. 4. And there shall be no more death; that is, there shall be no more Persecution and kil∣ling for Conscience sake: Which was the sad case of this Smyrnian Church
under the Pagan Cruelty in an emi∣nent manner. Wherefore when they had wone their Freedome, it was a Crown of Life to them, by the Law of Contraries. That this is the ge∣nuine sense will farther appear from what follows. 6. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto Verse 11. the Churches. This being an usual Epiphonema to Parables plainly inti∣mates, that what hitherto has been said is a parabolicall Prophecy. And the nature of a Prophecy is, to fore∣tell such things as are to be trans∣acted here on earth. And therefore where the Promise is not Divine, or concerning the state after this life, the Epiphonema follows: as is very conspicuous in the Promise to the Church of Thyatira, which is the first example of the Epiphonema coming last of all; which is a sign that the whole Epistle there is Propheticall: Verse 26. And he that overcometh and keepeth my words unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, &c.
Which therefore concerns the stage of this Earth. And therefore this Promise here of the Crown of Life before the Epiphonema, I would inter∣pret of a Reward in this life on this earth, according as I have expoun∣ded the passage. But now that which follows this Epiphonema is a Promise of another sort, viz. He that over∣cometh shall not be hurt of the second death: for it is the securing of a blessed Immortality after this life; and seems farther to correspond with that passage in the Apocalypse, Ch. 20. v. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such the second death hath no power. Wherefore though not according to the inference of rigid Syllogism, yet according to those nice and delicate hints in Propheticall Intimations, I would conclude that the promise of their Portion in the first Resurre∣ction is here proposed to those af∣flicted Smyrnians, which was the pro∣per Portion of Martyrs and Confes∣sours, according to the opinion of
the Primitive Church, as Mr. Mede has learnedly and judiciously obser∣ved. Which granted does hugely cor∣roborate this Application of the E∣pistle to the Church in Smyrna to this Intervall which contains the times of all the Sufferings in a manner of the primitive Martyrs. The pro∣mise of a blessed Immortality had been very proper and accommo∣date to this Smyrnian state of the Church, that were so frequently to lose their lives for profession of the Gospel: but for it to be intimated to them that these shall have their porti∣on in the first Resurrection, which is proper to Martyrs, as appears by the place above quoted, is so cha∣racteristicall of this Intervall, where∣in all the primitive Martyrs suffer∣ed, viz. in those Ten Persecutions, that it does marvellously confirm the truth of the Exposition of this pre∣sent Epistle in this Mysticall way we have gone. And thus much of the Church in Smyrna, that is in , in the bitternesse of Oppres∣sion
and Affliction, as the Allusion to that Syriack word imports. We pro∣ceed to the Church in Pergamus. CHAP. V. The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Pergamus. 1. AND to the Angel of the Church Apoc. ch. 2. v. 12. in Pergamus write. The Inter∣vall of this Church is from the year of Christ 324, when Constan∣tine utterly defeated the Army of Licinius, not above thirty thousand of one hundred and thirty thousand escaping, and so with his own Victo∣ries made the Church also trium∣phant out of her long and unsuppor∣table Miseries, raising her aloft from her sad Oppressions and Persecutions. From this year, I say, to the year 1242, when the Pope's Legate Ame∣lin made an end of the Albigensian War with Trancavel Bastard of the Earl of Beziers, let this be the Inter∣vall
of the Church in Pergamus. 2. Of the beginning of this In∣tervall there can be no doubt. And for the termination of it, there are these two Considerations to counte∣nance it. The first, in that the latter of those numbers in the last of Da∣niel, viz. the number 1335, does point to the beginning of the Affairs of the Waldenses and Albigenses, who are both one Sect and from one Au∣thour, Waldo of Lyons, an holy and good man, whose Preaching, and his own and his Followers Sufferings, were about the term of that Num∣ber whose Epoche is the Prophana∣tion of the Temple by Antiochus E∣piphanes. So considerable a passage of Providence is the appearing of the Waldenses in those times betwixt the year of Christ 1160 and 1170. For they were condemned for Here∣ticks by Pope Alexander in the La∣terane Council in the year 1162, up∣on which you may be sure Persecu∣tions would immediately follow. And Mr. Mede with great judgement will
have this latter Number in Daniel to Dan. 12. 12. point at these Times. Nor does that expression of Daniel at all weaken his Opinion, in that he saith, Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days, because it is said in the Apocalypse also, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, that is, that die for the cause of our Lord Jesus. And of the Church of Smyrna it is said, I know thy tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich. The judgement of the Spirit of God and the judgement of carnal men are quite opposite in these things. What they call Poverty, the Spirit calls Riches; what they Mi∣sery, the Spirit Blessednesse. Where∣fore the Affairs of the Waldenses or Albigenses is a notable, distinct and conspicuous joint of time, even ac∣cording to the judgement of the Spi∣rit of Prophecy. But then, in the second place, I ter∣minate the Intervall of this Church in Pergamus, not in the beginning, but the conclusion, of these Waldensi∣an
or Albigensian Affairs, because they being all in a manner one, and so plainly concluded in the year I have mentioned, their Sufferings may the more punctually answer to the Suffer∣ings of that one Martyr Antipas, who is here said to be slain in Pergamus. But the Concinnity of these things we shall better understand after we have descanted upon the name Per∣gamus. 3. That by Pergamus is intimated a state of Exaltation or Sublimity, I intimated before. Sublimia omnia dicta Asiaticis  notat Hesychius, Suidas, & Servius, saith Grotius upon Apoc. 1. 11. whence he would have the Church in Pergamus to re-mind us of high and heavenly things. But this is a Moral, not a Propheticall sense. But with him howsoever I acknowledge that the signification of Sublimity is alluded to in the ge∣neral, but here most elegantly and seasonably in reference to the pre∣cedent state of the Church in Smyr∣na, which was a state of Humiliation
and bitter Affliction. But at the very beginning of this present Intervall she so conspicuously emerging out of this low, sad, affictive state into the state of glory, peace and prosperity, what can be more significant then to salute her with the Title of the Church in Pergamus, accordingly as she is here saluted; which is a kind of Congratulation to her fresh emer∣gency out of her late Miseries. And this sense will hold good for a time in this Intervall, namely, till tho days of her Apostasy: but then the Aposto∣lick Church will be the Church in Pergamus still, but in another kind of meaning. 4. According therefore to the rich∣nesse of the Prophetick style, Perga∣mus has also another sense, such as the City Babylon and the City Tyrus, which are put for the City of Rome. But then not in such a sense as to mean the Walls or Stones of the Ro∣man City, but the Roman Church, and her Power and Jurisdiction. And in such a sense is Pergamus also here put
for Rome. So that this Epistle writ∣ten to the Church of Christ in Perga∣mus, the truly Catholick and Apo∣stolick Church, is directed to this Church dwelling under the Roman Church, or within the Roman Chur∣che's Jurisdiction, understanding old Rome especially; as all such Apoca∣lyptick Visions perstringe her most. Now that Rome in this sense is per∣stringed by this Pergamus, is very e∣vident, First, in the easie Allusion of Pergamus to Rome from the significa∣tion of the words. For as Pergamus signifies Sublimity, so (as Martinius notes) Rome is from the Hebrew  exaltari. Besides that her Situation is high, and Buildings lofty, according to that of the Poet, Collibus è septem totum circumspicit orbem. And the highest of all is the Bishop of Rome himself, who exalts himself above all that is called God, or is wor∣shipped. Is not this therefore a fit Bishop of Pergamus, that perks thus above all Kings and Emperours and
Princes of the earth? And our In∣tervall of the Church of Pergamus reaches the highest times of her Ex∣altation, it taking in both Gregory the seventh, who first excommunicated the Emperour, and took upon him the power of making Emperours himself, and Alexander the third, who trode upon the neck of the Emperour Frederick; as also Caelestine the third, that crowned Henry the sixth and his Empress with his feet, and in scorn kick'd the Emperour's Crown off with his foot when he had crowned him. Certainly the Popes of Rome were then the Bishops of Pergamus with a witnesse. Nor after this Inter∣vall could they ever hold their Crests so high. Boniface the eighth indeed was a Blusterer, and excommunicated Philip the Fair of France; but he cal∣led him fool for his pains, and handled him in such sort, that, surprized at Anagnia, he was disgracefully mount∣ed on a poor Jade, and so carried pri∣soner to Rome, where Pride and Re∣gret broke his heart, and so he there
dy'd ingloriously. But secondly, It is said of this Pergamus, that it was the most given to Idolatry of all the Ci∣ties of Asia, (so Andreas Cesariensis reports of it;) which is the noto∣rious Character of Rome above all Cities, and therefore elsewhere in the Apocalypse she is called the Whore of Babylon for her insatiable spiritual Fornications. Thirdly, These Pergamenians were very fierce and diligent Accusers of the Apostolick Christians, to bring them to Martyrdome, as Dr. Ham∣mond upon the place notes out of an∣cient History. For which also Rome is taxed elsewhere in the Apocalypse, who is said to be drunk with the bloud of the Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus. Fourthly, It is recorded of the Prefect of this City Pergamus, that he would persuade the Christians to forsake the Apostolick Faith, and re∣turn to Heathenism, , because the elder Reli∣gion was the more precious and to
be preferred: As Antiquity is the great Pretense of the Papal Church. That Prefect said of Christianity, that it was but , that it began but the other day: And so you may be sure the Church of Rome said of the Religion of the Waldenses and Al∣bigenses. See Dr. Hammond upon the place. And lastly, That it should be the Martyr Antipas that was slain in Per∣gamus, can any name more directly and assuredly point at the Church of Rome or the Papal Church then this? For  is Father, and , which is Papa,  but a Reduplication of , as Eustathius has noted: and  sig∣nifies as much as against. And there∣fore who can be so blind as not to discern how fit a Type this Antipas is of them that within this Intervall of the Church should suffer for being against that holy Father the Pope, as he is called. Nothing can sound more congruously or harmoniously, what∣ever any man by way of cavill can say against it. The main Interpretati∣on
therefore of this present Epistle to the Church in Pergamus will re∣spect the pure Apostolick Church a∣biding within the Jurisdiction of the Roman, as this sense plainly implies; the Woman in the wildernesse, as the Holy Ghost elsewhere expresses it. These things saith he that hath the sharp sword with two edges. Christ is set out thus in this Epistle to the Church in Pergamns, because this Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, understood and rel∣lished by the Divine Spirit in us, was the main Weapon whereby the Church in Pergamus defended her self from the Pergamenian Corruptions, and so kept her self pure from the false Glosses and unsound Traditions of either Superstitious men or crafty Deceivers. 5. I know thy works, and where thou Verse 13. dwellest, even where Satan's seat is; and thou holdest fast my Name, and hast not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithfull Martyr, who was slain among you, where
Satan dwelleth. That is to say, I know thou doest well for the main, and to thy greater commendation I consider where thou dwellest, even where the first-born of Lucifer has his throne, he that exalts himself above all that is called God or that is wor∣shipped. (So Christ compares Satan to Lucifer or the King of Babylon, (of whom the Prophet says, How art thou fallen, Lucifer, thou son of the Morning!) Luke 10. 18. I beheld Satan as lightning fall from Heaven.) And yet neither the awe nor glory of that Church could cause thee to for∣sake my Name, and, in stead of being a true Christian, to become a Mem∣ber of Antichrist, and so relinquish the pure Apostolick Faith, no not in those days that my faithfull Martyr Antipas, that is, those plain-hearted and openly-professed enemies of the Pope and his adulterate and idolatrous Religion, the Waldenses and Albigen∣ses, were so cruelly persecuted and murthered, who were slain among you who stood out and yet escaped,
though in the very Synagogue of Sa∣tan, that is to say, in that Church which is a treacherous Adversary to all my true Members, and a very bit∣ter Censurer and Accuser of them for their not complying with the Laws of Wickednesse which she hath esta∣blished, and a worse Adversary then the Pagan Dragon before, whom therefore my Church overcame in a few Ages. This Satan, I say, is a more mischievous Enemy then that red Dragon, by reason of his Cunning and Hypocrisie, and his pretenses that he is for me, when indeed he is against me, and by reason of the abuse of my Authority in pretense, against the Members of my true Church. Where∣fore I cannot but take notice where thou dwellest, and how in that re∣gard thou art in a worse condition then the Smyrnian Church her self, who were onely to grapple with a professed Enemy, but thou with both a malicious Enemy, and a false and hypocritical Friend. It is therefore well done of thee that thou holdest
out in such hard and difficult Circum∣stances. 6. This for the sense of that Verse in general. But now particularly, why the Waldenses and Albigenses, that were persecuted in this Intervall of the Church, should be called An∣tipas, why Martyr, why faithfull, and why slain, rather then burnt, we shall briefly give this account. And that a Company or successive Body of men is represented in the Pro∣phetick style under one single per∣son, is so trivial that I need not note it. Alcazar makes Jezebel, mentio∣ned in the next Epistle, to be the Church of the Jewes; Aretas, the Sect of the Nicolaitans; Dr. Hammond, the Gnosticks. But now that this one person should be called Antipas, there is nothing more congruous to the Doctrine of the Waldenses and Albi∣genses, who boldly preached that the Pope was Antichrist, the Mass an Abomination, the Host an Idol, and Purgatory a Fable. And Waldo, the chief beginner of this Sect, was of
the same mind, denying the Pope to be the Head of the Church, or that he had any Authority over the Kings and Princes of the earth, who depend immediately upon God alone. Was not this an Antipas indeed then, and exactly opposing the sovereign Paterni∣ty of his Holiness of Rome? But they were faithfull, because they did so plainly declare to the World such concerning Truths; and Martyrs, be∣cause they suffered death for so do∣ing, it being for the Cause of God, and for the Interest of the Kingdome of Christ. And they are said to be slain, (suppose with the Sword or any wea∣pon of War,) not burnt, because Burning was more rare within this Intervall of the Church; but they were slain in the field many hundred thousands of them. A great number of the Waldenses that took Arms in Germany were cut in pieces in the year 1220, (as Matthew Paris writes;) they being in such a disadvantageous place, betwixt marish ground and the Sea, that they could make no escape.
And Mr. Mede, out of Petrus Perioni∣us in his book of this Albigensian War, intimates that near ten hundred thou∣sand of them were slain in battel at times, and that in France alone. Wherefore slaying with the Sword is very Characteristically spoken here in this Epistle of the faithfull Martyr Antipas; Burning as yet being in it self not so frequent, and bearing no proportion at all to this vast number slain in the Field. Whence this is a considerable note of distinction be∣twixt this present Intervall of the Church in Pergamus from that of her abode in Thyatira, as we shall see in its due place. 7. But I have a few things against Verse 14. thee, because thou hast there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel, to eat things sa∣crificed unto Idols, and to commit For∣nication. This is spoken to the whole Body of those that in their judge∣ments did condemn both the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome.
But these may be cast into three sorts: such as notwithstanding this Judge∣ment still held Communion with her, and pretended they did well in so do∣ing; those that separated from her Communion; and those that not onely separated, but suffered death for so doing. These last were the Martyr Antipas above named; the first the Balaamites here reproved, that were of a more Gnostick-like temper, too much leaning towards the Flesh, thinking themselves wiser then the other in not exposing themselves for their judgement in Religion. Ye do well indeed, saith he, in declaring a∣gainst the Enormities of the Papal Church, and in condemning them in your own thoughts and Consciences: but this I take ill of you, that ye per∣mit (some of you) the Doctrine of Balaam to take effect, that is, by communicating with this Church of Rome in her idolatrous Eucharist, and by eating her Deus Panaceus, ye com∣mit spiritual Fornication, and be∣come guilty of Idolatry. (To eat
things sacrificed to Idols is one mode of Idolatry, but by a Propheticall Diorism it signifies Idolatry in gene∣ral.) That ye indulge this liberty to your selves or others, is to cast a Stumbling-block before the Children of Israel, and to occasion and en∣courage many to adhere to the Ro∣man Communion, when they ought to separate from her, that there be no prejudice done to my true Church, nor Dis-interest to my King∣dome. 8. So hast thou also them that hold Verse 15. the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. That also is a fault a∣mongst some of you, that you do not possesse your Vessels in that holinesse and sanctity ye ought to doe: and though you can discover the spiritual Fornications of Pergamus and their Luciferian Pride, yet ye are not so pure and clean as ye ought to be, and free from the Lusts of the flesh, (which Vice is here noted by Nicolaitism dioristically, as Idolatry in general before by eating things sacrificed to
Idols.) Flesh and bloud is over-prone to think little ill of such things, be∣cause they are so natural and pleasing: but I declare a pertly unto you, that it is a thing that I hate. Be ye holy even as I am holy. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them Verse 16. with the Sword of my mouth. Amend these faults, left I come to you sud∣denly in Judgement. Haply by the more sedulous activity of the Lords of the Inquisition, whose reign was most chiefly in the following Inter∣vall, as also of other Judicatures; the Pragmaticalnesse of whose Agents will be more then ordinarily ready to discover every one that dissembles his Religion; and the frequent ter∣rour of being burnt alive at the Stake will more effectually suppresse the flames of all Wantonnesse and Lust. And as I will come to you thus in Judgement unlesse ye repent; so I am resolved also farther to fight against your Adversaries, the Pergamenians or Romanists, with the Sword of my
mouth, till I cut off great branches from the body of that far-spreading Tree, and dismember whole Nations from the Community of that idola∣trous Church by the power of the Word and the preaching of the Gospel. This is that which is predi∣ctory of some Events to happen in the following Intervall, according to the Genius of these Epistles. 9. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden Manna. The Verse 17. Promise here following the Epipho∣nema, (He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear,) must, according to the Rule, signifie Theologically or Spiri∣tually, not Physically or Politically. Wherefore the sense is, Those of Pergamus indeed pretend, that when they give that white and sweet Conse∣crated Wafer into the mouths of their Communicants, they give them the true Manna, my very Body and Bloud which was shed on the Crosse, and my very Flesh that was there crucified and broken for them; whenas notwithstanding they order
their Eucharist so, that they turn my Supper into a Feast of Idolothyta, and make the partakers thereof guilty of Idolatry or spiritual Fornication, forasmuch as they give Divine Wor∣ship to that which is not God. So that as, in the case of Balaam, the Is∣raelites were to eat things sacrificed to Idols in order to carnal Forni∣cation, so they that partake of this perverted Eucharist are necessarily ipso facto (especially since the fourth Laterane Council) drawn into spiri∣tual Fornication or Idolatry. But he that is courageous and abstains from this illicit Communion, and through Faith overcomes all Difficulties, for the quitting that outward white vi∣sible Wafer, I will give him to eat of the hidden Manna, of that true spiritual Manna mentioned John 6. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my bloud is drink indeed. But the words I there speak they are spirit, and they are life. Or if he die in the Cause, I will give him the hidden Manna, e∣ven the invisible food of Angels, and
his Soul shall passe into the society of the blessed Genii and Holy Souls of Saints departed this life. 10. And I will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no man knoweth sa∣ving he that receiveth it. That is to say, Though he be accused and re∣proached for an Heretick and Schis∣matick in the Church of Pergamus, where Satan the Accuser dwells, yet I will give him a white Stone, and quit him in judgement, and e∣stablish the joy and peace of a good Conscience unto him. Or thus; I will give him a white Stone, in which there is a new Name written; that is, his Old man shall be throughly crucified, and he shall attain to the state of the New man in the purity thereof, and enjoy that inestimable Jewel of the Divine Nature pure and permanent, which no man knows the excellency of till he be made partaker thereof. I will consum∣mate Regeneration to him either in this life, or upon his passage into the
other state, if he be snatched away by a sudden Martyrdome. And this will more then countervail all the Injuries the lofty Church of Perga∣mus can doe to him in life, goods, or good name. CHAP. VI. The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira. 1. AND to the Angel of the Church in Thyatira write. The true Apoc. 2. 18. Church of Christ is still in the power and within the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome: and therefore as Rome has been set out by the City of Babylon, Tyre, and Pergamus, so is it here in this Intervall necessarily to be understood by the City of Thyatira, I mean in such a sense as it was by the City of Pergamus. That  (from whence both Strabo and Pliny, and others that are Criticks, fetch the rea∣son of the name Thyatira) is alluded
to, I am inclinable to think from those Authorities; and that the Woma∣nishnesse of the Church of Rome in this Period is perstringed. That her Softnesse and Luxury was more then ordinarily increased in this Intervall is not to be doubted, as certainly her Covetousnesse, as also her prankings and adornings in the splendour of their Altars, and Churches, and Copes, and the like. Which could not be so continuedly and so high in the former Intervall. But here all along she may well be looked upon as , Filia delicatula, a delicate Damosel indeed, sitting like a Queen, and knowing no sorrow, when a lit∣tle before she was like to be over∣run by the Waldenses and Albigenses, and was fain to enter the Field, and fight manfully for her own safety. A little after the beginning of this Intervall did Innocent the fourth ap∣point in the Council at Lyons, that the Cardinals should go in their Ro∣sie-coloured Hats and Robes, and ride upon Horses with Furniture and
Trappings sutable to the greatnesse of their Order, and delicacy of their Condition. And the Mitre of Paul the second is taken speciall notice of for the exceeding preciousnesse of the Jewels therein. And no doubt there was the like encrease of the Ecclesiastick Bravery every-where. A little before the beginning of this Intervall did Honorius the third ap∣point the Carmelites to goe in white, that they might look more Maiden∣like, and decreed that they should be called the Family of the Virgin. And the Franciscans and Dominicans are notorious all along this Intervall, who had the Virgin Mary for their peculiar Patronesse. And indeed within this Intervall the Roman Church ran so much in the seminine strain, that they generally professed themselves more under the Govern∣ment and Providence of our Lady then of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gre∣gory the ninth, a little before the beginning of this present Intervall, ordained that Salve Regina, an Hymn
to the blessed Virgin, should be sung in all Churches. Boniface the eighth, in the year 1293, composed that Oraison, Ave, Virgo gloriosa: and in the year 1470, the Mary Psalter and her Rosarie were composed by See if there was not a Ma∣rie's Psal∣ter before, Antidote against Idolat. chap. 6. sect. 8. Alanus de Rupe. 2. And how feminine this Church was in this Intervall, the observati∣ons of that excellent Person Sr. Ed∣wyn Sandys (though after the ex∣piration thereof, when one would think they should in Policy have been more castigate in their Religi∣on) will give us fully to understand. The honour, faith he, which they doe to the Virgin Mary is double for the most part unto that which they doe unto our Saviour. Where one pro∣fesses himself a Devoto or peculiar Servant of our Lord, whole Towns are the Devoti of our Lady. The stateliest Churches are hers lightly, and in Churches hers the fairest Al∣tars. Where one prayeth before the Crucifix, two before her Image: where one voweth to Christ, ten vow
to her: and for one Miracle report∣ed to be wrought by the Crucifix, not so sew perhaps as an hundred are voiced upon the Images of the Vir∣gin. Their Devils in Exorcism are also taught to endure the name of God or the Trinity without trouble; but at the naming of our Lady, to tosse and seem much tormented. Where one fasts on Friday upon the account of the Passion of our Lord, many fast on Saturday upon the ac∣count of his Mother. And to their Beads they string up ten Salutations of our Lady to one of our Lord's Prayers. The This was the Insti∣tute of Pope John 22. and within the fore-part of the In∣tervall of Thyatira. See Poly∣dore Virgil. de Rerum invent. lib. 6. c. 12. Bell also which is rung at Sun-rise, at Noon and Sun-set, is called the Ave-Mary Bell, whereby all men every-where at those set times might be engaged to doe their Devo∣tions to the Virgin Mary. And, last∣ly, their chief Preachers do teach in Pulpit, whatsoever is found in Scrip∣ture spoken of Christ the Son of God, to apply it to our Lady also, as being the Daughter of God. Is not there∣fore the Church of Rome rightly cal∣led
Thyatira, as alluding to , which both Strabo and Pliny would have to be the reason of the name of that City? 3. I will onely adde one thing more. Alsledius calls this Intervall of time which we attribute to the Church of Thyatira Regnum Locu∣starum, because of the variety of the Orders of Monks that started up within this time. Therefore when the Church of Rome swarmed so with Monks and Friers, that had abjured their Virility by an irrevocable Vow of Caelibate, and went in sculking Hoods and long Coats like Women, and so became Petticoat-men at the best, was it not very congruous for the Spirit of Prophecy, by way of just reproach to this Womanishness, so to characterize the Church of Rome at this time, by calling her Thyatira, as if they had become rather the Daugh∣ters of men then the Sons of men by this so general Effeminacy in more then those Monkish garbs which I now mention? Besides that these
Petticoat-men, the Dominicans espe∣cially, managed their opposition a∣gainst the true Church in a right fe∣minine manner, not manly, as before, by meeting their enemy in the Field, but sneakingly, by Perfidiousness and Treachery, to bring them into the In∣quisition, and then cruelly and in∣sultingly in the upshot; as it is easie to understand by reading the Histo∣ry of the Holy Inquisition, as they call it. Therefore there being all these symptoms of Feminity in the Church of Rome in this Intervall, it is not unreasonable to conceive that this corruption of hers is perstringed by calling her the City of Thyatira, al∣luding to Thygatira, which signifies not a son of Adam, but a daughter. 4. But were it not for the Autho∣rity of Strabo and Pliny, there is an∣other paronomastical Allusion which I should prefer before this. Where∣fore, according to the richnesse of the Prophetick style, I should also con∣ceive Thyatira to allude to , which is, to break or bruise Aroma∣tick
Spices, which makes them give the sweeter savour: or else to  or , Altars for the burning of sweet Odours. Any of which me∣thinks is lesse forced then either Gro∣tius his , or Strabo's . And as to the sense, the Paronomasia is very expressive of the Persecuti∣ons of the true Members of Christ within this Intervall, and agrees ex∣actly with History, wherein there is little talk of flaying with the Sword, as is intimated in that expression in the foregoing Intervall, where the Martyr Antipas is said to be slain; (which agrees admirably well with that great Slaughter of the Waldenses and the Albigenses, which were mar∣tyred in the Field by the Pontifician Forces, as the word  or  signifies properly to slay, sup∣pose with the Sword or any such weapon of War; .) But the Persecutions in the Thyati∣rian Intervall were usually Burnings, or Rackings, and wasting away their
lives in miserable Imprisonments. But that which was most frequent and most famous in this Period was the burning of men alive with Fire and faggot. This filled Thyatira with so many . Where though the Cruelty of the Persecutors was most execrable; yet the Faith, Constancy and devout Sincerity of our blessed Protestant Martyrs went up with the flames and globes of Smoak, sweeter then any Odours or Incense, from the Altar, into the presence of Heaven, and were there accepted for his sake who gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet∣smelling favour. 5. The frequency of these Burnt∣offerings in those times is noted by Sanderus a Papist; Infinitos Lolhar∣dos & Sacramentarios in tota Europa Downham de Anti∣christ. lib. 6. cap. 5. nuper ignibus traditos fuisse. But no∣thing can be so significative of the change of the Scene of the Persecuti∣on of the Church in Pergamus, where Antipas was slain, to this in Thyatira, whereby these  are alluded
to, as that passage in the History of the Albigenses, lib. 2. c. 9. which gave me occasion to terminate the Pergamenian Intervall in that year, viz. 1242. Here you see, saith he, the last Attempt which we finde the Albi∣genses to have made, and the last Ex∣pedition of Pilgrims levied against them. All the pursuit against them af∣terwards was by the Monks the Inqui∣sitours, (the Dominicans he means, of whose Father, Dominicus, his Mo∣ther when she went with child with him dream'd she was big of a Dog that vomited fire out of his throat,) which Monks, saith he, now kindled their Fires more then ever. And taking these poor people disarmed, and singling them out by retail, it was impossible for them any longer to subsist. And so this suf∣fering Church of Christ passed out of that state where Antipas was slain with the Sword, to that of Thyatira, where the holy Martyrs of our Re∣formed Religion were burnt at the Stake. And this, I think, will suffice to make us understand why the Pow∣er
and Jurisdiction of the Roman Church in this Intervall bears the Title of Thyatira. 6. These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eys like to a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brasse. The Son of God is here Christ, either per∣sonally, or mystically understood for his Body the Church. Understanding it personally of Christ, his flaming Eyes denote his piercing and discerning Foresight and Providence; it por∣tends also his Wrath and Vengeance against the Persecutors of his Church with Fire and faggot: but his Feet like fine brasse, the peremptory Constancy amd Purity of his ways. But if we understand these Feet like fine brasse of Christ's mysticall Body, we are to make a supply of the Description out of the former Chapter, ver. 15. And his feet like fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; whereby is insinuated the fiery Trial of his Church in this In∣tervall of Thyatira even in the gros∣sest sense, so many of his Servants standing at the Stake with their leggs
in the midst of flaming Fire, kindled by their barbarous Persecutors. That the Son of God described in the fore∣going Chapter is also representative of his Body mysticall, the descripti∣on of his Voice seems plainly to inti∣mate. His Voice being compared to the sound of many Waters, that in∣sinuates that this Description respects also his Body Mysticall, which are a multitude. 7. I know thy works, and charity, Verse 19. and service, and faith. The true Church then in Thyatira being in Op∣pression and Affliction stood close to one another, and encouraged and comforted one another, and support∣ed one another as well as they could, and endeavoured after an Exempla∣rity of Godlinesse and due proficien∣cy in the Power of Religion, as be∣ing Candidates for that Deliverance which they by Faith saw was not far off. And thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first. That is, I see the works of thy Patience
in suffering Imprisonment, Tortures and Death, and particularly in giving up your selves, as an Oblation of In∣cense, to the Fire and faggot in such numbers for the testimony of my Truth. Which being toward the lat∣ter end of this Intervall, it is fitly said, and the last to be more then the first. This is according to what is found in History. 8. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer∣est Verse 20. that Woman Jezebel, which calleth her self a Prophetess, &c. viz. the Papal Hierarchy, that pretends to be infallible, and under colour of this brings in Idolatry, which is spiritual Fornication, and detains men in the Communion of their idolatrous Mass, which the Spirit of God here paral∣lels to the eating of things sacrificed unto Idols. The Prophetesse Jezebel here therefore answers to the false Prophet after mentioned in the Re∣velations; Apoc. 19. 20. and this exprobration to the Church in Thyatira, of permitting Je∣zebel thus to practice her deceits, to
that voice of the Angel, Come out of Apoc. 18. 4. her, my people, lest ye be partakers of her sins and of her plagues. It is a kind of solicitation of the Princes and people in Christendome, such as discerned the Frauds and Idolatries of the Ro∣man Church, to make a Defection from her, and suffer her Trumperies no longer. For the time of that De∣fection now drew near, and things were ripe for it, and it was in the power of them that disliked the con∣dition of Affairs to amend it: and therefore he saith, Because thou suf∣ferest that Woman Jezebel. For it is no fault in us to suffer those things which it is not in our power to help or redresse. 9. This Jezebel is very expressive of the Roman Hierarchy, if we recurr to the story of the book of the Kings: not onely for her painting of her self, (which is notorious in the Ro∣man Church, (and especially in this Intervall,) and such as the Homilies of our Church in England take espe∣cial notice of, comparing all those
rich and gorgeous Adornings of the Church of Rome to the painting of the wrinkled face of an Harlot,) but also for her Whoredomes and Witch∣craft, as it is noted 1 Kings 9. 22. What peace, so long as the whoredomes of thy Mother Jezebel and her witch∣crafts are so many? Which is exactly parallel to the Description of the Whore of Babylon, who is said to be the mother of Fornications and Abo∣minations Apoc. 17. of the earth; described also by that Cup of Sorcery in her hand, whereby she intoxicates the Kings of the Earth, and makes them drunk with the Wine of her Fornica∣tion. And whereas she is said to be drunk with the bloud of the Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus, Jezebel also in her History is famous for murthering the Prophets 1 Kings 18. 4. of God. 10. And those grosse Wickednes∣ses committed by Ahab, who did ve∣ry abominably in following Idols, and in persecuting the Servants of the true God, who is said to have sold
himself to work Wickednesse, are imputed to this subtil murtherous Whore and Witch, as the Text plain∣ly declares. But there was none like unto Ahab, who did sell himself to work 1 King. 21. 25. wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up. That is to say, the Roman Hierarchy (according as both the Vision of the Whore of Babylon and of the two∣horned Beast do plainly signifie,) was the Authour, Contriver and Instiga∣tour unto all those murtherous and idolatrous practices that the Secular Magistrate has been guilty of, during their Force and Tyranny over the true Servants of Christ. The Beast with two Horns exercised all this Apoc. 13. Power before the Beast with ten Horns, or rather made use of the Se∣cular Power to effect all their devil∣lish Designs against the Children of God; as Jezebel wrote Letters in A∣hab's name, and sealed them with his 1 Kings 21. 8. seal. The Church got the stamp of the Imperial Authority upon all the wicked Dogmata of their Religion
and Idolatrous practices, which they contrived for their own carnal ad∣vantages: and then if any Naboth would not part with the Inheritance of his Fathers, the possession of an ho∣ly, righteous and rational Conscience, nor profess nor act against the , against those native Truths and Notions which God of his infi∣nite mercy and faithfulnesse has im∣planted in the minds of all men that have not done violence to that in∣nate Light, the Candle of the Lord searching all the parts of the belly, he Prov. 20. 27. was through the murtherous contri∣vances of this Strumpet Jezebel false∣ly accused as a Blasphemer of God 1 Kings 21. 10. and the King, as an enemy to both the Catholick Faith and secular Magistrate, and so was sentenced to death. And death came by these wicked Accusa∣tions in this Intervall, as in the for∣mer Intervall, wherein Antipas was slain, by openly fighting in the Field. Thus apposite is the Allusion to the History of Jezebel, for the setting out the state of this Intervall of the
Church under the Tyranny of the Church of Rome. 11. Nor is it all harsh, thus to interpret a Vineyard to so spiritual a sense as to make it something within us, whenas both Philo and other an∣cient Interpreters have interpreted Paradise to that sense, or the Garden of Eden. And others also cannot but acknowledge that that Law of Moses; Deut. 22. 9. Thou shalt not sow thy Vineyard with divers seeds, has also a Moral or Mysticall meaning, and is a Precept of Simplicity or Sincerity of heart. Wherefore the Vineyard of Naboth may very well signifie the Hu∣mane Will and Understanding that is sown onely or planted with such Notions or notices of things as are from God, whether they be those innate Idea's of the Soul, or what is communicated farther by the Spi∣rit of God in the Holy Writings of inspired men, or are more immediate∣ly inspired into us by the abode of that Spirit in us. All these Plants are of our Heavenly Father's own
planting, and no other seed is to be sown among them repugnant there∣unto. And this Vineyard is the In∣heritance of all true Christians, de∣scending upon them from the Apo∣stles times to this very day. But the Roman Empire being perverted by the doctrines of the whore or two∣horned Beast, or by the eorruptions also of their own nature, had a mind to invade this ancient right as Ahab had to get into his possession Na∣both's Vineyard, under pretence that men giving up their will and under∣standing to the supreme Power, Go∣vernment might be the more secure. And all that wondred after the Beast Apoc. 13. gave up their Vineyards into the hand of the secular Power, and pro∣fessed no otherwise then according to the faith of the Empire, and so had their Vineyards sown with divers seeds, nay indeed with what was re∣pugnant to the Apostolick Plantation. Their minds were filled with gross lies, foul-Idolatries of all sorts, and murder∣ous enmities against the true Children of God.
12. But as for the Vineyard of Naboth, that is the Vineyard of the true Prophets or Prophetesses, as the word Naboth seems to intimate; they were not given up, that is, those that were not Christians for fashion-sake, and believed new invented lies and Apostolick truth alike, but with a true and living faith acknowledged Jesus to be the Christ, these would rather lose their lives then quit their Vineyards that yielded them that noble Wine, that perpetual feast of a good Conscience, and of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Whence it was that this Whore and Sorceresse Jezebel contrived their death, or persecution and oppression, as the two Prophets are said to both mourn in sackcloath, and also to be slain. The Apoc. 11. Vineyard therefore of Naboth is that sense, and knowledge, and consci∣ence and life of the Spirit in the new birth, whereby a man discerning plainly & livingly betwixt the wayes of Christ and of Antichrist, does as necessarily loath the one, as adhere to the other.
13. For the true and firm belief in Christ is from the new birth, as S. John also witnesses, Every one that 1 John 5. 1. believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. And therefore this Spirit of life must needs have an Antipathy a∣gainst what is contrary to it self: And is also the Spirit of Prophecy in the most concerning sense: As John like∣wise intimates in his general Epistle where upon his mentioning many false Prophets gone out into the World, he presently adds, In this ye know the 1 John 4. 12. Spirit of God, Every spirit that con∣fesseth that Jesus is the Christ come in the flesh, is of God. Which agrees exactly with that in the Apocalypse, where the Angel says to John, I am Apoc. 19. 10. thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus, that is to say, of such as whose hearts do witnesse to them firmly and lively that Jesus is the Christ, and accord∣ingly professe it; which none can do unlesse he be born of God, and so have the Spirit of God. Which is implyed in the following words:
For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy: that is to say, the being able in such sort to witnesse that Je∣sus is the Christ, is from the spirit and life of God in us which inspireth all holy truth. From whence the An∣gel argues a kind of Parity betwixt John and himself, and indeed all such as have the testimony of Jesus ac∣cording to the sense declared, and therefore would not be worshipped by them. 14. But this is something a Digres∣sion, saving that it may illustrate that passage in the Apocalypse, where the Apoc. 11. 3, 10. two Witnesses are also called the two Prophets, (not so much from predicting things to come, as from witnessing to the Truth from the spi∣rit of life in the new birth, and be∣ing so firm in this faith as to suffer for it even to the death) and may also facilitate the belief of this My∣stical sense of the story of Naboths Vineyard, or this Vineyard of Pro∣phecy: it not implying any miracu∣lous predictions, but the being inspi∣red
with a right Sentiment of things from the Spirit of Life, and having the confidence to speak the truth as it is in Jesus. This is all that need to be understood thereby. 15. To teach and to seduce my ser∣vants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. This Wo∣man of Thyatira, (whether the wife of the Bishop of Thyatira, or some other Person of quality, for Interpre∣ters of the letter vary in that) ac∣cording to the Literal sense, is de∣scribed from her acts, as onely guilty of pretending her self to be a Pro∣phetesse, and that thereby she se∣duced the servants of Christ to com∣mit fornication and to eat things sa∣crificed to Idols, which is a chief point of that which was called Gno∣sticisme. And the truth of the sup∣posed History here we do in no wise deny. But we also adde, that it is hugely improbable, that the spirit of Prophecy would take notice so par∣ticularly of any one Woman in so majestick a Writing (which Alcazar
also very seriously and vehemently urges) if there were not some great∣er matter aimed at. Wherefore I say, the Spirit of God taking the ad∣vantage of the significancy of the mis∣carriages of this Woman in Thyatira; which would set out part of the e∣normities of the Church of Rome here perstringed, added there to the name of Jezebel, that the Prophetick Pre∣figuration might be the more com∣plete, the Church of Rome in this In∣tervall being lively adumbrated by this Allusion to Jezebel, joyned to what is reported of this woman in Thyatira, viz. That she pretends to be a Prophetess as the Church of Rome to be infallible, that she drew the ser∣vants of Christ to Idolatry and un∣cleannesse, as the Church of Rome does by engaging them in the Masse and other superficial modes of serv∣ing God, that leave the minde sensual, and besides necessarily intangle them in Idolatrous practices. Thus much from the practice of this Woman. 16. Now in that she has this name
given her of Jezebel, assuredly the spi∣rit of God points us to her story to make up this Parallel betwixt this wo∣man & Rome, viz. as she is also a mur∣derer of the Prophets and servants of 1 Kings 18. 4. 1 Kings 21. 10. God, and a contriver of false Accusati∣ons against them, as if by the keeping of the Inheritance of their Fathers, a pure conscience according to the an∣cient and Apostolick faith and innate notions of Truth that God has im∣planted in the minds of all men, they were blasphemers of God and the King, and obnoxious to both the Ci∣vil and Spiritual Magistrate. And lastly, (which is to be taken special notice of) the Church of Rome in this Intervall of the Succession of the Church of Christ is called Jezebel, because for all her paintings and fine meretricious pranking her self up, she was to be thrown out at the window, and her flesh to be devoured by dogs: which the just wrath of God and the zeal of Jehu, (the noble Re∣formers) stirred up by the Spirit of God brought to passe at the end
of this Intervall of the Church, as it is threatned also in the fol∣lowing parts of this Epistle. 17. And I gave her space to repent her of her fornication, and she repented Verse 21. not. She had a fair time to consider of her grosse Apostasies from the pu∣rity of my worship since the witnesse of the Waldenses and Albigenses a∣gainst her, and yet she remains still obdurate and impenitent, and con∣tinues her old trade of whoring still. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, Verse 22. and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they re∣pent of their deeds. Unlesse she repent I will certainly cast her into a bed of sicknesse and languishment, for that bed of Adultery wherein she has en∣tertained the Kings of the earth. Her strength and glory shall be much di∣minished, and her Paramours shall bewail the Calamity I shall bring up∣on her: For there shall be of the Kings that shall hate the Whore, shall make her desolate in their dominions,
and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire. As it fell out in the late defection of whole Nations from her. And I will kill her children with Verse 23. death. That is, either slay them with the sword of the Spirit, and so make them dead as to her by their conver∣sion to the truth, or else kill them with a natural death, such I mean as come against my true Church, whe∣ther whole Armies or seditious E∣missaries, as has often happened since the Reformation. And all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches the reins and hearts, and will give unto every one of you according to his works. That is, it will be notoriously taken notice of in all Christendome how just my judgements are, and that I deal not with Jezebel according to her fair pretenses and Titles, who calls her self Holy Church, and pretends all her cruelties, and imposturous and Idolatrous Trumperies to be for my glory, whenas they have run into all
this degeneracy for their worldly Interest. But mine eyes which are a flaming fire searching into the hearts and reins, clearly see their a∣bominable Hypocrisie, and my feet like fine brasse, that never goe out of the way of purity and justice, will be sure to overtake them and doe due vengeance upon them. I will re∣ward every one according to his works. 18. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira as many as have not Verse 24. this doctrine. To you Pastours of my true Church in Thyatira, and the rest which are your charge, that hold not the Idolatrous doctrine or faith of the Thyatirian, that is, of the Roman Church. And which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, that is, which have not approved the deep mysteries (as they speak) of reason of State, or of the Roman Religion, (such as murdering innocent men for the Interest of Holy Church; Infalli∣bility, Transubstantiation and the
like) but I who search the heart and reins do apertly declare to be the depths of Satan, they tending to no∣thing but to Luciferian Pride, barba∣rous Persecutions and Murders, and grosse imposture and Idolatry. I will put upon you no other burden, Verse 25. but that which ye have already, hold fast untill I come: I have already shew'd you my approbation of your wayes, ver. 19. and in that ye do not communicate with the Idola∣trous Jezebel, keep to where you are, and stand out to the last: let no Per∣secutions dismay you till I come in judgement against this Jezebel, the same with the little Horn in Daniel, which in the expiring of the time, and times, and half a time, will cer∣tainly be judged. 19. And he that overcometh and Verse 26. keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations. That company of men, those people that keep my works to the end, to the last semi-time of the Seven, they shall have power over the Pagan Christi∣ans,
they shall get them under and be no more domineered over by them. And he shall rule them with a rod of Verse 27. Iron: that is, with sufficient power and strictnesse to keep them in sub∣jection. As the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers. The stone shall smite the Image on the feet and break them to pieces. That shall be at the long-run. Even as I received of my father. I in you, and you in me; you in me by ver∣tue of the Power of my Spirit shall thus reign; and I in you, according as it is written, I shall give thee the Heathen Psalm 2. for thine inheritance, the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession; Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron, thou shalt dash them in pieces as a Potters vessel. But this is something further off. 20. And I will give him the morn∣ing Verse 28. star. In the mean time, and which is next to succeed, I will give them the morning star; that is, a conside∣rable dawning towards that greater
Day of the illustrious reign of Christ upon earth, in his Saints by his Spi∣rit. The Phosphorus to the glorious Sun-rise of the happy Millennium properly so called. This intervall will be the same with that of the Vials which are accompanied with such a smoake; As here the Promise, which is to be performed in the next Suc∣cession of the Church, and there con∣tinued, is not expressed with that vi∣gour as elsewhere, where Christ in reference to his Kingdome is said to be the bright morning star, here one∣ly the morning star without the orna∣ment of that Epithet: The King∣dome of Christ therefore under the first Thunder may be said to be the morning star, but under the second, the bright morning star. And it is ob∣servable, that whereas in that other place he is called , in this Apoc. 22. 10. he is called , which may al∣so have the signification of more early then was expected, which exquisitely answers to the evert, it falling out toward the fore-part of the last se∣mi-time.
But these things are onely by the by. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Verse 29. Churches. There is nothing new re∣markable in this Epiphonema, but the placing of it here after the whole E∣pistle, which is a sign that all the E∣pistle is a Parable, and is not onely meant of the Church in Thyatira in the Literal sense (but that the condition and affairs of some other Church, the truely Catholick and Apostolick Church in the Intervall defined, are here prefigured and described Pro∣phetically.) And that therefore the Promises are to be performed on this stage of the Earth, as of their own nature they appear to be such that have a Political sense. Which there∣fore therewithall assures us, that such a tenour of Interpretation belongs to the three following Epistles, because the Epiphonema is the close of every one of them. And therefore we shall steer the course of our Interpretation accordingly.
CHAP. VII. The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Sardis. 1. AND unto the Angel in the Apoc. 3. 1. Church of Sardis write. That Sardis was a City in Asia is manifest Ch. 1. And considered no otherwise then so, does not at all illustrate the condition of this fifth Succession of the state of the Church. But ac∣knowledging here again a Paronoma∣stical Allusion to Sarda the precious Stone, as Grotius does: or, taking no∣tice with Pliny, that that Stone is so called for its first being found about Sardis, it may prove very significa∣tive of the condition of Reformed Christendome within that Intervall, beginning from the rising of the Wit∣nesses, and ending in the last Viall, in part of it I mean. After which the Intervall of Phyladelphia comes in, and takes up also the second and third Thunder. Some special qualities
therefore of the Church of Sardis are to be read in this Stone Sarda, and some to her praise, others to her di∣minution. The virtue of this Stone is, that carried about one it makes a man chearfull and couragious, and drives away Witchcraft and En∣chantment, and expells poison right∣ly administred, which adumbrate some peculiar Privileges in this Sar∣dian Church. Their chearfull securi∣ty in justification by faith in Christ's bloud, and their being rid of the poisonous idolatrous doctrines, and bewitching Enchantments of the Cup of the Whore. Here's no∣thing of Jezebel in this Church, nor any mention of the eating of things offered to Idols, nor in the two fol∣lowing Epistles, which is no small ra∣tification of the truth of these Succes∣sions. Both they and she are well and sound touching these points. 2. But this Stone Sarda, which is also called Carnalina, and in the He∣brew , Odem, as representing humane flesh and bloud so lively,
seems also to insinuate something to the Derogation of the Sardian Church, as if they were flesh, and not spirit; which is the special Dispensa∣tion of the Church of Philadelphia. And whereas Christ's Conquest over Edom is, by letting out or squeezing out the corrupt bloud of old Adam, this Odem or Carnalina is said to be of that virtue as to stanch bloud and stop it from running out, and there∣fore seems to be significative of what∣ever Doctrines in the Sardian Church that hinder the due and requisite Mortification of the old man, as loth to weaken him too much, and let too much of his bloud and life run out. 3. The meaning therefore is, that though the Sardian Church be well rid of the foul Idolatries and grosse Trumperies of the Papal Church, yet her state as yet is but carnal most∣what. It is not the Dispensation of the spirit of life, but the main stir is a∣bout external Opinion & Ceremony: they seem to know Christ onely ac∣cording
to the flesh, not according to the power of his Spirit, whereby he is able to subdue all things under him. Whereas Christ after he had said that his flesh was meat indeed, and John. 6. 55. his bloud was drink indeed, clearly ex∣plains himself, in declaring expresly, that the flesh profiteth nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life; yet a great John 6. 63. part of this Sardian Church, I mean the Lutherans, rack their own Wits, and disturb the rest of Reformed Christendome, to maintain that odd Paradox of Consubstantiation, that so men may eat and drink that grosse Flesh and Bloud of Christ that was crucify'd upon the Crosse in the Ce∣lebration of their Eucharists. What can be more Carnaline-like then this? Besides that there are over-many that do as grosly and carnally erre touching the nature of the Resurre∣ction-Body, they phansying it as terrestrially modify'd (though it be called a celestial or spiritual Body in the Scriptures,) as that Body is that
we put into the Grave, or is capable of the imbraces of the Nuptial Bed. To say nothing of other such like grosse carnal Conceits that this Sar∣dian Church has not yet expunged out of her mind. But as mischievous a mark as any of her Carnality is her Dissen∣sion and Schismaticalnesse even to mutuall Persecution, as also the un∣natural and unchristian Wars of one part of Reformed Christendome a∣gainst the other. These things rank∣ly savour of the Flesh, and are in∣finitely contrary to the due Dispen∣sation of the Spirit; which when it shall appear will bring in the Church of Philadelphia, the Church of un∣feigned Love and Charity, where∣in, according to the prediction of the Prophets, there shall not be the noise of this unchristian War any more. These Touches may suffice to shew why the Spirit of God has denoted this Succession of his Church by the Title of the Church in Sardis.
4. These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God. The num∣ber Seven signifies Universality some∣times; whence the Pythagoreans call it . The sense therefore is, that hath in readinesse to bestow all the spiritual or Divine Graces to make the man of God perfect to eve∣ry good word and work. And the seven Stars. That is to say, that holds the seven Stars in his right hand: so it is in the Description be∣fore his speech to the Ephesine Church, which is repeated here for encou∣ragement; Christ hereby declaring his Power, and promising his Assi∣stence to the renewing of Christen∣dome through the Reformation, as well as he did to the forming of it at first, and rooting out Paganism in the first beginning of the Church, which is the Ephesine Intervall. I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead. I discern plainly thy state and conditi∣on. Thou hast indeed a semblance of life, because thou hast a great deal
of Heat and Zeal, and dost with an externall fervour doe many perfor∣mances that may raise a fame of thee of being more then ordinarily reli∣gious. And many hot disputes there may be for this or that Ceremony, for this or that Opinion, and against them, much and very vehement dis∣course about Faith and Justification, and the like. Which Heat and activity bears a semblance of Life in thee. But assure thy self, unlesse thou hast that Faith that worketh by Love, all this stir is but the noise of tinkling Brasse or of sounding Cymbals. And being thus alive, thou art notwithstanding in my sight little better then dead. And although thou dost thus imitate warm flesh and bloud, yet thou art but a cold Sardius Stone to my touch and discernment. As she that liveth wantonly is dead while she liveth, though she thinks she is then most of all a∣live: so it is with him that, devoid of Christian Love and Charity, is enli∣vened with an hot, bitter, ignorant and preposterous Zeal: This is not the life
of God, but of mere Nature and Car∣nality. 5. Be watchfull, and strengthen the Verse 2. things that remain that are ready to die. Take heed that want of Love and Life hazard not Faith too, and Remissnesse in Manners bring not in Atheism and Infidelity over all. For I have not found thy works per∣fect before me. Those things that have Life in them goe on to Perfection. Wherefore if they stop before, and make no progresse, it is a sign there is some deadly distemper at the very heart or root, and such a Plant must wither and die. Thy Works are nei∣ther perfect, nor dost thou easily ad∣mit of such Doctrines as lead most ef∣fectually to Perfection. Remember therefore how thou hast Verse 3. received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. That is to say, You that are my true Apostolick Church, re∣member what ye have received from me my self, or my Apostles; stand fast to the infallible Word, which will impartially instruct and excite
you to all the due measures of God∣linesse. And believe not the rotten and corrupt Glosses ofdeceitful men, that would sew Pillows under mens Arm-holes, and frame Opinions and Precepts to favour the Lusts of the flesh. To dote upon men is a piece of Carnality; but to dote on them for their carnal Opinions and flesh∣favouring Documents, is Sardian or Carnaline of a double Dye. Repent therefore, for the Kingdome of God is at hand; and he that has the seven Spirits of God stands ready to assist and succour with his Divine Graces all that sincerely endeavour after Righteousnesse. So that the fault lies at your own doors. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I come upon thee. If thou wilt not re∣turn to true Sobriety and Sincerity of Manners, I shall bring some signal mischief upon thee before thou beest aware; I shall suddenly come in Judg∣ment against thee when thou least
dreamest thereof. God of his infinite mercy avert the ill Omen, and change our hearts, that we may a∣mend our lives, and he may be re∣conciled to us. 6. Thou hast a few names even in Verse 4. Sardis, which have not defiled their garments. Notwithstanding the Dis∣pensation of the Sardian Church be so generally carnal, in the very hew of that Carnaline-stone that looks so like mere flesh and bloud, yet there are some few that have not defiled their garments with that colour, but are as it were the Primitiae of the Dis∣pensation of the Spirit, whose in∣ward Man is renewed day by day in∣to the Image of my self, and are made partakers of the Divine Nature, and are the Children of Light. And they shall walk with me in white. These shall not onely enjoy glorious Converses with me, and I communicate my spiritual Graces a∣bundantly to them, but they shall be very successfull and prosperous in their Affairs. For to be cloathed
in white signifies so in the Onirocri∣ticks, accordingly as you may see in Achmetes. For they are worthy. For I doe to every one according to his work. 7. He that overcometh, the same Verse 5. shall be clothed in white raiment. He that overcometh all the Lusts of this terrestrial Body, to him will I com∣municate the Celestial or Divine. This is a more Theologicall sense. But the Political is most proper, the E∣piphonema concluding the whole E∣pistle. Wherefore to be clothed in white Raiment, it being here the promise to him that overcomes, sig∣nifies (and that rather then in the fore-going Verse) Successe and Pros∣perity in external affairs, and exem∣ption from Grief and Affliction, as the Onirocriticks do expresly interpret it. See Achmetes. And I will not blot his name out of the book of Life. The more proper and Politicall sense may be, that when the Church by overcoming has e∣merged into the Philadelphian condi∣tion,
it shall never change, at least as to the externall frame, but keep up to the end; and God will avowedly ac∣knowledge it to be his even to the last, even then when it is passed into the Laodicean state, and the state of Persecution shall never overwhelm it any more. So the Book of life may signifie here as the Crown of life be∣fore in the Epistle to the Church of Smyrna. But I will confess his name before my Father and before his Angels. That is to say, I will acknowledge his na∣ture to have become in a manner Di∣vine and Angelical, and therefore to be a meet Associate for their com∣panies in my Heavenly Kingdome for ever. This may be a Moral or Theo∣logicall sense. But the Politicall is chiefly aimed at, as is intimated by the placing of the Epiphonema last of all. The confessing therefore of the Names of these few in Sardis that are right as they should be, and as many as make up to the measure of their Sanctity, (which therefore are
the seed of the Philadelphian Church,) Christ his confessing of their Names before his Father and before his ho∣ly Angels, is the mentioning of their Names as of a People more peculi∣arly his, and extraordinarily dear unto him; that by thus owning them in such an endearing manner before God and his holy Angels, they may be in a more special manner recom∣mended to the favour and Protection of God, and to the faithfull and watchfull Ministry of his holy An∣gels: which will be the efficient cau∣ses of their being cloathed in white, and of their Name never being blot∣ted out of the Book of Life; that is to say, of the Permanency of their outward Prosperity and security from Misery and Oppression; that thus In∣nocency and outward Felicity may goe hand in hand in the blessed Mil∣lennium, which is in a manner the same with the Philadelphian Intervall of the Church. These few Names in Sardis will amount to this at last. For Salvation is to spring out of Sardis,
not out of Babylon. Nor is it any wonder that the Ministry of the holy Angels will be so extraordinarily ex∣ercised about a Church which will then have become so Angelicall, as is more fully noted in the Divine Dia∣logues. 8. These are the rousing Motives which Christ useth to excite the car∣nal Church of Sardis to more hearty endeavours after the Dispensation of the Spirit, that they may bring on the beginning of those most happy Times; the conduct of which Affair is represented by that illustrious He∣ros on his white Horse, Chap. 19. where his Armies follow him on white Horses clothed in fine Linnen, white and clean. Which appertains to the last end of the Intervall of this Church of Sardis, a great part of whom by this time it's likely may have turned their Carnaline-colour into pure white, and be ready to march with him there to that spiritual Warfare, as some are said here to walk with him in white, and that with marvellous
success and prosperity, as their white Cloathing does intimate. He that hath an ear to hear, let him Verse 6. hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. Reformed Christendome especially, she is so much concerned therein. For she, as I said at first, is this Sardian Church; the beginning of whose Intervall, being adorned with more true Holinesse and since∣rity of Zeal, the better deserved the Title of the Rising of the Witnesses: And though they be here much re∣proved for their Faults, yet they are acknowledged to be one of the Seven Churches in Asia, Chap. 1. 11. that is to say,  in Fundamento, and are the true and Apostolical Church still, and justly witnesse against the Idolatries and grosse Antichristian practices of the Church of Rome, such, I mean, as with them have become a Law, and thereby are properly An∣tichristian. This I thought fit to adde, to stop the preposterous pronenesse of some toward the Roman Church from the
Consideration that all things are not so perfect in the Reformed Churches as might be desired. For though they be not so well as they should be, yet they must needs appear to any but an Humorist exceeding much better then in the Church of Rome. And thus much of the Sardian Church. CHAP. VIII. An Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia. 1. AND to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia write. The Apoc 3. ver. 7. meaning of Philadelphia is plain, and is no Riddle. The word signifies Bro∣therly love: which rightly under∣stood is the fulfilling of the Law. So that I understand by  the same that , universal Love, (for we are all brothers in Adam;) but especially the love of those of the houshold of Faith; that is to say,
of Christian Believers. In the Sar∣dian Church, the greatest noise and stir there is about Faith, but her Works were not found perfect before God. But the Inscription of this Church is Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, as I hinted before. And Cant. 2. 4. his banner over me was Love. This is the Ensign of the Church of Phila∣delphia, who elsewhere is said to be beautifull and terrible as an Army with Banners; Who is she that looketh Cant. 6. 10. forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Ar∣my with Banners? Why? who can it be but this Church of Philadelphia, as famous for feats of Arms as for Love, as we shall see in the process? For the Intervall of this Church be∣gins in the last Vial, and reaches to the fourth Thunder. These things saith he that is Holy. And speaks to that Church that loves to hear those Instructions: Be ye ho∣ly, for I am holy; and, Be ye per∣fect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.
He that is true. He that will make good all his Promises and glorious Predictions touching his Church in this state thereof which is figured out by the Church of Philadelphia, and writes to those that believe it, and have a firm Faith in the Power and Spirit of Christ and of God. He that hath the Key of David, he that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth. What Eliakim was to Hezekias, who was of the stock of David, the same is Christ to God the Father, whom S. John calls Love, . He is chief Minister of State under God, and car∣ries all as he pleases by the Authority committed to him; of which a Key is the Symbol. (See Grotius upon the place.) There is nothing so hard and impervious but he can make way through it, and open a door to Suc∣cesse, and again shut it against his Enemies. 2. I know thy works. And that so Verse 8. as to approve of them, because they are the fruits of the Divine Love, then
which there is nothing to me more precious. Thou actest not out of bit∣ter zeal and strife, or vain ostentati∣on, or any secular respect, but merely out of love to me and my Righteous∣nesse, and out of love to mankinde, whose both present and future Hap∣pinesse thou dost sincerely endea∣vour to promote. Behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it. Behold; I have brought things about so by my Providence, and will so effectually second what I have begun by my special assistence, that, maugre all the machinations of men and Devils, thou shalt finde opportunities of most glo∣riously and successfully carrying on the Interest of my Kingdome. This is performed in the last Vial, in that great battel of God almighty, when Apoc. 16. and 19. also the Beast and the false Prophet are said to be taken. See the Divine Dialogues. For thou hast a little strength. Gro∣tius himself interprets it, a little Ar∣my: and so indeed  will signi∣fie,
& appositely to the present scope, and answerably to the Battel I na∣med before. The sense is; Because, though ye be but a few in compari∣son of the rest of my Church and Kingdome, (for the Sardian Church is his Kingdome and Church too, out of which the Philadelphian Church is emerging) and especially in respect of the Infidel and Antichristian par∣ty, those under the Dragon and the Beast and the false Prophet, yet ye Apoc. 16. have kept my Word, and not denied my Name, that is, have both kept to what is holy and true in your hearts, and professed it in your words and works: therefore I will be with you in this glorious manner, and make you so successfull in the promoting of the Interest of my Kingdome. Of this Church therefore of Philadelphia are those Armies seen in Heaven, A∣poc. 19. following Christ upon white Horses clothed in fine linnen, white and clean; which implies both the justnesse of their cause, and the cer∣tainty of their successe. As also
those Boanergesses in the last Vial, (synchronal to that other Vision) Apoc. 16. 18, 19. that thunder and lighten over the City divided into three parts, where∣by the Cities of the Nations fell, and Babylon and her daughters were ut∣terly overthrown. 3. Behold, I will make them of the Verse 9. Synagogue of Satan (which say they are Jews, but do lie.) Jews, as I noted before, according to the style of the Apocalypse, are Christians; and the Jews which professe themselves such, and are not, but do lie, are pseudo-Christians, or the Antichristian party; but are judged here to be of the Synagogue of Satan, because of their abominable lies and bloudy murders. For the Devil was a murderer from Joh. 8. 44. the beginning; and he is also in the same place by our Saviour termed a Liar. Besides the Luciferian Pride of that Church, like Satans, the Prince of the Devils. Behold, I will make them come and worship before thy feet. Even those that before kissed the feet of the
Pope, that lofty Prelate. This an∣swers very patly to that passage in the fore-named Vision; where the Beast and false Prophet are taken, and put alive into a lake of fire: that Apoc. 19. 20. is to say, the Bestian and Pseudopro∣phetical power, as such, is burnt and destroyed and abolished, and the Philadelphian power then appears a∣bove all, or rather the Lord alone will be exalted in that day; for to this time especially belongs that say∣ing, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts. For, indeed, the struggling of the Sardian Church hitherto against the City that is called Sodom and AEgypt, though it has been in its kind lau∣dable, yet it has been in a manner E∣dom against Edom, a part something more refined against that which is more impure, I mean as to Life and Godlinesse; and the weapons of their warfare have not been so spiritual as they ought, they have not rid upon white Horses, nor have been clothed in fine linnen, white and clean; they
have not endeavoured to be that Church which is without spot & wrin∣kle, or any such thing, but the Sardian tincture has too much distained them. But as it is true in the natural sense, that flesh and bloud cannot inherit the Kingdome of God; so it is also in the political, that those glorious times of the Kingdome of God can∣not appear till the Church emerge out of the Sardian or Carnaline state into the Philadelphian. Against which Church Christ exhibits no complaint at all, but loves her, and likes her en∣tirely, even as he is cordially loved of her. And without question the state of that Church is so lovely, that she will charm even her enemies to a liking of her, and unto a submission to her, all things being so irrepre∣hensible in her. But commonly wick∣ed men are very domineering and fe∣rocient against good men that have any blot or infirmity on them, unless they be of their own faction. And therefore this Philadelphian Church, if any, must be the Church
that can mollifie the hearts of the Pa∣pists, and bring over as many as God pleaseth to the belief of the Truth. But for the Cities of the Nations, their Conquests will be unspeakable amongst them. For these are those powerfull Thunderers, by whose thundering and lightening the Cities of the Nations are to fall, as I in∣timated before. And to know that I have loved thee. The Papists themselves shall discern, by the stupendious successe of the Philadelphian Church, what a value Christ puts upon her, and how far he prefers her Integrity, Simplicity, Brotherly-kindnesse, Humility, Meek∣nesse and Purity of Worship, before the Roman Frauds and Impostures, their barbarous Persecutions and Cruelties, their Luciferian Pride, and superstitious and Idolatrous practi∣ces. 4. Because thou hast kept the word Verse 10. of my patience; that is, Because thou art both meek-hearted, and hast been faithful and not flitting in the time
of trial, but endurest all things for my names sake; I will keep thee from the hour of temp∣tation that shall come upon all the world. Namely, at what time all the world will be in an hurly-burly, and cast in∣to manifold streights and calamities. Which is in the last Vial, when the three unclean spirits goe forth unto the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battel of that great Day of God Al∣mighty; and when there shall be so great an Earthquake as has not been since men were upon earth, so migh∣ty an Earthquake and so great. In this mighty tempest and hurry of things will I preserve thee from danger, and thou shalt carry it safe through all. Thou shalt escape better then any party of men, by reason of thy con∣spicuous Innocency, sincerity, and exemplarity of life, and unexcep∣tionable Apostolicalnesse of doctrine, and singular love to me and all man∣kind. Because thou art milde and courteous and benign and beneficent
to all; because thou art a lover of unity, un-self-interessed, a foe to no body, and onely an enemy to the vices and miseries of men: This, with my singular favour to thee, shall protect thee in that great confusion and high fermentation of mens spi∣rits under the last Vial. Who is he that 1 Pet. 3. v. 13. will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good? 5. Behold, I come quickly. Thou Verse 11. art already in that Period of time wherein this great Judgement will come upon the earth, namely, under the first Thunder. Or rather, because the Philadelphian Church is not sup∣posed to be in distinct being or ap∣pearance till the last Vial, the last Vial must be this Period. And then this coming in respect of that time will be quickly indeed. Hold thou fast what thou hast, that no man take thy Crown. Thou art a Church after my own heart, O Phila∣delphia, and I blame thee for no∣thing, thou walkest uprightly with me and art perfect: Wherefore hold
that ground which thou hast got in truth and integrity, that thou mayst not be deprived of that Crown I in∣tend thee; for in thee will I accom∣plish all the glorious Promises touch∣ing my Kingdome upon earth. 6. Him that overcometh will I make Verse 12. a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall goe no more out. 'O , He that overcomes, that is, in the Apocalyptick style, All, or the whole Company that overcomes, which is here meant of the Philadelphians. They shall be as a pillar in the Temple of God; that is, they shall be a steddy and standing Holy people, a true holy Catholick Church that shall never fail, but shall last till I come in the clouds to Judg∣ment in the last Day. All other forms and denominations shall fail, but this shall keep the sovereignty to the last. And I will write upon him the name of my God. This is in pursuance of the former Metaphor of a Pillar, with a farther Allusion to the  of the Ancients. These Philadelphians
shall have the name of God written upon them; that is, their Conversa∣tion and manners will be so holy and divine, that it will be as conspicuous to all, as if it were writ upon their foreheads that they are the holy Church and chosen people of God. Or more briefly and in a more Politi∣cal sense; The name of my God may allude to Jehovah Shammah, intima∣ting, that these Philadelphians shall be that Church which is represented by the City Jerusalem described by Eze∣kiel, which is called Jehovah Sham∣mah. Of which the following words seem to be a more expresse significa∣tion. And the name of the City of my God, which is, New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of Heaven from my God. The name of the City, the new Jerusalem, as well as Jehovah Shammah, will be written upon them, The City where God dwelleth and ruleth by his Spi∣rit; that is to say, they will be that City of Jerusalem formally and actu∣ally under the second Thunder. For
to be called, and to be, are all one in the Hebrew Idiom. And his name is called the Word of God, Apo. 19. 3. is as much as, He is the Word of God. Wherefore this Phila∣delphia under the second Thunder passes into the same with the new Je∣rusalem; but the Title of Philadel∣phia begins sooner, and reaches far∣ther to the fourth Thunder. This Inscription of the Philadel∣phians, that they are called the new Jerusalem, &c. in the very words in which it is described afterwards Apoc. 21. is a notable Indication that by the Church of Philadelphia is meant that Succession of the Church that is un∣der the second and third Thunder, but was emerging in the last Vial. For it is the new Jerusalem which cometh out of Heaven from God. Which therefore having this manifest Poli∣tical sense, would be very hardly at∣tributed to that City of Philadelphia in Asia literally understood, but with an eye to this successive Intervall of the Church which we here speak of.
And the Promise was not performed to the Literal Church of Philadelphia, which has perished; that was no such lasting Pillar. And therefore there is a necessity of a farther sense, Mysti∣call or Propheticall. 7. And I will write upon him my new name. It is expresly said, Apoc. 10. 16. that Christ has a name written upon his Vesture and upon his Thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This name Grotius would have understood here. And there is no small reason for it, that name being so particu∣larly and pompously set out for a special name of his. And though he has ever had a right unto it; yet because the getting into possession of this right will be new and fresh in this Philadelphian Intervall after the battel of the Heros on the white Horse, it is rightly termed a new Name, and very fittingly writ upon these Philadelphians, because they are so instrumental in his Atchievements. These are the Boanergesses, (thunder∣ing over the great City divided into
three parts) and also those Horsemen on white Horses, as I intimated be∣fore. Christ therefore through these becomes King of Kings and Lord of Lords; or rather, he has made them the greatest Kingdome upon earth. The mountain of the Lord's house is exalted upon the top of the mountains, and all Nations flow unto it; as it is to come to passe under the third Thun∣der. Through which third and se∣cond Thunder, and seventh Vial, is drawn the Intervall of the Successi∣on of the Church of Philadelphia, as I have hinted above. He that hath an ear to hear, let him Verse 13. hear, &c. We need not here urge the intimation of this Political sense of things from the putting of the Epiphonema last, the very nature of the expressions calling for it, though we had no such guide. But we may rather argue, that the things them∣selves being of so manifest Political sense, not moral or spiritual, that it confirms our Rule touching the po∣sition of this Epiphonema. But this
by the bye. We proceed to the Church of Laodicea. CHAP. IX. The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church of Laodicea. 1. AND to the Angel of the Church Apoc. 3. 14. of the Laodiceans write. The Intervall of the Succession of the Church of Laodicea is the fourth and fifth Thunders, that is, from the loosing of Satan to the appearing of Christ coming to Judgement under the sixth Thunder. In this Intervall the Scene of Philadelphia is past, and Laodicea takes place: which is ac∣knowledged a true Church as to Worship and Doctrine, but is repre∣sented as a lazy, lethargical Church; in which that former Philadelphian zeal is extinguished as to the gene∣rality of the Church, though it's like∣ly this degeneracy comes on by de∣grees in this Intervall.
2. Thus therefore it is foreseen in the series of Divine Providence, that after that glorious estate of the Church which is synchronal to the second and third Thunder (during which space and a little before the Scene of Philadelphia adorned the Stage) had well purged the Chri∣stian World from all foolish opini∣ons and superstitions, and of that ac∣cursed custome of persecuting one another for them, and that the truth of the Gospel had clearly shined in the simplicity thereof, and so con∣victively against all the follies and impostures of the former Ages, that the Church had no great hazard of being again cheated with them; and that they had seen all Prophecies in a manner fulfilled before their eyes, so that there could be no doubt to them, but that the Philadelphian Church was the true Church, nor be in any capacity of any change in faith or worship: after this, I say, as all things are in some sort or other va∣riable under the Sun, so it seems this
Philadelphian Church was at last to degenerate into this Laodicean state; and that which was before the Reign of the Spirit and the living Righteous∣nesse of God, would now become the Church of Laodicea; which signifies a more popular or external Politicall righteousnesse, or the righteousness of the people. An external profession and performance of that Mode that was used by the Philadelphians in a living way, and with the power of the Spirit, the same will this Church of Laodicea hold on spiritlesly and lazily, with little life or zeal, and yet applaud themselves by reason of the abundance of knowledge she has, be∣cause of the completion of the Pro∣phecies, and by reason of the purity of the external Worship she still re∣tains, as if all was still well with her, and as if she wanted nothing. 3. This in brief is the condition of this Church, as it is significantly in∣timated in the very name. For  signifies as much as the righte∣ousnesse of the people. And the peo∣ple
are any multitude of mankind gathered into a body politick; as is manifest in that notation of , as if it were from  and  and then again in Homer, — And therefore the people, being a body politick, are ruled by such and such laws, which if they observe, it is not regarded quo animo, or out of what Principle, they observe them. The new nature, Regeneration and the Spirit, are quite out of this rode. And a National or Oecumenical Re∣ligion, Doctrine or Worship, as they are ab extrà, are but as a political law, and the Righteousnesse therein but a Laodicean Righteousnesse, as has been abundantly inculcated already. But besides this meaning of the name Laodicea, which I doubt not but is particularly intended, there may, ac∣cording to the multifarious Allusive∣nesse of the Propheticall style, ano∣ther notable meaning be also intima∣ted, and that very appropriate to this Church. For the ratio nominis
in Laodicea may be likewise , because in the Intervall of this Church God will in that most notorious and terrible manner come to judge the people. Be∣cause the Closure of this Church brings in the last Judgement properly so called, therefore this last Intervall of the Church is called Laodicea, The judging of the people, all the Nations of the world, at the last Day. And there is nothing more frequent in the Scripture, then the giving of names from some notable externall Acci∣dent, that respects the thing or per∣son so named. 4. These things saith the Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse. Paul, in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, says, That all the promises of God in Christ are Yea and Amen; that is to say, they are so sure and certain, that no man need doubt but they will be performed. Wherefore this Attri∣bute of Christ is seasonably brought in, as respecting both the completion of the Promises already performed,
in bringing his Church to that admi∣rable glorious condition in the Suc∣cession of Philadelphia, as also the performance of that material Pro∣mise at the end of this Epistle, touch∣ing eternal Life or a blessed Immor∣tality in Christ's Heavenly Kingdome; which these Laodiceans, or degene∣rated Philadelphians, like our modern Familists, that pretend to the Phila∣delphian Dispensation, may some of them, it's likely, be prone to dis∣trust. But Christ is here also called the faithfull and true witnesse, because he does so impartially witnesse concern∣ing the truth of the condition of the Laodiceans, and so faithfully discover to them the danger thereof. And the declaration seeming so paradoxi∣call to them, it was the more requi∣site to inculcate into them his own truth and faithfulnesse, that he might gain belief of them against their own false sense and opinion of them∣selves. The beginning of the Creation of
God. This hath a more high mean∣ing, like that in the beginning of S. John's Gospel, and respects the Divi∣nity of Christ, by whom all things were made, and in whom all things are. But I believe also that is more particularly insinuated here which is expresly declared of him (according to the Seventy) by the Prophet Esay; , Isa. 9. 6. The beginner of that world or Age under the Messias; wherein he ha∣ving, as I intimated before, carried on all things so completely according to promise and prediction, this seems an advantageous repetition of what was intimated before in that Attri∣bute of Amen: As if he should say, I was the beginner of this marvellous Scene of things from the time of my living on this Earth in the flesh to this very day, and you see how sted∣dily all things have been carried on, according to Predictions and Prophe∣cies: wherefore believe me in the rest (whether Comminations or Pro∣mises) which I shall now declare un∣to
you. This seems to be the ge∣nuine sense of this Preface to the E∣pistle. 5. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. I see thee to be Verse 15. in a tepid, formal, remisse Dispensa∣tion: Thou holdest still the outside of the Philadelphian Church for Do∣ctrine and Worship: But thou art de∣stitute of that Spirit of life in the new Birth which was the proper Chara∣cter of thy deceased Sister of Phila∣delphia. I would thou wert cold or hot. Though it be not better in it self, yet it were better for thee thou wert not so externally good as thou art, that thou mightest the sooner be convin∣ced of thine own wants, and get into the state of Repentance, of Mortifi∣cation, and finally of Regeneration, that so thou mightest partake of my Spirit. But now thou art but an ex∣ternall Image of warm flesh out of which life and soul did lately de∣part, even then when thy Sister Phi∣ladelphia departed out of this world.
Thou art the external frame of that Philadelphia, but the spirit has left thee. 6. So then, because thou art luke-warm, Verse 16. and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. That is, I will declare in a torrent of words against thee, how nauseous and dis∣tastfull thou art to me, and how my stomack rises against thee. Which is done in the following verse, where he pours out those just Reproaches against her, that she is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Or, it may be, there may be a more profound, and yet not less solid, meaning in this Commination, and that it may be predictive of her ut∣ter Extermination; that the continu∣ance of the Church of Christ upon Earth shall cease in her. For the im∣menseness of Christ's Divinity incom∣passing all things that are, he can vo∣mit nothing out from him but it must therewith be cast into Non-entity. And the Laodicean Church is the last Scene of Providence, and this
Church, and indeed the whole Scene of affairs on this Earth for her sake, is shortly to have an end. For in the next Thunder to this Laodicean Intervall Christ comes to Judgement, and presently after is the Conflagra∣tion. And Satan is to be let loose but a little time; so that the time of the Laodicean Church cannot be long. Wherefore the Commination, I will spew thee out of my mouth, may well be a prediction of the utter Ex∣termination of the Church out of be∣ing, that is, as to the state of a Church upon Earth. For as before the com∣ing of the Floud God is said to repent Gen. 6. 6. him that he had made man upon the earth, and that it grieved him at his heart: so Christ here expresseth how nauseous and stomack-sick he is a∣gainst his Church under this Intervall and Title of Laodicea, how his cho∣ler and indignation rises against her Luke-warmnesse; and that therefore he will vomit her out in a floud of Fire, and overwhelm her in a deluge of hot scalding sulphureous flames:
which will come to passe at the Con∣flagration. The state of the Church now in its old age naturally growing worse, Christ will think fit to put an end to the Scene of things, and car∣ry his to his Celestial Kingdome. 7. Because thou sayest, I am rich, Verse 17. and increased with goods, and have need of nothing. And this is one rea∣son of the Spiritlesnesse and Inactivi∣ty of the Laodicean Church, that she thinks she has all things desirable al∣ready, Peace, Plenty, Power and Dominion, Security from enemies, Profession of the Truth, Purity in externall Worship, rid of Supersti∣tion and Idolatry, abundance of Knowledge as well Natural as Theo∣logical, the understanding of all Pro∣phecies, by reason of their clear Completion, and the faithfull and judicious Interpretations of her Pre∣decessours; no Oppression, no Per∣secution for Conscience sake; every man lives at quiet, and injoys himself under his own Vine & under his own Fig-tree: What want we therefore?
are we not still the true Philadelphian Church, and the new Jerusalem de∣scended from Heaven, in all the riches and glories thereof? One would think so indeed, according to the judgement of any carnal eye. But let us hear what the Amen says, the true and faithfull Witnesse. And knowest not that thou art wret∣ched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Christ saith to the Church in Smyrna, I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty; but thou art rich. The Primitive Church, while the Spirit of life was in them, though in the midst of the want of all externall Comforts, and under most dreadfull Persecutions, in the judgement of Christ are accounted rich: but the Laodiceans, in the af∣fluence of all external Blessings, be∣cause they want that Spirit of life, are deemed poor, and miserable, and naked, as if they had not a rag to hang on their backs; nay, blind also, for all their abundance of Know∣ledge, because they are devoid of
the knowledge and experience of the Mysteries of the Spirit of life in the new Birth, and the Renovation of the Soul into inward living Righ∣teousnesse, but take up with the externall Laodicean state or condi∣tion. 8. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may est be Verse 18. rich. I advise thee, sincerely to en∣deavour (for that is the price thou must pay for this Gold) after the Recovery of thy self into the state of the new Jerusalem descended from Heaven; which City was of pure Gold, so purify'd in the fire, that it was as clear as transparent Glasse. This is the new Creature in thee, the Transformation of thy nature into the Image of the Heavenly Adam. This is solid and durable Riches in∣deed, and such as will go along with thee into the highest Heavens, when this Earth and the metalls therein shall melt with fire. Labour there∣fore after such a solid Treasure as will abide those fatal flames, and will not
perish with thee in the general Con∣flagration. And the Symbol of this Treasure is this purify'd Gold. And white rayment, that thou mayst be cloathed, and that the shame of thy nakednesse do not appear. Groan then earnestly in this, O thou spiritlesse Laodicea, desiring to be cloathed upon with that spiritual house which is from Heaven; that, being so cloathed, thou mayst not be found naked. For while thou art in this earthly Tabernacle, thou oughtest to account it a burthen, and not to set up thy staff in the enjoyments of this life, because all things are peacefull and prosperous with thee. Not that I would advise thee to shorten thy days here; but that, being thus cloathed by this spiritual Vestment, Mortality might be swallowed up of life. And it is the Spirit of life and the Divine Love that worketh in thee this one great thing that thou so greatly wantest, and yet art insensi∣ble thereof. And anoint thine eyes with eye∣salve,
that thou mayst see. That is, Cleanse thy self with such a due mea∣sure of Mortification, and Purificati∣on of the inward man from all fil∣thinesse of flesh and spirit, that thou mayst attain to the Divinely-moral Prudence which will enable thee to have a right judgement and discern∣ing in all things. This therefore is the Collyrion which I would advise thee to anoint thine eye-sight with, even the purgation of thy self from all the Animal Corruptions, that thou mayst perfect the inward Righteous∣nesse in my fear: For the outward alone carries none to Heaven. The Ointment I prescribe will indeed smart; but without it thou wilt still continue blind, and never finde the way to everlasting Salvation. 9. As many as I love, I rebuke. I 9. deal plainly, truly and faithfully with thee; and not out of any ill will is it that I thus rebuke thee: But it is ex amore benevolentiae, though not ex amore complacentiae. For, as thou art, thou art but a nauseous and irk∣some
spectacle to me. And therefore I thus rebuke thee and instruct thee, that thou mayst amend. And chasten, . Which signifies to chastise and scourge, as well as to instruct. Which therefore may seem to be the commination of some external Calamity and Affliction that Christ would bring upon the Laodiceans, if they did not repent them of their remissness; and in such a way as themselves may haply be the causes of, through their Re∣missnesse and Luke-warmnesse. For that former Philadelphian Zeal and Activity ceasing, which that Church exercised in the behalf of the Interest of the Kingdome of God, their ene∣mies may more then ordinarily en∣crease upon them, especially the De∣vil being let loose, and being very active to deceive the Nations; whom they should counter-plot, by being as active to convert them to the Truth. And this may be the time wherein the Prediction of Gog and Magog is to be fulfilled, who are said to be ga∣thered
together to battel, and to en∣compasse the Camp of the Saints and the beloved City, which in this state is termed the Church of Laodicea; but in that Vision, the Camp of the Saints, because there were not onely many Saints amongst them of the old Philadelphian strain, but that they were still in their externall frame an holy people and an holy City, not pro∣phaned by the Gentiles, that is to say, not polluted by Heathenish Supersti∣tion, and Idolatry, and Imposture, and Cruelty; nor brought under their power and dominion that were. Which yet was once the condition of the Holy City for a time and times and half a time, or forty two months, A∣poc. 11. 2. 10. And it is still called the beloved City also for the same reason: but not the new Jerusalem descended from Heaven, because so generally that new and Heavenly nature was lost amongst them. But this Church of Laodicea is still beloved of Christ, partly for her own sake, and partly
for her deceased Sister's sake, the lovely Philadelphia, whom she so much resembles in all her externall features, that dearest Spouse of Christ. And therefore the Title of the be∣loved City agrees very well with this passage in the present Text, Whom I love, I rebuke, yea and scourge too. For these streights that the Laodice∣ans are to be cast into by the Siege of Gog and Magog seems the most proba∣ble way to rowze them out of their Lukewarmnesse and lazy Formality. But that things may not run the ha∣zard of growing worse and worse, nor there be an infinite repetition of the vicissitude of Scenes on the Stage of this Earth, Providence will knock off at such a time as that the wicked and prophane Rabble of the world shall not again get the dominion o∣ver his true Church, but he will put a period to the Contest by a deluge of Fire from Heaven, as it is intima∣ted in that Vision. But this is more then falls to the share of this present verse.
Be zealous therefore, and repent. That is, Amend thy dead Formality and Lukewarmnesse, by attaining to the Spirit of life through Mortifica∣tion and Regeneration, that so thou mayst recover the old Philadelphian Zeal and Love: For this is the onely thing thou wantest. 11. Behold, I stand at the door and Verse 20. knock. Do not pretend Difficulties: I am ready not onely to assist thee, but do also importune thee: I sug∣gest good Motions to thee; do thou but pursue them and improve them. If any man hear my voioe, and open the door; that is, If any man obey those dictates of Conscience and o∣vertures of Light and Grace that Christ ever and anon offers him, and so becomes sincere in all things, and not willingly offends him in any thing, great or small, (which will not fail to be done where the desire is sin∣cere; and this sincere desire is the Door that lets in Christ, for he passes into us through an unfeigned hunger and thirst after Righteousness;) then, says he,
I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. That is, I will communicate my Nature and Spirit unto him, and he shall eat my flesh, which is meat indeed, and drink my bloud, which is drink indeed: that is to say, He shall partake of my body & bloud, not in Symbols onely, (which ye doe well to keep up till I come,) but in a true and living way; where∣by that shall be accomplished, I in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. If John 14. 20. any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him; and we ver. 23. will come unto him, and make our a∣boad with him. Wherefore, being thus replenished with the God of life and the Father of lights, thou canst not fail of being full of the Spirit, and of all alacrity and readinesse to every good work: Thy Luke-warmnesse and Dulnesse will goe a∣way. 12. To him that overcometh will I Verse 21. grant to sit with me in my Throne; e∣ven as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. And
that thou mayst be the more effectu∣ally rowzed up out of this Tepidity and Lethargicalnesse, thou shalt not onely enjoy me and my Father on this Earthly stage, but, if thou stri∣vest so as to get the victory in the way I have instructed thee, I will translate thee to that Heavenly King∣dome most naturally and properly so called; where thou shalt sit down, and drink of the fruit of the Vine in the Kingdome of my Father. As I, Matt. 26. 29. after I had overcome, ascended up to Heaven into those glorious mansions, and there sate down at the right hand of God: so him that overcometh the Temptations and Incumbrances, the Pleasures and Enticements of this lower world, will I cause to sit down with me in the Heavenly places at the last Day. Which Monition is the more seasonable, by how much more near the approach of that great Day is. For I shall come visibly to Judge∣ment in the very next Thunder to the Siege of Gog and Magog, when I will transform your vile bodies into
the similitude of my glorious body, that ye may be fit companions for me in Heaven for ever. Behold, I shew 1 Cor. 15, 51, 54. you a mystery: Ye shall not all sleep, yet ye shall all be changed; that mortality may be swallowed up of life. This is a great and stupendious Promise; but thou art to consider that it is spoken by him that is the Amen, the true and faithfull witnesse, and the beginning of the Creation of God, and therefore both will and can carry on all his design to the very end, Amen. 13. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto Verse 22. the Churches. From the Epiphonema coming here last, as in all these four last Epistles, one may haply raise this Objection, as if this sense of the Promise immediately preceding it were not Politicall or Propheticall e∣nough, but merely Theologicall, the Promise being to be performed in the other world, and therefore not the proper object of Prophecy, which concerns the affairs of the stage of this Earth: And that this there∣fore
is against our professed Rule. But I answer, that though the Pro∣mise of obtaining Heaven after this life upon the death of the body be merely a Theogicall Promise, and of a thing more spiritual and invisible, and not to be seen upon the face of this Earth; yet this promise of obtaining Heaven at the Resurrection and ge∣neral Day of Judgement, it being the day of that great and visible As∣sizes wherein the Souls of the Saints shall appear in glorify'd bodies, may well be ranged in the same order with the rest of the Promises imme∣diately preceding the Epiphonemata of each Epistle, and to be accom∣plished visibly in this life. For the sense of the Promise in brief is this; That as Christ, after his Sufferings, his Death and Passion, ascended vi∣sibly into Heaven, (for Heaven is said to be the throne of God in the Scripture,) and so Heaven became also Christ's throne; so those of Lao∣dicea, who upon the Mortification of their Lusts should attain to the
state of life in the New birth, should ascend visibly into Christ's throne, that is, into Heaven, in the open view of them that should be left here on the Earth and in the inferiour Re∣gions of the Air, sentenced to that e∣verlasting fire prepared for the De∣vil and his Angels. This is a plain and obvious sense of this Promise, and such as the placing of the Epiphonema requires, and is, in my judgement, no mean Ratifica∣tion of the true and Literal sense of that Article of our Faith, touching the visible Resurrection and Glorifi∣cation of our bodies, and their ascen∣sion into the Heavenly Regions, a∣gainst such as would whiffle away all these Truths by resolving them into a mere moral Allegorie. Thus consonant every way are the Interpretations of these Epistles both to themselves, and to the Apostolick Truth.
CHAP. X. A Recapitulation of the main Evidences of the truth of this Mysticall or Pro∣pheticall Exposition of the Seven E∣pistles to the Seven Churches of Asia, by way of Solution of Difficulties touching the said Epistles and their Circumstances, otherwise hardly or not at all to be solved. 1. AS in natural Hypotheses those are accounted truest that solve the Phaenomena of Nature the most naturally and easily, and espe∣cially if such as are no otherwise sol∣vible then upon the proposed Hypo∣thesis: so that meaning of Scripture, I mean especially of any considerable portion thereof, ought to be esteem∣ed truest that can solve the most Dif∣ficulties that may be raised concern∣ing the same, or the Contexts pre∣cedent or subsequent thereto; and if all, still the more certain; and if un∣solvible otherwise, there is still the
more assurance of undeniable De∣monstration. Now how near this Mysticall or Propheticall Exposition of these Epistles approches to the clear∣nesse of this case, I will leave to the Reader to judge, after he has consi∣dered the Solutions of the Questions easily raised out of the Epistles them∣selves, or the precedent Chapter, and not easily answered, nor at all satisfactorily, at least most of them, but upon the Hypothesis we have gone. 2. As first, If a man enquire why the Spirit of Prophecy, after he has so expresly given notice that this Book of the Apocalypse is to shew unto his servants things that are to come, and called it plainly a Book of Prophe∣cies, Apoc. 1. 1, 3. should start so unexpectedly from the Title and intended subject, as to write no lesse then seven Epi∣stles to certain Churches, that have nothing considerable of Prophecy in them, before he deliver any Pro∣phecies properly so called, but onely Promises and Comminations; and
that he should doe this with as great Pomp and as high a Preamble as he does when he begins so famous Pro∣phecies as those of the seven Seals, and the opened Book. But according to our Hypothesis the Answer is easie; viz. That though these seven Epi∣stles to the seven Churches of Asia have a Literal sense, yet they are also a Parable or Prophecy, and of as high concern for both matter and extent of time (they reaching from the be∣ginning of the Church to the end of the world) as the Prophecy of the Seals and opened Book; and that they are ushered in with this great Pomp on purpose to give us notice there∣of. Secondly, A man would be prone to enquire why the Spirit dictates Letters unto the Churches in Asia, and not rather to the Churches in Europe, Asia and Africk. For certain∣ly the Church had disspred it self in∣to all these Quarters of the world by that time. As if the Spirit of Truth were a respecter of persons. For these
are not the Letters of John, but of the Holy Ghost. But our Answer is ready at hand, That for the signifi∣cancy of the word Asia to comport also with the significancy of the names of the Seven Churches, Asia alone was pitched upon. But, according to the Propheticall sense, the true Ca∣tholick Church is writ unto under such distinct Conditions as she was to vary into unto the end of the world. So that there is no Partiality nor Ac∣ception of Persons in this. Thirdly, If a man demand touch∣ing the order or precedency of these Seven Churches that are writ unto: What a plain and manifest account is there to him that compares the Epi∣stles in their Propheticall sense with the Intervalls of the Church Catho∣lick lying in that order that these Churches are ranged? This is a sa∣tisfactory reason, and worthy the Spirit that wrote these Epistles. But whether they are ranged in this or∣der, because that a Letter-carrier going from Patmos, his first journey
will be to Ephesus, and then to Smyr∣na, and so in order till he come to Laodicea; whether the holy Spirit of Prophecy regarded that in the dicta∣ting of his Letters, (though Alcazar the Jesuite be for it,) I cannot but sus∣pend my judgement, and that not without a smile. But of this Ataxie more particularly anon. 3. Fourthly, If it be demanded why just Seven Churches in Asia are writ to, neither more nor lesse, (especi∣ally that in Thyatira, according to the acknowledgement of Epiphanius, be∣ing then not founded, but after the writing of these Epistles,) it is hard to give a satisfactory answer in the Literal sense. For to say this Book of the Apocalypse affects the number Seven, and that, because it runs up∣on the number Seven altogether in the insuing part of the book, which is Propheticall, it therefore, for Con∣formity sake, chuses this number in writing to the Churches though lite∣rally understood, seems but a meagre, mean and trifling account, a design
unworthy the Holy Spirit that dicta∣ted this Book. But the using this number Seven all over is rather an intimation that the Book is Propheti∣call all over, and that these Epistles are also a Prophecy, accordingly as we have explained them. And taking them so, the Answer is plain and ob∣vious, viz. The number Seven is here chosen out as Symbolicall, it being the note of Universality; whence the Pythagoreans, as I above noted, call it . Wherefore Seven (and no more then Seven) Churches are writ un∣to, as standing for the seven Inter∣valls of the Church from the begin∣ning to the end of all. Fifthly, If it be demanded why these seven Churches rather then any others, which in all likelihood may have the same Vertues and Vices that these are commended and taxed for: The reason of this is writ in the very Notation of their Names, e∣very Name being significative of the Condition of the Church Catholick
in that successive Intervall of time that this or that Church so named standeth for, and in such order as they are repeated. Sixthly, If one require a Reason why Christ is described by holding the seven Stars in his right hand in the Epistles to the Churches of Ephesus and of Sardis, why the same de∣scription in both, or why in either: In the Literal sense it will be hard to finde any peculiar Reason; but in the Propheticall sense already decla∣red it is obvious. For the seven Stars signifie all the Pastours, whether in present existence, or succession. And Ephesus is the beginning-state of the Church; and therefore it is both very seasonable and methodicall to re∣present the first Founder, Sustainer and Continuer thereof by this Em∣blem; Lo, I am with you to the end of the world. And that this again is hin∣ted at in the Epistle to the Church of Sardis, is with evident Proportion and Analogy to the Affairs of the Church there represented. For the
Church of Sardis is as it were the beginning again or the emerging of the true Church or Kingdome of Christ out of the Power and King∣dome of Antichrist. 4. Seventhly, Why the Church of Ephesus, of all other Churches, should be commended for their try∣ing false Apostles. Why might not other Churches be attaqued by them, and also discover them, as well as the Church of Ephesus? The Solution of which Probleme is easie in this My∣sticall sense of the Epistles, that pla∣ces the Ephesine Intervall within the Apostles times, but the rest on this side of them. Eighthly, If any one demand why it is said to the Church of Smyrna, more then to any other Church, Be thou faithfull unto death, and I will Apoc. 2. 10, 11. give thee the Crown of life; and a∣gain, He that overcometh shall not be hurt by the second death: In the Li∣teral sense it will be very hard to finde any peculiar Reason why this might not as well be said to the
Church in Pergamus, where there was killing for Religion, it seems, by the mention of the Martyr Antipas. I, but there was no obtaining the Crown of life there in any peculiar sense; but the Crown of life, that is, the Imperial Crown, was given to the Sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs under the Ten Persecutions: to whom also, according to the opinion of the ancient Church, the Promise of the first Resurrection belonged. Which is here obliquely glanced at, (according to the mode of the Apo∣calyptick style, that loves to hint things by Ellipses,) in that Promise, He that overcometh shall not be hurt by Apoc. 20. 6. the second death; implying thereby, that he shall be made partaker of the first Resurrection. Ninthly, If any one will again ob∣ject more particularly against the A∣taxie of the Churches, that they are ranged neither according to the me∣rit nor congeneracy of their Condi∣tions, pretending that it had been far better to have joyned the two
irreprehensible Churches together, Smyrna and Philadelphia, against whom there is no complaint at all; and then Ephesus, Sardis and Laodicea, against whom there is no complaint of eat∣ing things offered unto Idols; and af∣terwards Pergamus and Thyatira, in which Churches alone there is: If any one, I say, contend that this me∣thod had been more exact; truly, in the Literal sense it will be hard to frame an handsome and satisfactory answer; especially if he urge that God is the Authour of Method, as well as the God of Order. But in this Mysticall or Propheticall sense the Answer is solid and exquisite, and much-what the same that was given to the like Difficulty more generally propounded before, namely, That the Churches of Asia are named in that order the successive Intervalls of the Church Catholick were to pro∣ceed in, of which these Asiatick Churches are but the Symbols or Hie∣roglyphicks. And therefore those two Intervalls of time which take in the
Reign of the Beast and the False pro∣phet, viz. the Intervalls of the Church of Pergamus and of Thyatira, must come after Ephesus and Smyrna, be∣cause till the expiration of those two Intervalls Idolatry had not again re∣entred the Apostatizing Church. And the three following Intervalls of Sar∣dis, Philadelphia and Laodicea, are the Intervalls of the true Church e∣lapsed out of the hands of dominee∣ring Idolatry; and therefore we hear no more in them of things sa∣crificed unto Idols, nor of any Jeza∣bel. And Philadelphia, which is the most holy and the most glorious In∣tervall of the Church that is to ap∣pear on the face of the earth, is not to be named according to her Dignity, but according to her Suc∣cession in time, toward the latter end of the world, as she is here ranged. But of this more then enough, be∣cause we had touched of it in the general before. 5. Tenthly, Why is Christ in his Description before the Epistle to
the Church in Pergamus set out by a two-edged sword, coming, suppose, Apoc. 2. 12. out of his mouth, (according to the Ellipticalnesse of the Apocalyptick style?) what reason in the letter can be given of that? for (especially if this Supplement be made) it cannot respect the slaying of Antipas with the sword. What peculiar thing then in this Church of Pergamus is there to require this Description? Truly no∣thing at all appears in the Letter. But in the Propheticall sense it is very proper, The Waldenses and Albigen∣ses in this Intervall assaulting the Church of Rome, or at least defend∣ing themselves and their pure Faith, so signally by this weapon, I mean, by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; though them∣selves died so many thousands of them in the field by the sword for the Faith they thus defended. And in the eleventh place, The Description of Christ before the E∣pistle to the Church in Thyatira, And his feet like fine brasse, (as if they bur∣ned Apoc. 2. 18.
in a furnace;) (for that Supple∣ment is to be understood out of his Description in the first Chapter, as before:) But now what peculiar significancy has this Description, or what congruity to any thing in the Church of Thyatira Literally under∣stood? surely none. But in the Pro∣pheticall sense it is very expressive of those lower members of Christ's bo∣dy, his Church here on earth, of their invincible Zeal, and Patience, and Sincerity of Affection, such as did abide the most fiery Trialls that could be put upon them, and made them stand at the Stake amongst bur∣ning Faggots with the flames about their ears, and never flinch for it: As has been noted in the interpretation of that Epistle. This was the state of that Intervall of the Church. Twelfthly, In a Book that is so full of AEnigmaticall Involutions, and Coverings upon Coverings, where he calls the Churches Golden Candle-sticks, and the Bishops or Pastours Stars and Angels, even then when
he interprets and offers to be more plain; that the same Authour should so openly and plainly mention any one by name as he does the Martyr Antipas, if there were not some far∣ther Mysterie in it, would be a great difficulty, and hardly to be digested by the more sagacious and curious. I must confesse I have often wondred at this naming Antipas by name, till I understood a farther sense thereof, such as we have rendred in the expo∣sition of that Epistle. 6. In the thirteenth place, One might well demand why Christ ex∣presses a greater disgust against the Church of Laodicea then that of Sar∣dis. For though the former is said to be luke-warm; yet the other, ma∣king a great show of life, is notwith∣standing declared to be dead. That Christ should be more enraged against Luke warmnesse then Hypocrisy, and threaten it more deeply then the o∣ther, I will spew thee out of my mouth, (which is quite to cast a thing away, never to be resumed again,) must
seem marvellous to the considerate. Certainly, if there were not some greater matter in it, the Spirit of Christ would not speak so severely onely to follow a Metaphor. But in the Propheticall sense the Solution is easie, that passage being predictive of the Extermination of the Church from the face of the earth at the close of the world, as I have expoun∣ded it. In the fourteenth place, It may be demanded, why so affectedly and re∣peatedly in every Epistle that phrase is used, I know thy works, without any variation or omission. Which seems a thing but of small importance in the Literal sense of these Epistles: but in the Propheticall it seems on pur∣pose so repeated, to intimate an Allu∣sion in Asia to the Hebrew word , (as if  was intended on purpose to answer to ) that Asia may also be significant as well as the names of the Seven Chur∣ches: which they all being, it is a shrewd presumption this repetition
was for some such design as has been declared. Whereas the Literal sense can give no account thereof. Fifteenthly, Alcazar himself is much stumbled, that the Spirit of God should be thought to take notice of any one particular Woman in the Church of Thyatira, and so call her by the name of Jezabel, as is ordina∣rily supposed. And indeed these things are too little for the majesty of this writing of the Apocalypse. But how can we help it in the Literal sense, if we will interpret with constancy and coherency? But in the Propheticall sense there is no such incongruity. The Object is worth the Spirit's taking notice of in this kinde; this Jezabel being that painted Woman of Rome, intoxica∣ting the Kings of the earth with the Cup of her spiritual Fornications, as has been shewn upon the Text. 7. Sixteenthly, It seems very strange that that Promise of ruling o∣ver the Nations, and receiving the Morning-star, (which doubtlesse are
Politicall Promises,) should be made to the Church in Thyatira, more then to that in Pergamus, or Ephesus, and others. What Victories or Domini∣on did the Church in Thyatira in Asia get over the Nations more then other Churches? This is an hard knot in the Literal sense. But in the Pro∣pheticall it is loosned at the first sight. For the Closure of the Intervall of the Church of Thyatira brings in the time wherein whole Nations revol∣ted from the Pope and his idolatrous Church, and professed the Reformed Religion, and so in these parts got the Pontifician party under them. Seventeenthly, In the Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia there is mention made of a mighty Tempta∣tion that is to come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth, touching which he saith, Behold, I come quickly. Why should this be said to the Church of Phila∣delphia more then to any other of the Churches here specified? There are not the least footsteps of reason to be
found in the Literal sense. But in the Propheticall sense the thing is plain. For the Intervall of Philadelphia be∣ginning in the last Vial, wherein that mighty and terrible Earthquake is to happen, the great Temptation, what it is, is plainly thence understood, and how in respect of this Philadelphian Church it will come quickly, she commencing but in the very same Vial that this is to happen under. Eighteenthly, Why upon this Phi∣ladelphia, a private Asiatick Church, should the name of the City of God, the new Jerusalem which cometh down out of Heaven from God, (the very same that is expressed Apoc. 21.) be said to be written? This title were too big and turgent for any private Church, were it not a Type or Symbol of some greater matter. But by the Propheticall interpretation this diffi∣culty is quite removed. For the In∣tervall of the Philadelphian Church is co-incident with the times of the new Jerusalem, (mentioned at the end of the Apocalypse,) and of the Millen∣niall
Empire of Christ upon earth. 8. Nineteenthly, The Curious may be prone to enquire, why the Church of Laodicea in those times should ac∣count her self so hugely and extraor∣dinarily rich, increased in goods, and to have no want of any thing. And truly why this should be her estate rather then any of the Churches spe∣cify'd, from the Literal ground we can fetch no reason. But admitting the Propheticall sense, and that this is the last Intervall of the Church of Christ, it will naturally so come to passe: For this Laodicea will be left Heir to all the Riches of her Sister Philadel∣phia, to Peace, Prosperity, Purity in Worship, abundance of natural Knowledge, universal skill in the In∣terpretations of the Prophecies, and what-ever good thing there is be∣longing to the Church, saving the Life and Spirit which Philadelphia carried along with her into the o∣ther world. How easily then and naturally, or rather necessarily, does this Description of the Church of
Laodicea fall upon the last Intervall? And, lastly, It is a Question ex∣tremely obvious to demand, Why that phrase, He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear, which our Sa∣viour so often is found to adde at the end of his Parables to the people, should be used here so repeatedly in every Epistle, they being no Parables, but Epistles sent to each of those Se∣ven Churches in Asia respectively: And then, why this Epiphonema is sometimes the last close of the Epi∣stle, sometimes not. To which Pro∣bleme there is no tolerable Solution in the Literal sense of these Epistles. But supposing a Mysticall or Prophe∣ticall sense, there was a necessity of affixing this Epiphonema, to shew there was a farther sense intended then that of the Letter: and also, that sometimes this Epiphonema should come last of all, (as in the four last Epistles,) that the Promise to the Conquerour, to him that overcomes, might be more certainly understood to be of a proper Propheticall or Po∣liticall
sense, not merely Theologicall, Moral or Spiritual; as has been a∣bundantly declared in the Exposition. 9. We might have drawn many more Questions and Solutions from the consideration of the Letter, and of this Hypothesis we go upon, to shew its solidity and fitnesse, but that we hold it needlesse, having produ∣ced so many already: which jointly considered, with the perpetuall easi∣nesse and naturalnesse of the whole Exposition of all the Epistles, and the exact Correspondency of the Names of the Churches to the Events of the successive Intervalls of the true Catholick Church which they repre∣sent, one would think they should not fail fully to satisfie any unprejudiced Peruser of our Exposition of these E∣pistles, touching the truth thereof. But I am abundantly taught by Experi∣ence, that both the finding out, and receiving of Divine Truths found out by others, is a special gift of God. And therefore to him alone be the Glo∣ry for ever and ever, Amen. THE END.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY: OR, A brief Discourse containing sun∣dry Considerations or Conclusions tending to the Discovery of what is or ought to be held to be IDOLATRY amongst Christians. With Application to the Doctrine of the Council of TRENT, and for the putting a stop to the Romish Infection. MATTH. 4. 10. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve.
To the Reader. Reader, 1. I Suppose thou wilt expect some∣thing should be said of this en∣suing Discourse also, though it needs not be much. The occasion of writing it, and the fitnesse of joyning it to the foregoing Exposition of the Se∣ven Churches, will discover themselves to thee in the perusing of the Treatise it self. I must confess I have treated of this Argument elsewhere, namely, in my Part 1. Book 1. Ch. 5. to the 17. Chap. Mysterie of Iniquity. But it is a Subject of that great Importance, that it deserves an entire Treatise apart by it self, and that girt up in the most close and convictive method that may be: that those that are sanable or preservable from this dreadfull sin of Idolatry may finde the efficacy of our Antidote; and those whose minds it cannot alter may (however) be found without excuse. And there is this considerable here above
what I have done already on this Sub∣ject, that here is such an expresse Ap∣plication made of the Theorie to the grosse Errours in this point and foul Mispractices of the Church of Rome. 2. Those of ours that speak the most favourably of that Church cannot but declare them guilty of Material Idola∣try, as they call it. And questionlesse there must be something among them very like that great Sin, if there be any truth or sense in the Visions of that Di∣vine Volume of the Apocalypse. For the order of things and demonstration of the Synchronisms do necessarily cast those Visions that represent the concern∣ed as Idolatrous (Chap. 13. and 17.) upon the Church of Rome, (as also Ch. 2. v. 14—20;) and they can belong to none else in the Propheticall scope of the Visions, Time and Place and the Order of things having so unavoidably fix∣ed them upon her. Wherefore even ac∣cording to Divine suffrage they are guilty of Idolatry in one sense or o∣ther, or come so nigh it, that the Spirit of God in a jealousie, to exaggerate
their Wantonness, speaks to them as such, to deterre them from those suspec∣ted ways, and dangerous approches to so horrible a Crime. And grant it were but thus, yet both in the Vision of the Apoc. 2. 20. Seven Churches, and in that of the Apoc. 18. 4. Whore of Babylon, the people of God are expresly called un∣to and encouraged and commissioned to forsake the Church of Rome's Commu∣nion. So that the Protestants have not the least guilt of Schism upon them for leaving her, no not upon this more fa∣vourable Supposition. 3. But, alas! alas! this smooth Hy∣pothesis is but a pleasing Dream arising from the softnesse and sleepinesse of the carnal minde, and the love of those things that must passe away as a Dream or Phantasm of the night. Let God be Rom. 3. 4. true, and every man a liar, as the A∣postle speaks. And truly the Spirit of God would scarce speak true, if what is spoken of Idolatry so broadly and so expresly in those Visions (insomuch that they have been understood of the Heathen Idolatry even for this very
reason by learned and able Interpreters) should, now we are necessitated to un∣derstand them of Rome Christian in her apostatized condition, not amount to the Charge of any proper and for∣mal Idolatry at all. 4. But the desperatenesse of their case is, that if they were not represen∣ted by these Visions as Idolatrous, that is to say, if these Visions had never been writ, or now they are writ, though they were to be understood of some others, and not of the Church of Rome; yet appealing to the nature of the thing, to the true Notion of Idolatry properly and formally so called, and to the ac∣knowledged Doctrine of their Church expressed in the Council of Trent, and their universal Practices abetted by pub∣lick Authority, this alone is sufficient to demonstrate them to be Idolaters pro∣perly so called. Which is the scope of this present Treatise. 5. Which therefore doth confirm and corroborate, and place beyond all ex∣ception, the Orthodox Protestant In∣terpretations of those Visions that con∣cern
the Church of Rome: which in this last Age have been made so clear, and every way so natural and congru∣ous, that this one thing granted of their Idolatry, there cannot be the least scru∣ple of the truth and congruity of the rest of the Applications. 6. And I cannot but adore the faith∣fulnesse of Divine Providence, that has furnished his Church with these Oracles to be the Guide of the Faithfull in these latter Ages, which are as it were the dregs of those times which the Spirit of Prophecy has set no good character up∣on; wherein there is such an Inunda∣tion of Wickednesse and Prophanenesse, that there is scarce any Faith to be found upon earth. But that Church which has deluded the world with so many Ficti∣ons could never forge those Prophecies that are so punctually true, and so cut∣tingly set out all her grosse Miscarria∣ges, and as expresly foretell her Ruine, unlesse she will humble her self, and pluck in her horns, lay aside her bold boasts of Infallibility, and be content to be taught to cast away her Idols, and be
cured of her Dropsie and unnatural thirst after the bloud of the Saints and the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus. 7. Nor can I on the other side suffi∣ciently admire the stupidity of some of our own, and their grosse ingratitude to Divine Providence, that have so slight a regard to a Book of that mighty weight and moment as the Apocalypse is, and think it such a subject, as that any good Wit must needs mis-place his time if he meddle with it: which is more then a Pagan irreverence to so holy and so im∣portant Oracles. The Romans of old had another esteem for the Verses of the Si∣bylls: Nihil enim ità custodiebant neque sanctum neque sacrum quem∣admodum Sibyllina Oracula, as Dio∣nysius Halicarnasseus testifies. And it was an high honour to be the Keepers, much more the right Expounders, of them. But that which God of his mercy offers to all, such is either the idlenesse, frivolousness or profaneness of the spirits of men, that it is scarce accepted of any. 8. The truth is, most men are loath to be , to be messengers of
ill news to the greatest, that is to say, to the corruptest, part of Christendome; but rather affect the glory and security of being accounted of so humane, of so sweet and ingratiating a temper, as that they can surmize well of all mens Reli∣gions; and so think to conciliate to themselves the fame of either civil and good Natures, or of highly-raised and released Wits, (though it be indeed but a spice of the old abhorred Gnosticism,) that can comply with any Religion, and make a fair tolerable sense of all. 9. But these are such high strains of pretense to Wit or Knowledge and Gen∣tility as I must confess I could never yet arrive to, nor I hope ever shall: though I am not in the mean time so stupid in my way, as to think I can write thus freely without offence. And yet on the contrary, I can deem my self no more uncivil then I do him that wrings his friend by the nose to fetch him out of a Swound. 10. I am not insensible how harsh this charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome will sound in some ears, espe∣cially it being seconded with that other
of Murther, and that the most cruel and barbarous imaginable, and finally so se∣verely rewarded with an impossibility of Salvation to any now, so long as they continue in Communion with that Church. But, I believed, therefore I 2 Cor. 4. 13. spake, and have no reason to recall my words, or to have concealed the truth, that their fishing may become lesse suc∣cessfull in these parts; and that it may be with my Countrey-men according to that in Salomon, Surely in vain the Prov. 1. 17. net is spred in the sight of any bird. And therefore this is to open their eyes, that they may see what snares of destru∣ction are laid for them; and how those that promise others liberty are them∣selves 2 Pet. 2. 19. the servants of corruption; and how they that take upon them to be the onely Absolvers from sin are themselves held fast in the snares of eternall death, and do as necessarily illaqueate all o∣thers therein whom they proselyte to their Religion: so far are they from gi∣ving them any effectual Absolution. 11. I doubt not but many will be prone to cry out, This is a very rude
piece of Uncharitablenesse to all Roma∣nists. But I say, it were a most perfidi∣ous kinde of Civility, even to them them∣selves, (to say nothing of the Injury to our Church and Countrey,) to declare otherwise. But if this be the main Odium that sticks upon so true and usefull a Conclusion, that it is so far estranged from the spirit of Charity, hear but this brief Parable, Reader, and then I will leave it to thy self to judge, and conclude. There was a certain Knight bravely mounted, as it might seem, and in goodly equippage, in bright armour, a rich scarf about his shoulders, and a large plume of feathers in his Helmet, who was bound for the Castle of Health, seated on an high Hill, not unlike to the Do∣micilium Salutis in Cebes his Table, which therefore he easily kept in his eye. But the way he was in being something stony and rough, and leading not so di∣rectly as he thought to the desired Castle, he diverted out of the way, and descen∣ded into a green Plain; but not know∣ing whether it was all passable to the Castle, called to some Loyterers there
in the field, to enquire of them; who came right willingly to the Knight, scra∣ping many legs to him, and desiring him to tell his demands. 12. There was an old Shepherd likewise not far off, who, by that time this idle people had got to the Knight, had come down to him also. Friends, said he, to those men he called, Is the way passable and safe through this green Plain to yonder Castle? pointing to the Castle of Health with his Warder. Ve∣ry safe, may it please your Worship, said they; and, shrugging their shoulders, and scraping many legs, asked a Largesse of the Knight, pretending they had been at common work not far off. Whereupon the Knight put his hand into his pocket, and gave them liberally. But are there no Bogs, said he, nor Lakes betwixt this and the Castle? Some small inconsidera∣ble Sloughs it may be, said they; but you will meet with the Holy Society of the Wipers every-where, who will be ready to wipe you as clean as a Clock before you come at the Castle. And being so excellently well mounted as we see you
are, namely, upon that famous Steed renowned over all the world, the infal∣lible-footed Aplanedo, so good an Horse as that he never stumbles, your Worship need fear no disaster at all: Besides, the Beast, God blesse him, has a Nose like any Hound, and by a mi∣raculous sagacity, without any Reason or humane Literature, with an un-er∣ring certainty he can smell out the right way, and so secure you from all dan∣ger. To say nothing how excellent he is at the swimming any water, and how he can tread the very air, he is so high∣metall'd and light-footed. Onely be sure to keep fast in the Saddle. And then, Sir Knight, said the Shep∣herd, if the wind blow fair, the plumes in your Helmet may help to support you both; but if not, some Angel from Heaven may take you by the Crest of your Helmet, as he did the Prophet Habakuk by the hair of his head, when he carried him through the air from Judea into Babylon. 13. The Knight looking back, (for he was not aware of the Shepherd at
this time,) What coneed  man is this, said he, that talks this phanciful∣ly? May it please your Worship, he is a Shepherd, said they, and has a Flock on yonder little Hill hard by; but he is one of the most self-conceited old fools that ever your Worship met with in all your days: he thinks that all skill and knowledge lies within the compasse of his baldpate and wrinkled fore-head, though few or none are of the same opinions with himself. Sir Knight, said the Shepherd, I pretend to no skill nor knowledge but what is certain∣ly within mine own ken; but what I know, I love to speak freely. And I tell you, Sir Knight, unlesse you be stark staring mad you will never follow these mens counsels, nor venture over this Moor to that Castle: for you will be swallowed up horse and man into a fa∣thomlesse Lake of ill-sented mire, for all the nice nostrills of Aplanedo. You was in a more hopefull way before, though something rough; but it is so streight before you come at the Castle, that you could never have got through, un∣lesse
you had left Aplanedo behind you. He's an old cholerick Dotard, said those other fellows; be but sure to keep the Saddle, and we dare warrant your Worship, (our lives for yours) that Aplanedo will carry you safe through all dangers. Wherefore upon the renewall of the high conceit the Knight had before of his Steed, and those confident Anima∣tions of his mercenary Counsellers, he set on in a direct line toward the Castle over this Moor; the Shepherd looking after him to see the event. But the Knight had not rid two or three bow∣shots from the place, but the Shepherd saw them suddenly sink horse and man into the ground, so that they were both buried alive in the mire. 14. Whereupon fetching a deep sigh after so Tragicall a spectacle, he re∣turned with a sad heart and slow pace towards his Sheep on the top of the Hill, drailing his Sheephook behinde him, as they do their Spears at the Funeral of a Souldier: whom his Dog followed with a like soft pace, hanging down his head,
and letting his tail flag, as if he had a minde to conform to both the sorrows and postures of his Master. But those other false Companions had somewhat before this got to a lone Alehouse not far off, to spend the Knight's Largesse merrily with a bonny young Hostesse, and in plenty of good Ale and Cakes to celebrate his Funerall. 15. Now, Reader, I dare appeal to thy judgement which of these parties, the old free-spoken Shepherd, or those mercenary Flatterers, had the greater share of Charity; and to determine with thy self in what a sad condition those of the Church of Rome are, who, having the opportunity of being better instructed, as the Knight had, are yet led away captive by such cun∣ning Deceivers. Which is the main State of the Controversie. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they John 15. 22. had not had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin, saith our blessed Saviour, in the Gospel. The rest of the Riddle, Reader, I leave to thine own unravelling, and bid thee Farewell.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY. CHAP. I. What is Idolatry according to Divine Declaration. 1. THere are two ways in gene∣ral of discovering what is or ought to be held to be Idolatry amongst Christians; the one, Divine Declaration, the other, clear & perspicuous Reason: Which though they may haply reach the one no farther then the other, that is to say, that whatsoever may be concluded to be Idolatry by Divine Declarati∣on, the same may also by unprejudi∣ced
Reason, and vice vers'd; yet their joint concurrence of Testimony is a greater assurance to us of the truth; and two cords twisted together are stronger then either single. Where∣fore we will make use of both, and begin with Divine Declaration first. 2. The first Conclusion therefore shall be, That as in civil Govern∣ments it is the Right of the Supreme power to define and declare what shall be or be held to be Treason, and punishable as such: so it is most manifestly the Right of God Almigh∣ty, who is also infinitely good and wise, to define and declare to his people what shall be or be held to be Idola∣try, which is a kind of Treason a∣gainst God, or crimen laesae majestatis Divinae. And what is thus declared Idolatry by God is to be held by us to be such, though the Ludicrous∣nesse and Fugitivenesse of our wan∣ton Reason might otherwise find out many starting-holes and fine preten∣ces to excuse this thing or that action from so foul an Imputation.
But as in civil affairs the declaring such and such things to be Treason does in a Politicall sense make them so ipso facto: so God's declaring such and such things to be Idolatry, they do to us ipso facto become Idolatry thereby: though to an or∣dinary apprehension, perhaps, nei∣ther this would have seemed Trea∣son, nor that Idolatry, without these antecedent Declarations. But where the Law-giver is infallible, there is all the reason in the world we should submit not onely to his Power, but to his Judgement in the Definitions of things, and rest sure that that is Idolatry which he has thought fit to declare so to be. 3. The second Conclusion; That what is declared Idolatry by God to the Jews ought to be acknowledged Idolatry by us Christians. The ground of this Conclusion is fixed in the nature of the Christian Religion. For Christianity being a far more spi∣ritual Religion then that of Judaism, and therefore abhorring from all Su∣perstition,
there cannot be the least Relaxation to the most rancid of all Superstitions, Idolatry it self. Where∣fore whatsoever was accounted Ido∣latry amongst the Jews, and so defi∣ned by a Divine Law, must be rec∣koned much more such under Chri∣stianity, there being not the least pre∣tence for any Relaxation. Besides, there was nothing under the Jews (or can by any people be) rightly deemed Idolatry, but it is carefully enough cautioned against and plainly forbid in the first and se∣cond Commandments of the Deca∣logue. But the whole Decalogue is Moral, and so declared by God, in that it is said to be writ by his own Exod. 31. 18. finger on the Tables of stone, (which are Symbols of the permanent sub∣stance of our Souls, on which all the general Precepts of Morality are in∣graven as innate Notions of our Du∣ty.) And therefore it is hereby in∣timated that the Precepts of the Decalogue are just and fitting, not onely , but , not onely by
an externall Law, but engraffed in our very Nature and Reason; and that the root and ground of them will easily be fetch'd from thence. To which you may adde, That it were a very immethodicall and hete∣rogeneous Botch, unworthy of the Wisedome of God and of his Servant Moses, whenas all the rest of the De∣calogue is Moral, to phansy one or two of the Commandments of ano∣ther nature. This is so rash and gross a Reproach to the Divine Wisedome as truly, in my judgement, seems un∣excusable. But besides this, The Morality of the Decalogue is also acknowledged by the Church, it making part of their Liturgie every-where, and we begging an ability of obeying the Se∣cond Commandment as well as the rest: and Christ also referrs to the De∣calogue Mark 10. 18, 19. for eternall life. And lastly, It seems as it were sin∣gled from all the rest of Moses Laws, as a lasting and permanent Law to the Church of God, (whence it is en∣tred
into our very Catechisms,) ne∣ver to be abolished, or rather vigo∣rously to be kept in force, for the Se∣cond Commandment's sake particu∣larly, that it might strongly bear a∣gainst those Invitations to Idolatry that may seem to offer themselves in the nature of our Religion, or re∣claim the Church from it when they were fallen into it, as well as it was to keep back the Jews from joyning in Worship with their Idolatrous neighbors round about them. Where∣fore all manner of Idolatry being cautioned against by the Moral De∣calogue given to the Jews, there are no kinds thereof that ought to be en∣tertained or allow'd of by any Chri∣stians. 4. The third Conclusion; That what-ever was Idolatry in the Hea∣then, the same is Idolatry in us, if we commit it. The reason of which Assertion is this, Because the Hea∣then had not so express a Declarati∣on from God against all manner of I∣dolatry as the Jews and Christians
have: and therefore where-ever they are guilty of Idolatry, the Jew and Christian, if they doe the like things, are much more. The fourth Conclusion; The Ido∣latry of the Pagans consisted in this, viz. in that they either took some∣thing to be the supreme God that was not, and worshipped it for such; or else worshipped the supreme God in an Image; or gave religious Wor∣ship, that is to say, erected Altars, Temples and Images, offered Sacri∣fice, made Vows to, and invoked, such as they themselves knew not to be the supreme God, but either the Souls of men departed, or other Dae∣mons, or else particular Appearances or Powers of Nature. The fifth; That both Divine Dae∣claration and the common Consent of Christendome do avouch to us, that all the aforesaid Pagan Modes of I∣dolatry practised by them were in those Pagans practices of Idolatry. And therefore, by the third Con∣clusion, they must be much more
so in either the Jew or Christian. 5. The sixth; That giving religi∣ous Worship, that is to say, erecting Temples, building Altars, Invoking, making Vows, and the like, to what is not the supreme God, though not as to him, but as to some inferiour helpfull Being, is manifest Idolatry. This is plain out of the precedent Conclusion; and may be farther con∣firmed from this Consideration, That Idolatry was very rare amongst the Nations, especially the Romans, if this Mode of Idolatry be not truly I∣dolatry. And scarce any thing will be found Idolatry amongst them, but taking that to be the supreme God which is not, and worshipping it for such. But if any Being on this side the supreme God may be worshipped with religious Worship void of Idola∣try, all things may, though some more non-sensically and ridiculously then others. Wherefore to use any of the abovesaid Modes of Worship to what is inferiour to the supreme Being, though not as to the supreme
Being, must be Idolatry; or else the Roman Paganism it self is very rare∣ly, if at all, chargeable therewith, they having a Notion accurate e∣nough of the supreme God, and di∣stinct enough from their other Dei∣ties; so that unlesse they chance to worship him in an Image, they will seldome be found Idolaters, or rather never, according to the opinion of some, who say, none that have the knowledge of the one true God can be capable of Idolatry. 6. The seventh; That to sacrifice, burn Incense, or make any religious Obeisance or Incurvation to an I∣mage in any wise, as to an Object of this Worship, is Idolatry by Divine Declaration. This is manifest out of the second Conclusion and the first, as may appear at first sight. For it is plainly declared in the se∣cond Precept of the Decalogue touching Images, Thou shalt not bow to them, nor worship them: Of which undoubtedly the sense is, They shall not be in any wise the Object of that
Worship which thou performest in a religious way, whether by Bowing down to them, or by what other way soever. For the second Command∣ment certainly is a Declaration of the mind of God touching religious Worship, let the Ceremonies be what they will. The eighth; That to erect Tem∣ples, Altars, Images, or to burn In∣cense, to Saints or Angels, to invoke them, or make Vows to them, and the like, is plain Idolatry. This is apparent chiefly out of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth Conclusions of this Chapter. For the Pagans Dae∣mons exquisitely answer to the Chri∣stians Saints and Angels in this point; saving that this spiritual Fornication is a Rape upon our Saints and An∣gels, but simple Fornication in the Heathen with their impure Daemons. The ninth; Religious Incurvation towards a Crucifix, or the Host, or any Image, as to an Object, and not a mere unconsidered accidental Cir∣cumstance, is Idolatry. This is ma∣nifest
out of the seventh and eighth Conclusions. But the Worship of Latria exhibited to the Host upon the opinion of Transubstantiation is Idolatry by the third and fourth. 7. Conclusion the tenth; To use on set purpose in religious Worship any Figure or Image onely circum∣stantially, not objectively, but so as to bow towards it, or to be upon a man's knees before it with Eyes and Hands devoutly lifted up towards it, but with an intention of making it in no sense any Object of this religious Worship, yet if this were in a Coun∣try where men usually and professed∣ly do, it were notwithstanding for all this intention a grosse piece of I∣dolatry. But if the whole Countrey should conspire to make this more plausible sense of those Incurvations and Po∣stures; admit we might hope it were not Idolatry, yet it would be certain∣ly a most impious and wicked Mock∣ing of God, and eluding his minde in the second Commandment, (that na∣turally
implies the forbidding any Worship or Incurvation toward Ima∣ges in a way of Religion,) and a crime as scandalous and near to Ido∣latry as the going into bed to another man's Wife, with chast pretensions, would be to grosse Adultery. Nay, indeed, it is very questionable, if he knowingly and deliberately put himself into these postures before an Image, whether the Image will not be the Object of those Postures and Incurvations whether he will or no. Or rather it seems plain, beyond all questioning, that it will be so. For there is a corporeall Action significa∣tive of Honour and Respect corpo∣really (though not mentally) direc∣ted towards and received by the Image, and this at the choice of the Religionist, which intitles him to the fact. But we need not labour much touching this last Conclusion, the two former abundantly convincing the Church of Rome of multifari∣ous Idolatries, if they will stand
to Divine Definitions, or the De∣clarations of Holy Scripture touch∣ing this Point. CHAP. II. What is Idolatry according to the De∣termination of clear and free Rea∣son. 1. WE will now try how ob∣noxious the Romanists are out of the plain Definitions and De∣terminations of free and clear Rea∣son. In which Method let us set down for The first Conclusion, That Idola∣try is a kinde of Injustice against God. That this is true, may appear from that Definition of Religion in Tully, who defines it Justitiam adver∣sùs Deum. Which is not the sense of Tully onely, but the very voice of Reason and Nature. And therefore Idolatry being one kinde of Irreligi∣on or Impiety, it must needs include
in it a kind of Injustice against God. 2. The second Conclusion; That Idolatry is a very sore and grievous Disease of the Soul, vilely debasing her and sinking her into Sensuality and Materiality, keeping her at a di∣stance from the true sense and right knowledge of God, and leaving her more liable to bodily Lusts: That the natural tendency of Idolatry is this, and yet the Souls of men, in this Lap∣sed state, are naturally prone to so mischievous a Disease, as both Histo∣ry and daily Experience do abun∣dantly witnesse. See the Mischiefs of Idolatry in my Mystery of Iniquity, Part 1. Lib. 1. Ch. 16. Nor can it infringe the truth of this Conclusion, that a man, retaining still the true Notion of God accor∣ding to his Divine Attributes, may, ac∣cording to a sense of his own, bow down toward a corporeall Object of worship. For he must retain it by force against such a Practice as would and does naturally debauch the users of it. And besides, if he had really the
Life of God in him as well as the No∣tion of him, he would feel such Acti∣ons grate against his heart, and per∣ceive how they would invade and attempt the abating and extinguish∣ing the more true and pure sense of God and of his Worship, and seduce the Soul to externall Vanity. But suppose a man or two could keep their minds from sinking down from a right Notion of the Deity; yet they are as guilty of Idolatry, if they give religious Worship to cor∣poreall Objects, as he is of Adultery and Fornication that yet uses them so cautiously as neither to impair his bodily Health, nor besott his natural Parts thereby. And therefore, though there may be some few such, yet the Laws against Fornication and Adultery ought notwithstanding to be very sacred to every one, even to those discreeter Transgressours of them, and ever to be obeyed by them, because the Observation of them is of such infinite importance to the Publick.
And what we have said of the Wor∣ship of God is analogically true of honouring of the Saints, who are best honoured by the remembrance and imitation of their Vertues, not by scraping Legs to or clinging about their Images, which are no more like them then an Apple is to an Oister. 3. The third Conclusion; That those high expressions of the Jealou∣sie of God and his severe Displeasure against Idolatry are very becoming the nature of the thing, and his Pa∣ternal care of the Souls of men. This appears from the foregoing Conclu∣sions. For both the Prerogatives and Rights of the Divine Majesty himself are concerned, and also the Perfecti∣on, Nobilitation and Salvation of the Souls of men. This we discover by Reason, and our Reason is again more strongly ratify'd by Divine Suffrage. The fourth; That Idolatry, though it be so hainous a Sin, yet where it is committed most in good earnest does necessarily involve in it Ignorance or
Mistake, in the Act of Worship or in the Object; they either taking the Object to be God when it is not, or to have some Attribute of God when it has not, or to enjoy some Prero∣gative of God which yet it does not, or else the Worship not to be Divine when it is; or, lastly, they mistake in the Application of the Worship, thinking they do not apply Divine Worship to an Object when they do. The fifth; That to be mistaken in the Object of Worship, or in the Kind of Worship, or in the Applica∣tion, cannot excuse any-thing from being downright Idolatry; forasmuch as none are in good earnest Idolaters without some of these Mistakes. The sixth; That the peculiar Ho∣nour or Worship which is given to God is given to him not so much as his Honour and Worship, as his Due and Right: insomuch that he that does not give it to God, or communi∣cates it to another, does an injury to the Divine Majesty. This is plain,
and consonant to what was said on the first Conclusion, That Religion is a kinde of Justice towards God. And indeed if Divine Honour was not gi∣ven to God as his Due and Right, it were no Honour at all, but rather a Benevolence. 4. The seventh; The Right of that peculiar Honour or Worship we doe to God is grounded either in the nature of his incommunicable Excel∣lencies, or in his Excellencies so far as we know incommunicated to any Creature, or, lastly, in Divine De∣claration or Prescription of the ways or Modes of thus or thus worshipping him, which himself has some-time set down. The eighth; That any Actions, Gestures or Words directed to any Creature as to an Object, which na∣turally imply or signifie either the incommunicable or incommunicated Eminencies of God, is the giving that Worship that is the Right and Due of God alone to that Creature, and that Injury against the Divine
Majesty which is termed Idolatry. The evidence of this Conclusion may appear from hence, because there is no other way of Application of ex∣ternal Worship then by directing such significant Actions, Gestures, or Words, toward such a Being as to an Object. The ninth; That the using any of those Actions or Gestures, or doing any of those things that the true and supreme God did chuse and chal∣lenge in the setting out the Mode of his own Worship, towards or in refe∣rence to any Creature as to an Ob∣ject, this also is that Injury against God which we term Idolatry. The Reason is this, Because such a mode of Worship does thus manifest∣ly appear to be the peculiar Right of God, which none can transferr to another but God himself. Wherefore this Right having not been commu∣nicated by him to any other, when-e∣ver such a kind of Worship is used, it must be used to him, and to none else.
Nor can his dereliction of any such Mode of being worshipped warrant the use of it to any Creature after∣wards, because no Creature can be God in those circumstances as he thought fit to institute such a Worship for himself in: For no Creature can be God at all, and therefore never capable of any of those Modes of Di∣vine Worship which God ever at any time instituted for himself. Be∣sides, if this dereliction and disuse of any Mode of Worship might make it competible to a Creature, then might we sacrifice Beeves and Sheep (be∣sides other Services of the Temple) to any Saint or Daemon. 5. The tenth; An omnipercipient Omnipresence, which does hear and see what-ever is said or transacted in the World, whether considered in the whole, or as distributed into ter∣restriall, celestiall, and supercelestiall, not onely all these Omnipercipien∣cies but any one of them is a certain Excellency in God, and, for ought we know, incommunicated to any Creature.
The eleventh; That this Omni∣presence or Omnipercipience terre∣striall is one main ground of that reli∣gious Worship due to God which we call Invocation. This is plain, that upon this very ground that God hears and sees (though himself be invisible) what-ever is said or done upon earth, he has the honour of being invoked any-where or every-where, and of having Temples built to him; because he that is omnipresent cannot be ab∣sent from his Temple, but is alway there to be invoked. The twelfth; That if Omnipre∣sence or Omnipercipience, at least terrestriall, (if not celestiall,) be not communicated to Saints and An∣gels by God, the Invocation of either is palpable Idolatry. This is manifest from the eighth Conclusion. For In∣vocation implies an incommunicated Excellency in the Saints or Angels, and so communicates that Right to them that appertains onely to God, and is that Injury against God that is called Idolatry.
So that it is a vain Evasion that pre∣tends that we honour God the more in making him so good to the Saints and Angels, as to bestow this Excellency on them; whenas yet his Wisedome has not thought fit so to doe. For we are so far from honoring him hereby, that we injure him in giving his Right to another; and we dishonour him in presuming he had done wiselier or better in doing what he has not done. Whenas indeed, if he were so lavish in imparting his proper Excellencies to Creatures as some would make us believe he is, to palliate their own I∣dolatries, it were the next way to make men forget all Applications to God, and to cast him out of their me∣mory, and take up with the more particular Patronages of Saints and Angels. 6. The thirteenth; That our thinking such a Saint or Angel can hear us where-ever we invoke him, is no excuse for our Invocation of him, nor saves us from Idolatry, since all Idolatry committed in good
earnest implies some Mistake, as has been noted in the fourth Conclu∣sion. The fourteenth; That all the Modes or ways of the Communicati∣on of this Omnipercipiency to Saints or Angels are either very incredible, if not impossible, or extremely ridi∣culous as to any excuse for their In∣vocation. For the usual Residence of Saints and Angels being in sede Bea∣torum, as the Roman Church holds, and that place on the Coelum Empy∣reum above all the Stars, That the Angels and Saints should upon the ac∣count of the Exaltednesse of their natures see and hear from thence what is done or said from one side of the Earth to the other, is extremely incredible, if not impossible; yea, sufficiently incredible, or rather im∣possible, though they had their abode on this side of the Moon. And that they should see all things and transactions, hear all Prayers and Orations, in Speculo Divinitatis, is a∣like incredible; a thing which the
Humanity of Christ himself, though hypostatically united to the Divini∣ty, did not pretend to. But that God should either in this Speculum or any otherwise advertise them that such a one prays to them that they would pray to him for that party, is it not at first sight above all measure ridi∣culous? And alike ridiculous it is to pray to Saint or Angel, as if they were pre∣sent and heard our Prayers, when in∣deed they are absent, and cannot tell that we did pray, unlesse by some In∣telligencers. This Devotion is an im∣proper and unnatural act, and shews that we doe that to an invisible Crea∣ture which is onely proper to be done to the invisible God; and that therefore it is Idolatry, as giving that right of Worship to others which is onely congruous to him. 7. The fifteenth; That though there were communicated by God to Saints and Angels at least a terre∣striall Omnipercipiency, yet if he have not communicated the know∣ledge
thereof to us, as most certainly he has not, the Invocation of them is notwithstanding a very presumptu∣ous invasion of the indubitable Rights of God, and the intrenching upon his Prerogatives, and therefore as to the internall Act no lesse then the Sin of Idolatry. The Reasons of this Conclusion are, First, That God concealing from us the knowledge of the communi∣cation of this Excellency, does natu∣rally thereby intimate that he would not have them invoked, but reserves the Honour of our Invocation of an invisible Power unto himself onely. Secondly, That whatsoever is not of saith is sin: and therefore the ground of Invocation of Saints or An∣gels being at least dubitable, their In∣vocation is sin; and it being about the Rights of God in his Worship, what can it be better esteemed then Idolatry? Thirdly, This Principle of feign∣ing or groundlesly coneeiting, with∣out any Revelation from God, that
any Creatures are capable of such Honours as are God's indubitable Right and Prerogative, is the Forge and Shop, the Palliation and Pre∣tense, for infinite sorts and odly-ex∣cogitated varieties of Idolatrous Ob∣jects: and therefore so presumptuous and so abominable a Principle, which is the Mother and Nurse of such infi∣nite ways of Idolatry and Injustice against God, even according to hu∣mane Reason ought to be declared against as Idolatrous; and, conse∣quently, all the practices thereupon are also to be declared Idolatry, be∣cause they spring from a Principle ta∣ken up which is such a fundamental piece of Idolatry and Injustice against God, and exposes him to all manner of Idolatrous Injuries. Fourthly, To dare to doe an act we know not whether it may be Ido∣latry or no, and this needlesly, our Conscience not at all compelling us thereto, this is to dare to commit Ido∣latry; and the daring to commit Ido∣latry, and so to doe defiance to the
Majesty of God, what is it less then to be an Idolater? For according to his inward man and the main Mora∣lity of the action he is so: As he is morally a Murtherer that, doubting or not knowing but that it is his own Friend, by luck killed his intended Enemy: For the sense is, that rather then not be revenged of his Enemy, he will not stick to kill his dearest Friend. And finally, This Idolatry is the more discernible and aggravable in the Invocation of Saints or Angels, their Omnipercipiency being so extremely incredible, if not im∣possible or ridiculous, upon any ground, as appears by the foregoing Conclusion. 8. The sixteenth; That the ere∣cting of a symbolicall Presence with Incurvations thitherward, the conse∣crating of Temples and Altars, the making of Oblations, the burning of Incense, and the like, were declared by the supreme God, the God of Is∣rael, the manner of Worship due to
him, and therefore, without his Con∣cession, this Mode of Worship is not to be given to any else; as appears by Conclusion the ninth. The seventeenth; That the Pagans worshipping their Daemons, though not as the supreme God, by symboli∣call Presences, Temples, Altars, Sa∣crifices, and the like, become ipso fac∣to Idolaters. This is manifest from the ninth, the fifteenth, and the fore∣going Conclusion. The eighteenth; Though it were admitted that there is communicated to Saints and Angels at least a terre∣striall Omnipercipiency, and that we had the knowledge of this Commu∣nication, and so might speak to them in a civil way, though unseen; yet to invoke them in such Circumstan∣ces as at an Altar and in a Temple de∣dicated to them, or at their symbo∣licall presence, this were palpable Idolatry. The truth is manifest agian from the ninth and sixteenth Conclu∣sions. 9. The nineteenth; Incurvati∣on
in way of Religion towards any open or bare symbolicall Presence, be it what-ever Figure or Image, as to an Object, is flat Idolatry: in the Worship of Saints, Angels and Dae∣mons, double Idolatry; in the Wor∣ship of the true God, single. The reason hereof is resolved partly into the ninth and sixteenth Conclusions, and partly into the nature of Appli∣cation of Worship. For externall Worship is not any otherwise to be conceived to be apply'd to a symbo∣licall Presence, but by being directed towards it as towards an Object. Wherefore if religious Incurvation be directed towards any Figure or Image as to an Object, this Figure or Image necessarily receives this reli∣gious Incurvation, and partakes with God (if the Image be to him,) in it; which is manifest Idolatry. For the direction of our Intention here is but a Jesuiticall Juggle. And therefore I will set down for Conclusion The twentieth, That religious In∣curvation toward a bare symbolicall
Presence, wittingly and conscienci∣ously directed thither, though with a mental reserve, that they intend to use it merely as a Circumstance of Worship, is notwithstanding real I∣dolatry. The Reason is, because an exter∣nall Action toward such a thing as is look'd upon as receptive of such an Action, (and has frequently received it,) if it be thus or thus directed, will naturally conciliate the notions or respects of Action and Object be∣twixt these two, whether we intend it or no. And it is as ridiculous to pretend that their motions or actions toward or about such a symbolicall Presence are not directed to it or conversant about it as an Object, as it were for an Archer to contend that the Butt he shoots at is not the Scope or Object, but a Circumstance, of his Shooting; and he that embraces his Friend, that his Friend is not an Ob∣ject, but a Circumstance, of his Em∣bracing. Which are Conceits quite out of the rode of all Logick. See
the last Conclusion of the foregoing Chapter. 10. The twenty-first; That the Adoration of any Object which we, out of mistake, conceive to be the true God made visible by hypostatical union therewith, is manifest Idolatry. The Reason is, because Mistake does not excuse from Idolatry, by Conclu∣sion the fourth and the fifth. And in this Supposition we misse of one part of the Object, and the onely part that single is capable of Divine Ho∣nour. For God to be disunited from this adored Object is in this case all one as to be absent: For God is not considered nor intended in this act of Adoration but as united with this visible Object. Which respect of Uni∣on if it fail, that consideration or In∣tention also fails, and the Worship falls upon a mere Creature. In brief, If out of mistake I salute some lively Statue or dead body for such or such a living man, though this Man or his Soul were present, and saw and heard the Salutation, yet I
play the fool, and make my self ridi∣culous, and am conceived not to have saluted him I would: So if I doe A∣doration to any Object, suppose the Sun or some Magicall Statue, for the true Deity visible, whenas neither of them are so, I play the Idolater, and make my self impious, and have mis∣sed of the due Object of my Adora∣tion. 11. The twenty-second; That the Adoration of the Host upon the presumption that it is transubstantia∣ted into the living Body of Christ is rank Idolatry. This appears from the precedent Conclusion. To which you may adde, that the Romanists, ma∣king Transubstantiation the true ground of their Adoration of the Host, do themselves imply, that with∣out it were so their Adoration there∣of would be Idolatry. But that it is not so, and that their Ground is false, any body may be as well assured of as he can of any thing in the world: and no lesse assured that they are I∣dolaters according to their own Sup∣position
and Implication, as Costerus indeed does most emphatically and expresly acknowledge it, if they be mistaken in their Doctrine of Tran∣substantiation; as we shall hear anon. The twenty-third Conclusion; That Adoration given to the Host by Pro∣testants or any else that hold not Transubstantiation is manifest Idola∣try. The Reason is to be fetch'd from the nineteenth and twentieth Con∣clusions. For it is religious Venera∣tion towards a bare corporeall Sym∣bol of the Divine Presence, and, to make the Action more aggravable, towards a Symbol that has Imagery upon it, and that of the person that is pretended to be worshipped there∣by. What can be Idolatry if this be not? The twenty-fourth; That the In∣vocation of Saints and Angels, though attended with these considerations, that both that Excellency we sup∣pose in them, and which makes them capable of that Honour, is deemed finite, and also (be it as great as it
will) wholly derived to them from God, yet it cannot for all this be ex∣cused from grosse Idolatry. This is clear from the seventh, eighth, tenth, and so on till the sixteenth Conclusi∣on. For though this Excellency be supposed finite, yet if it be so great as that it is no-where to be found but in God, it is his Right onely to have such Honours as suppose it. And though it be deemed or conceived to be derived from God, yet if it be not, we give an uncommunicate Excel∣lency to the Creature, and rob God of his Right and Honour. And, last∣ly, though this Excellency were com∣municated, but yet the Communica∣tion of it unreveal'd to us, it were a treasonable Presumption against the Majesty of God, thus of our own head to divulge such things as may violate the peculiar Rights of his Godhead, and (for ought we know) fill the world with infinite bold ex∣amples of the grossest Idolatry: and therefore all our practices upon this Principle must be Idolatrous, and
Treasonable against the Divine Ma∣jesty. Consider well the fifteenth Conclusion. 12. The last Conclusion; That this pretended Consideration, that where Christ is corporeally present, Divine Worship is not done to his Humani∣ty, but to his Divinity, and that therefore, though the Bread should not prove transubstantiated, the Di∣vine Worship will still be done to the same Object as before, viz. to the Divinity, which is every-where, and therefore in the Bread; this will not excuse the Adoration of the Host from palpable Idolatry. For first, That part of the Pre∣tense that supposes Divine Worship in no sense due or to be done to Christ's Humanity is false. For it is no greater presumption to say, that in some sense Divine Worship is com∣municable to the Humanity of Christ, then, that the Divinity is communi∣cated thereto. In such sense then as the Divinity is communicated to the Humanity, which are one by hypo∣staticall
Union, may Divine Worship also be communicated to it; name∣ly, as an acknowledgement that the Divinity with all its adorable Attri∣butes is hypostatically, vitally and transplendently residing in this Hu∣manity of Christ. Which is a kinde of Divine Worship of Christ's Humani∣ty, and peculiar to him alone, and due to him, I mean, to his Humanity, though it be not God essentially, but onely hypostatically united with him that is; and does as naturally partake of Religious or Divine Worship in our Addresses to the Divinity, as the body of an eminently-vertuous, ho∣ly and wise man does of that great Reverence and civil Honour done to him for those Excellencies that are more immediately lodged in his Soul. Which Honour indistinctly passes upon the whole man: And as the ve∣ry bodily Presence of this vertuous person receives the civil Honour, so in an easie Analogy doth the Huma∣nity of Christ receive the Divine; but both as partial Objects of what
they do receive, and with significati∣on of the state of the whole case, viz. that they are united, the one with the Divinity, the other with so vertuous a Soul. Hence they both become due Objects of that entire externall Worship done towards them, to the one civil, to the other Divine. And therefore, in the second place, it is plain, that there is not one and the same due Object capable of Reli∣gious Worship in either Supposition, as well in that which supposes the Bread transubstantiated, as in that which supposes it not transubstantia∣ted. For in the former it is the true and living corporeall Presence of Christ, whose whole Suppositum is, as has been declared, capable of Divine Honour; but in the latter there is onely, at the most, but his symboli∣call Presence, whose Adoration is I∣dolatry, by the nineteenth, twentieth and twenty-first Conclusions. And lastly, The pretending that though the Bread be not transubstan∣tiated, yet the Divinity of Christ is
there, and so we do not misse of the due Object of our Worship; this is so laxe an Excuse, that it will plead for the warrantableness of the Laplan∣ders worshipping their Red cloth, or the Americans the Devil, let them but pretend they worship God in them. For God is also in that Red cloth and in the Devil in that Notion that he is said to be every-where. Nay, there is not any Object in which the ancient Pagans were mistaken, in taking the Divine Attributes to be lodged there, whether Sun, Heaven, or any other Creature, but by this Sophistry the worshipping thereof may be excused from Idolatry. For the Divine Attributes, as God him∣self, are every-where. To direct our Adoration toward a supernatural and unimitable Tran∣splendency of the Divine Presence, or to any visible corporeall nature that is hypostatically united with the Di∣vinity, most assuredly is not that sunk and sottish, that dull and dotardly sin of Idolatry. For, as touching this
latter, to what-ever the Divinity is hypostatically united, or (to avoid all cavill about terms) so specially and mysteriously communicated as it is to Christ, the Right of Divine Wor∣ship is proportionably communica∣ted therewith, as I have already in∣timated. And as for the former, That through which the Divine Transplendency appears is no more the Object of our Adoration, then the diaphanous Air is through which the visible Humanity of Christ ap∣pears when he is worshipped. But the Eucharistick Bread being neither hypostatically united with the Divinity, nor being the Medium through which any such supernatu∣ral Transplendency of the Divine Presence appears to us, Adoration directed toward it cannot fail of be∣ing palpable Idolatry. For the Eu∣charistick Bread will receive this A∣doration as the Object thereof, by Conclusion the nineteenth and twen∣tieth. But the Adoration or any Di∣vine Worship of an Object in which
the Divine Attributes do not perso∣nally reside, (in such a sense as is in∣timated in those words of S. John, And Joh. 1. 14. the Word was made flesh,) but onely locally, as I may so speak, this, ac∣cording to sound reason and the sense of the Christian Church, must be downright Idolatry. CHAP. III. That the Romanists worship the Host with the highest kinde of Worship, even that of Latria, according to the Injunction of the Council of Trent; and that it is most grosse Idolatry so to doe. 1. AND having thus clearly and di∣stinctly evinced and declared what is or ought to be held Idolatry amongst Christians; let us at length take more full notice of some Parti∣culars wherein, according to these Determinations, the Church of Rome will be manifestly found guilty of
Idolatry, and that according to the very Definitions of their own Coun∣cil of Trent. As first, in the Point of the Adoration of the Host, touching which the very words of the Council are, Latriae cultum, qui vero Deo de∣betur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in Concil. Trident. Sess. 3. cap. 5. Ca. 6. veneratione esse adhibendum: and a∣gain, Siquis dixerit, in sancto Eucha∣ristiae Sacramento Christum non esse cultu Latriae etiam externo adorandum, & soleiter circumgestandum po∣pulque proponendum publicè ut ado∣retur, Anathema sit. 2. This confident Injunction of grosse Idolatry, as it is certainly such, is built upon their confidence of the truth of their Doctrine of Transub∣stantiation. For the Chapter of the Adoration of the Host succeeds that of Transubstantiation, as a natural, or rather necessary, Inference there∣from. Nullus itaque dubitandi locus relinquitur, &c. That is to say, The Doctrine of Transubstantiation be∣ing established, there is no Scruple left touching the Adoration of the
Host, or giving Divine Worship to the Sacrament (or Christ, as it is there called,) when it is carried about, and exposed publickly in Prócessions to the view of the people. But the Doctrine of Transubstan∣tiation being false, it must needs fol∣low, that the giving of Divine Wor∣ship to the Host is as grosse a piece of Idolatry as ever was committed by any of the Heathens. For then their Divine Worship, even their Cultus Latriae, which is onely due to the onely-true God, is exhibited to a mere Creature, and that a very sorry one too; and therefore must be gross Idolatry, by the twenty-first and twenty-second Conclusions of the second Chapter. 3. But now, that their Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false, after we have proposed it in the very words of the Council, we shall evince by un∣deniable Demonstration. Per conse∣crationem Concil. Trident. Sess. 3. cap. 4. Panis & Vini conversionem fieri totius substantiae Panis in substan∣tiam Corporis Christi, & totius sub∣stantiae
Vini in substantiam Sanguinis ejus; quae conversio convenienter & propriè à Sancta Catholica Ecclesia Transubstantiatio est appellata. And a little before, cap. 3. Si quis negave∣rit cap. 3. can. 3. in venerabili Sacramento Euchari∣stiae sub unaquaque specie, & sub sin∣gulis cujusque speciei partibus, separa∣tione factâ, totum Christum contineri, Anathema sit. In which passages it is plainly affirmed, that not onely the Bread is turned into the whole Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Bloud, but that each of them are turned in∣to the whole Body of Christ, and every part of each, as often as division or separation is made, is also turned in∣to his whole Body. Which is such a contradictious Figment, that there is nothing so repugnant to the Facul∣ties of the humane Soul. 4. For thus the Body of Christ will be in God knows how many thou∣sand places at once, and how many thousand miles distant one from ano∣ther. Whenas Amphitruo rightly ex∣postulates with his Servant Sosia, and
rates him for a Mad-man or Impo∣stour, that he would go about to make him believe that he was at home, though but a little way off, while yet he was with him at that di∣stance from home. Quo id (ma∣lúm!) pacto potest fieri nunc utî tu hîc sis, & domi? And a little before, in the same Colloquie with his Servant, Nemo unquam homo vidit, saith he, nec potest fieri, tempore uno homo idem duo∣bus locis ut simul sit. Wherein Am∣phitruo speaks but according to the common sense and apprehension of all men, even of the meanest Idiots. 5. But now let us examine it ac∣cording to the Principles of the lear∣ned, and of all their Arts and Scien∣ces, Physicks, Metaphysicks, Mathema∣ticks and Logick. It is a Principle in Physicks, That that internall space that a Body occupies at one time is equal to the Body that occupies it. Now let us suppose one and the same body oc∣cupy two such internall places or spa∣ces at once; This Body is therefore equal to those two spaces, which are
double to one single space; where∣fore the body is double to that body in one single space, and therefore one and the same body double to it self. Which is an enormous Contradi∣ction. Again, in Metaphysicks; The Bo∣dy of Christ is acknowledged one, and that as much as any one body else in the world. Now the Metaphysicall Notion of one is, to be indivisum à se, (both quo ad partes and quo ad totum,) as well as divisum à quolibet alio. But the Body of Christ being both in Hea∣ven, and, without any continuance of that body, here upon Earth also, the whole body is divided from the whole body, and therefore is entire∣ly both unum and multa: which is a perfect Contradiction. 6. Thirdly, in Mathematicks; The Council saying that in the separati∣on of the parts of the Species, (that which bears the outward show of Bread or Wine,) that from this Di∣vision there is a parting of the whole, divided into so many entire Bodies
of Christ, the Body of Christ being always at the same time equal to it self, it follows, that a part of the Di∣vision is equal to the whole, against that common Notion in Euclide, That the Whole is bigger then the Part. And, lastly, in Logick it is a Max∣ime, That the Parts agree indeed with the Whole, but disagree one with another. But in the abovesaid Division of the Host or Sacrament the Parts do so well agree, that they are entirely the very same individuall thing. And whereas any Division, whether Logicall or Physicall, is the Division of some one into many; this is but the Division of one into one and itself, like him that for bre∣vity sake divided his Text into one Part. To all which you may adde, that, unlesse we will admit of two Sosia's and two Amphitruo's in that sense that the mirth is made with it in Plautus his Comedy, neither the Bread nor the Wine can be transubstantiated into the intire Body of Christ. For this
implies that the same thing is, and is not, at the same time. For that in∣dividual thing that can be, and is to be made of any thing, is not. Now the individual Body of Christ is to be made of the Wafer consecrated, for it is turned into his individual Body. But his individual Body was before this Consecration. Wherefore it was, and it was not, at the same time. Which is against that fundamental Principle in Logick and Metaphysicks, That both parts of a Contradiction cannot be true; or, That the same thing cannot both be, and not be, at once. Thus fully and intirely contradi∣ctious and repugnant to all Sense and Reason, to all indubitable Principles of all Art and Science, is this Fig∣ment of Transubstantiation; and therefore most certainly false. Reade the ten first Conclusions of the brief Discourse of the true Grounds of Faith, added to the Divine Dialogues. 7. And from Scripture it has not the least support. All is, Hoc est cor∣pus
meum, when Christ held the Bread in his hand, and after put part into his See Paul. Fag. upon Deut. 8. 10. own mouth, (as well as distributed it to his Disciples:) in doing where∣of he swallow'd his whole Body down his throat at once, according to the Doctrine of this Council, or at least might have done so, if he would. And so all the Body of Christ, Flesh, Bones, Mouth, Teeth, Hair, Head, Heels, Thighs, Arms, Shoulders, Belly, Back, and all, went through his Mouth into his Stomach; and thus all were in his Stomach, though all his Body intirely, his Stomach exce∣pted, was still without it. Which let any one judge whether it be more likely, then that this saying of Christ, This is my Body, is to be understood figuratively; the using the Verb sub∣stantive in this sense being not un∣usual in Scripture; as in, I am the Vine; The seven lean Kine are the John 15. 5. Gen. 41. 27. seven years of Famine; and the like: and more particularly, since our Sa∣viour, speaking elsewhere of eating his flesh and drinking his bloud, says
plainly, that the words he spake, they Joh. 6. 63. were spirit, and they were truth, that is to say, a spiritual or aenigmaticall truth, not carnally and literally to be understood. And for the trusting of the judge∣ment of the Roman Church herein that makes it self so sacrosanct & infallible, the Pride, Worldliness, Policy & mul∣tifarious Impostures of that Church, so often and so shamelesly repeated and practised, must needs make their Authority seem nothing in a Point that is so much for their own Inte∣rest, especially set against the unde∣niable Principles of common Sense and Reason, and of all the Arts and Sciences God has illuminated the Mind of man withall. Consider the twelfth Conclusion of the above∣named Treatise, together with the other ten before cited. Wherefore any one that is not a mere Bigott may be as assured that Transubstantiation is a mere Figment or enormous False∣hood, as of any thing else in the whole world.
8. From whence it will unavoida∣bly follow, and themselves cannot de∣ny it, that they are most grosse and palpable Idolaters, and consequently most barbarous Murtherers, in killing the innocent Servants of God for not submitting to the same Idolatries with themselves. Costerus the Jesuite speaks expresly to this Point, (and consonantly, I think, to the Suppo∣sitions of the Council;) viz. That if their Church be mistaken in the Do∣ctrine of Transubstantiation, they ipso facto stand guilty of such a piece of Idolatry as never was before seen or known of in the world. For the errours of those, saith he, were more tolerable who worship some Francise. Coster. Enchirid. Controvers. cap. 12. golden or silver Statue, or some Image of any other Materials, for their God, as the Heathen worshipped their Gods; or a red Cloth hung upon the top of a Spear, as is reported of the Laplan∣ders; or some live Animal, as of old the AEgyptians did; then of these that worship a bit of Bread, as hitherto the Christians have done all over the world
for so many hundred years, if the Do∣ctrine of Transubstantiation be not true. What can be a more full and ex∣presse acknowledgement of the gross Idolatry of the Church of Rome then this, if Transubstantiation prove an Errour? Then which notwithstan∣ding there is nothing in the world more certain to all the Faculties of a man; as is manifest out of what has been here said. And therefore the Romanists must be grosse Idola∣ters, from the second, third, fourth, seventh and ninth Conclusions of the first Chapter, and from the fourth, fifth, eighth, ninth, twenty-first, twen∣ty-second and twenty-fifth of the se∣cond Chapter. All these Conclusions will give evidence against them, that they are very notorious Idolaters. 9. And therefore this being so high and so palpable a strain of Idolatry in them touching the Eucharist, or the eating the Body and drinking the Bloud of Christ, wherein Christ is of∣fered by the Priest as an Oblation, and the People feed upon him as in a
Feast upon a Sacrifice, which is not done without Divine Adoration done to the Host, according to the precept of their Church; This does hugely confirm our sense of the eating of things offered unto Idols in the Epi∣stles to the Churches in Pergamus and in Thyatira, this worshipping of the Host being so expresly acknowledg∣ed by the Pope and his Clergy, and in that high sense of Cultus Latriae, which is due to God alone. And there∣fore it is very choicely and judicious∣ly perstringed by the Spirit of Pro∣phecy above any other Modes of their Idolatry, it being such a grosse and confessed Specimen thereof, and such as there is no Evasion for or Ex∣cuse. Hoc teneas vultus mutantem Protea odo.
CHAP. IV. The grosse Idolatry of the Romanists in the Invocation of the Saints, even according to the allowance of the Council of Trent, and the autho∣rized practice of that Church. 1. BUT we will fall also upon those Modes of Idolatry wherein the Church of Rome may seem less bold; though indeed this one, that is so grosse, is so often and so universally repeated every-where in the Roman Church, that by this alone, though we should take notice of nothing farther, Idolatry may seem quite to have overspred her like a noisome Leprosy. But, how-ever, we shall proceed; and first to their In∣vocation of Saints. Touching which the Council of Trent declares this Doctrine expresly: Sanctos utique unà cum Christo regnantes Orationes Concil. Trident. Sess. 9. suas pro hominibus offerre, bonúmque atque utile esse suppliciter eos invocare;
& ob beneficia impetranda à Deo per Filium ejus Jesum Christum, ad eo∣rum orationes, operam auxiliúmque confugere. Where Invocation of Saints is plainly allow'd and recommended: and besides their praying for us, or offering up our Prayers to God, it is plainly imply'd that there are other Aids and Succours they can afford, if they be supplicated, that is, invoked with most humble and prostrate De∣votion. And the pretending that this is all but the way of procuring those good things we want from God, the first Fountain, and that through his Son Christ; that makes the Saints the more exactly like the Pagans Dii me∣dioxumi, and the Daemons that nego∣tiated the affairs of men with the highest Deity. 2. I say then that, though they went no farther then thus, even this is down-right Idolatry which the Council of Trent thus openly owns, (and consequently the whole Church of Rome,) as appears from the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and eighth Con∣clusions
of the first Chapter; as also by the fifth, seventh, eighth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, four∣teenth, fifteenth and twenty-fourth of the second. But if we examine those Prayers that are put up to the Saints, their Invocation is still the more unexcusable. 3. Wherefore looking to the pub∣lick Practice of the Church of Rome, authorized by the Popes themselves, the Invocation of a Saint does not consist in a mere Ora pro nobis, as people are too forward to phansy that the state of the Question, (though the mere invoking of them to pray for us would be Idolatry, as is already proved:) but, which is insinuated in the Council it self, there are other more particular Aids and Succours that they implore of them, and some such as it is proper for none but God or Christ to give: Such as Protection from the Devil, Divine Graces, and the Joys of Paradise. But as the things they ask of the Saints are too big for them to be the Disposers of;
so the Compellations, of the Virgin Mary especially, are above the na∣ture of any Creature. Whence this Invocation of Saints will appear a most grosse and palpable Mode of I∣dolatry in that Church. As I shall make manifest out of the following Examples, taken out of such pieces of Devotion as are not mutter'd in the corners of their Closets, but are publickly read or sung with Stento∣rian Voices in their very Churches. I will onely give the Reader a tast of this kinde of their Idolatry; for it were infinite to produce all we might. 4. And first, to begin with the smal∣ler Saints, (as indeed they are all to be reckoned in comparison of the bles∣sed Virgin, to whom therefore they give that Worship which they call Hyperdulia, as they give Dulia to the rest of the Saints, and Latria to God alone, and to Christ as being God:) That Prayer to S. Cosmas and S. Dami∣an is plainly a Petition to them to keep us from all Diseases, as well of
Soul as of Body, that we may attain to the life of the Spirit, and live in Grace here, and be made partakers of Heaven hereafter. O Medici piissimi, Qui Meritis clarissimi In Coelis refulgetis, A peste, clade corporum Praeservetis, & operum, Moribus nè langueamus: Nec moriamur spiritu, Sed Animae ab obitu Velociter surgamus; Et vivamus in Gratia, Sacra Coeli palatia Donec regrediamur. 5. Such a piece of Devotion as this is that to S. Francis: Sancte Fran∣cisce, properè veni; Pater, accelera ad populum, qui premitur & teritur sub o∣ere, palea, luto, latere, & sepultos AE∣gyptio sub sabulo nos libera, carnis ex∣tincto vitio. Which is plainly a Prayer to this Saint that he would deliver us from the bondage and drudgery of Sin, which is onely in the power of our great Saviour
and Redeemer Christ for to doe. That Invocation of S. Andrew is also for that spiritual Grace of duly Bearing the Crosse here, that we may obtain Heaven afterwards. Jam nas foveto languidos, Curámque nostrî suscipe, Quò per Crucis victoriam Coeli petamus gratiam. But that to S. Nicolas is against the Assaults of the Devil: Ergò piè nos exaudi Assistentes tuae laudi, Nè subdamur Hostis sraudi, Nobis fer auxilia. Nos ab omni malo ducas, Vitâ rectâ nos conducas, Post hanc vitam nos inducas Ad aeterna gaudia. The like Devotion is done to S. Mar∣tin, S. Andrew, S. James, S. Bartholo∣mew, and others, though not in the same words. 6. When I have given an example or two of their Prayers put up to their She-Saints, I shall a little more copiously insist on those to the bles∣sed
Virgin. They beg of S. Agnes the greatest Grace that God is able to im∣part to the Soul of man, that is to say, to serve God in perfect Love. And this Gift this one poor single She-Saint is solicited to bestow on all men. Ave, Agnes gloriosa, Me in fide serves recta, Dulcis Virgo & dilecta, Te exoro precibus: Charitate da perfectâ Deum, per quem es electa, Colere piè omnibus. That Devotion put up to S. Brigitt is, that she would play the skilfull Pilot, and lead us through all the tem∣pests and hazzards of this World so safely, that at last, by her good Con∣duct, we may attain to everlasting Life. The Rhyme runs thus: O Bregitta, mater bona, Dulcis Ductrix & Matrona, Nobis fer suffragia; Naufragantes in hoc Mari Tuo ductu salutari Duc ad vitae bravia.
7. But that to S. Catharine is a piece of Devotion something of an higher strain, or rather more copi∣ous and expresse: But so great a Boon they beg of her as is in the power of none to give but God a∣lone. Ave, Virgo Dei digna, Christo prece me consigna, Audi Preces, praesta Votum; Cor in bono fac immotum. Confer mibi Cor contritum; Rege Visum & Auditum; Rege Gustum & Olfactum, Virgo sancta, rege Tactum. Ut in cunctis te regente, Vivam Deo purâ mente. Christum pro me interpella, Salva Mortis de procella. Superare fac me Mundum, Nè demergar in profundum. Nè me sinas naufragari Per Peccata in hoc Mari. Visita tu me infirmum, Et in bonis fac me firmum. Agonista Dei fortis, Praestò sis in hora mortis.
Decumbentem fove▪ leva, Et de morte solve saeva; Ut resurgam novus homo Civis in coelesti dome. 8. Now it is observable in this devo∣tionall Rhyme to S. Catharine, that whereas the Council of Trent advises men, ad Sanctorum orationes, opem auxiliumque confugere, that in these many. Verses there are not passing two or three that are an entreating of the Saint to pray for us, but to aid and succour us in such a way as the Story of the Saint and the Allusion to her Name most naturally leads the phancy of the Devotionist to think sutable for her: As if she were the giver of Courage, of Patience, and of Purity of minde, and was to com∣fort and support us in the very Ago∣nie of death by her presence, Which Petition is very frequent to other Saints also. So plain a thing is it, that this Invocation of the Saints is not a mere desiring of them to pray for us. But here the Devotionist commits the whole Regimen of both his Soul
and Body unto this Saint, to rule all his Faculties and Senses, and begs so high Vertues and Graces, as that none but God can supply us with them; as I intimated at first. Whence the In∣vocation upon that very account al∣so must appear most grosly Idola∣trous, as Grotius, who yet is no such foe to the Papists, does expresly ac∣knowledge and declare. CHAP. V. Forms of Invocation of the blessed Vir∣gin used by the Church of Rome e∣gregiously Idolatrous. 1. AND if they can contain themselves no better in their Devotions towards these lesser Saints, to whom their Church-men will al∣low onely the Worship they call Du∣lia, how wilde and extravagant will they shew themselves in their Ad∣dresses to the Virgin Marie, the Mo∣ther
of God, to whom they allow the Worship they call Hyperdulia? And that is the thing I will now take no∣tice of, though not according to the copiousnesse of the Subject; for it would even fill a Volume. But some Instances I will produce, and those such as are publick and authentick, as I intimated at first. In the Rosarie of the blessed Virgin she is saluted thus: Reparatrix & Salvatrix desperantis Animae, Irroratrix & largitrix spiritualis Gratiae, Quod requiro, quod suspiro, mea sa∣na Vulnera, Et da menti te poscenti Gratiarum munera; Ut sim castus, & modestus, dul∣cis, fortis, sobrius, Pius, rectus, circumspectus, simulta∣tis nescius, Eruditus, & munitus Divinis elo∣quiis, Constans, gravis, & süavis, benig∣nus, amabilis,
Corde prudens, ore studens veritatem dicere, Malum nolens, Deum volens pio sem∣per opere. A very excellent Prayer, if it had been directed to a due Object. But such things are asked as are in the power of none but of Jesus Christ himself, as he is God, to give. 2. For the Virgin Mary is here made no lesse then a Saviour and gi∣ver of all spiritual Graces; as she is also a giver of eternall Life in what follows in Prose. Peccatorum causo∣latrix, infirmorum curatrix, erranti∣um revocatrix, justorum confirmatrix, desolatorum spes & auxiliatrix, atque mea promptissima adjutrix, tibi, Do∣mina gloriosa, commendo bodie & quo∣tidie Animam meam; ut me in custo∣diam tuam commendatum ab omnibus malis & sraudibus Diaboli custodias, atque in hora mortis constanter mihi assistas, ac Animam ad aeterna gaudia perducas. Here is the commending of the Soul of the Devotionist into the Protection of the Virgin, that he
may be kept from all Evil, and from the Frauds of the Devil, and that she would assist at the hour of death to convey his Soul to the eternall Joys of Heaven. 3. Like that at the end of the Ro∣sarie; Cor meum illumina, fulgens Stel∣la Maris, Et ab hostis machina semper tuearis. O gloriosa Virgo Maria, ma∣ter Regis aeterni, Libera nos ab omni malo, & à poenis Inferni. Which is a Petition for Illumination of heart, for Security from the Devil and from eternall Death: which is onely the Privilege of the Son of God, the eternall Wisedome of the Father, to grant, who is said also to have the Keys Apoc. 1. 18. of Hell and of Death. 4. But the thing which is very ob∣servable, and which I mainly drive at, is this, That the Roman Church toward the latter end, before the Re∣formation broke out, had run so mad after the Patronage of the Virgin, that they had almost forgot the Son of God, and spent all their Devoti∣ons on her, whom they do at least
equallize to Christ, and so really make her, as well as some love to call her, the Daughter of God, in as high a sense as Christ is his Son: as will farther ap∣pear in the process of our Quotations. As in that Prayer to the blessed Vir∣gin that follows in Chemnitius: Te, mater illuminationis cordis mei, te, nu∣trix salutis meae mentis, te obsecrant quantum possunt cuncta praecordia mea. Exaudi, Domina, adesto propitia, adjuva potentissima, ut mundentur sordes men∣tis meae, ut illuminentur tenebrae meae. O gloriosa Domina, Porta vitae, Janua sa∣lutis, Via reconciliationis, Aditus recu∣perationis, obsecro te per salvatricem tuam foecunditatem, fac ut peccatorum meorum venia & vivendi gratia conce∣datur, & us{que} in finem hic servus tuus sub tua protectione custodiatur. Which Petition and Compellations, saving what belongs to the Sex, are most proper and natural to be used towards Christ. But the Virgin is here made our Saviour and Mediatour in the femi∣nine gender. 5. As she is again most expresly in
that Prayer to her in her Feast of Vi∣sitation: Veni, praecelsa Domina Maria; tu nos visita: AEgras mentes illumina Per sacrae vitae munera. Veni, Salvatrix seculi; Sordes au∣fer piaculi; In visitando populum Poe∣nae tollas periculum. Veni, Regina gentium; Dele flam∣mas reatuum; Dele quodcunque devi∣um; Da vitam innocentium. In which Invocation the Virgin Mary is plainly called the Saviour of the World, and pray'd unto for spiritual Illumination of the Soul, and for the purgation thereof from the filth both of Sin and Guilt: whereby she is plainly equallized to the Son of God, and made as it were a She-Christ, or Daughter of God. To this sense also are those Pray∣ers put up to her in her Feast of the Conception and of the Annunciati∣on: But it were infinite to pro∣duce all. Reade that Prayer in Chem∣nitius sung to her by the Council of
Constance: It is a perfect Imitation of the ancient Prayer of the Church to the Holy Ghost. CHAP. VI. More Forms of Invocation of the bles∣sed Virgin out of the Mary-Psalter, so called, extremely Idolatrous and Blasphemous. 1. WE will now onely note some passages in the Ma∣ry-Psalter, as it is called, wherein how much at that time the Church of Rome had thrust themselves under the Protection and Patronage of the Vir∣gin, and made her the Daughter of God, in stead of approving them∣selves faithfull touching the Rights and Prerogatives of the Son and his Worship, will be most notoriously evident. I will begin with the thir∣tieth Psalm: In te, Domina, speravi; non confundar in aeternum. In grati∣am tuam suscipe me; inclina ad me
aurem tuam, & in moerore meolaetifica me. Tu es fortitudo mea & refugium meum, consolatio mea & protectio mea: ad te clamavi cùm tribularetur cor meum, & exaudîsti de vertice collium aeternorum. In manus tuas, Domina, commendo spiritum meum, meam to∣tam vitam, diem ultimum. This is that whole Psalm to the Virgin: jusr in such a form and with such a repose of spirit as David prays in to God himself. 2. But we will content our selves with transcribing onely some select pieces. As Psalm 71. Resperge, Do∣mina, cor meum dulcedine tuâ. Fac me oblivisci miserias hujus vitae: Concu∣piscentias aeternas excita in anima mea, & de gaudio Paradiss inebria men∣tem meam. And again, Psalm 104. Salus sempiterna in manu tua est, Do∣mina; qui te dignè honoraverint sus∣cipient illam. Clementia tua non defi∣ciet à seculis aeternis, & misericordia tua à generatione in generationem. And Psalm 117. Dispositione tuâ mun∣dus perseverat, quem tu, Domina, cum
Deo fundâsti ab initio. Tuus totus ego sum, Domina; salvum me fac, quoniam desiderabiles sunt laudes tuae in tempore peregrinationis meae. No man can say more to, or expect more from, the eternall God himself. Whence they make the eternall Godhead as hypostatically united with the Virgin as with Christ him∣self, and carry themselves to her as if she were as properly the Daughter of God as he the Son. For else how could she be said to have everlasting Salva∣tion in her power, and to have laid the Foundations of the world from the beginning with the eternall Dei∣ty? 3. There are also other passages in this Psalter whereby they make the Virgin Mary a She-Christ, the Daughter of God, as he is the Son of God; and that is by the applying of the very Phrases spoken of him in the Scrip∣ture, unto her. As in Psalm 2. Venite ad eam omnes qui laboratis & tribu∣lati estis, & refrigerium & solatium dabit animabus vestris. And Psalm 81.
Terge foeditatem me am, Domina, quae semper rutilas puritate. Fons vitae, influe in os meum, ex quo viventes a∣quae profluunt & emanant. Omnes si∣tientes venite ad illam, & de fonte suo gratanter vos potabit. This is the gift of the Spirit, belonging onely to Christ to give to them that believe on him. And he is also said to be the John 7. 37, 38. Matth. 11. 28. ease and rest of all them that are weary and heavy laden. And again, Psalm 46. Omnes gen∣tes, plaudite manibus, psallite in jubilo Virgini gloriosae. Quoniam ipsa est por∣ta vitae, janua salutis, & via nostrae reconciliationis, spes poenitentium, so∣lamen lugentium, pax beata cordium atque salus. This is attributed to the Virgin, whenas it is Christ alone that is the way of Salvation and Reconci∣liation with God. 4. This is a foul and tedious Sub∣ject, and therefore to make an end at length, let us consider the Blasphemy of the 41. Psalm. Quemadmodum desi∣derat cervus ad fontes aquarum, ità ad amorem tuum anhelat anima mea, Virgo
sancta. Quia tu es genitrix vitae meae, & altrix reparationis carnis meae: Quia tu lactatrix Salvationis animae meae, initium & finis totius salutis meae. Here is that attributed to the Virgin which is said of Christ, that he is the Authour and Finisher of our Faith and Salvation. Nay, the Crea∣tion or Generation of our life and flesh, as well as our Salvation, is here ascribed to the Virgin. Which can have no sense or truth, unless she were , God-woman, in that sense that Christ is  or , God-man, and, as I said, were as properly the Daughter of God as he is the Son of God. 5. As she is expresly called in her Litanie, Filia Dei, the Daughter of God. Which, considering what high Titles they give her both in that Li∣tanie and elsewhere, as, Illuminatrix cordium, Fons misericordiae, Flumen sapientiae, Mater Dei, Regina coeli, Do∣mina mundi, Domina coeli & terrae, would be but a dwindling Title, (it belonging to all women that are be∣lievers,)
if there was not some such raised and sublime sense of it as I have intimated. And therefore their Addresses to her being as if she were, as I said, a She-Christ, and the Daughter of God in as high a sense at least as Christ is the Son of God, and she being called the Daughter of God in the Litania Mariae, in her Litanie or publick Supplication to her, it is plain, that in that Intervall of the Church where∣in this most conspicuously and notori∣ously happened, the Church of Rome, by reason also of the abundance of their Devotions then to the Virgin, might be said to be rather the Wor∣shippers of the Daughter of God then of the Son of God. And that there∣fore the Spirit of Prophecy foresee∣ing these times, whenas for such a space he called Rome Pergamus, this succeeding Scene coming on, he might very well change the title of Perga∣mus into that of Thyatira, with a de∣risorious Allusion to the occasion of the name of that City, from the
news of a Daughter being born to Nicanor. As if God Almighty had the like occasion of changing the name of Pergamus into Thyatira, from the Romanists turning the Virgin Ma∣ry into the Daughter of God. 6. For a stop to which Insolency Christ seems on purpose in the E∣pistle to the Church in Thyatira to resume to himself the Title of the Son Apoc. 2. 18. of God, notwithstanding that he is called the Son of man in the Vision in Apoc. 1. 13. the foregoing Chapter, out of which he ever draws a description of him∣self for an Entrance before each E∣pistle to the Churches. Which, in my judgement, is a thing specially well worth the marking; and that this making the Virgin Mary the Daughter of God in this Intervall, might alone be a sufficient occasion of changing the name of the Church of Rome from Pergamus to Thyatira. But other things that are apposite are also comprehended by a Prophe∣ticall Henopoeïa. 7. But this is an Overplus to our
present purpose, which was mainly to discover the grosse Idolatry of the Church of Rome in the Invocation of their Saints, and especially of the Vir∣gin Mary; and how both the Defini∣tion of the Council of Trent is Idola∣trous in this Point, and much more the Practice of the Church counte∣nanced by publick Authority. 8. For this Mary-Psalter it self, that has the most enormous and blasphe∣mous Forms of Idolatrous Invocati∣on of any, is not the private Contri∣vance of some single, obscure, super∣stitious Monk, but bears the Title of that Seraphick Doctour S. Bonaven∣ture, once Cardinal of Rome: Which is no small publick countenance thereto. And that nothing might be wanting to the grace and furtherance of so devotionall a piece of Idolatry, there was instituted a peculiar Socie∣ty, entitled the Fraternity of the Ma∣ny-Psalter, confirmed afterward by Sixtus the fourth, many Indulgences being added Anno 1470. And Inno∣cent the eighth added to these Indul∣gences
plenarie Remission à poena & culpa once in their life, and once in articulo mortis, to as many as entred into that Fraternity. 9. And in such case stands the Church of Rome at this very day, that is to say, she is still Thyatira, noto∣rious for her Idolatrous Worship of the Virgin Mary. But the Intervall of the true Church in Thyatira ceased upon the Reformation, when we cast off the Pope, or suffered Jezebel to delude the Servants of God no lon∣ger, nor to debauch them with Ido∣latrous Modes of Worship. But this is onely by the bye. In the mean time it is abundantly manifest, that the Invocation of Saints in the Roman Church is not onely the praying to them that they would pray to God for us, but the asking Aids of them, and such frequently as are in the power of none but of God, and of Christ as he is God, for to give; and therefore is still the grosser Ido∣latry.
CHAP. VII. That the Doctrine of the Council of Trent touching the Worshipping of Images is Idolatrous, and the Reason of the Doctrine weak and unsound. 1. AND thus much for their Ido∣latry in the Invocation of Saints. Let us now consider what the sense of the Council of Trent is touching the worshipping of Images. Imagines porrò Christi, Deiparae Vir∣ginis, & aliorum Sanctorum, in tem∣plis Concil. Trid. Sess. 9. praesertim, habendas & retinendas esse, eisque debitum honorem & reve∣rentiam impertiendam. Quoniam ho∣nos qui eis exhibetur refertur ad Proto∣typa, quae illae repraesentant; ità ut per Imagines quas osculamur, & coram quibus caput aperimus & procumbimus, Christum adoremus, & Sanctos, quo∣rum illae similitudinem gerunt, venere∣mur. Id quod Conciliorum, praeser∣tim verò secundae Nicaenae Synodi, Decre∣tis
contra Imaginum oppugnatores est sancitum. The meaning of which in brief is this, That the Images of Christ, of the blessed Virgin and other Saints, are to be had and retain'd in Chur∣ches, and that due honour and reve∣rence is to be done to them. For which are produced two Reasons. The first, In that the Honour that is done to the Images is referred to the Prototypes. The second, In that this Injunction is but what the second Nicene Council had of old decreed. 2. To which I answer, That thus much as the Council of Trent has de∣clared touching Images is plain and open Idolatry by the seventh Con∣clusion of the first Chapter, and ex∣presly against the Commandment of God, who forbids us to make any graven Image to bow down to or worship. But the Council of Trent says, Yes, ye may make graven I∣mages of the Saints, and set them up in their Temples, and give them their due Honour and Worship; nay, ye
ought to doe so; and instances in the very act of Bowing or Kneeling and prostrating our selves before them. This Definition of the Council is so palpably against the Commandment of God, that they are fain to leave the second Commandment out of the Decalogue, that the people may not discern how grosly they goe against the express Precepts of God in their so frequent practices of Idolatry. See the first, ninth and tenth Conclusions of the first Chapter; as also the third, fourth, fifth, eighteenth, nine∣teenth and twentieth of the second. 3. Nor can all their Tricks and Tergiversations and subtil Elusions serve their turn. For undoubtedly the Decalogue was writ to the easie capacity of the people, and there∣fore their hearts and consciences are the best Interpreters. Not the foolish Evasions and Subterfuges of perfidi∣ous Sophisters, who, to the betray∣ing of weak Souls to Idolatry and Damnation, and for the opening their Purses, would make them be∣lieve
that the Council of Trent's en∣joyning of Images in Churches, and the honouring them or worshipping them and bowing down before them, can consist with God's forbidding to make any graven Image, and to bow down to it and worship it. So that I say, the Council it self does appoint flat Idolatry to the Christian world to be practised. And it being so mon∣strous a thing, I pray you now let us consider the Reasons why they do so. 4. The first is, Because the Ho∣nour done to the Image is referr'd to the Prototype. But I answer, that this Reference is either in virtue of that Similitude the Images have with those persons they represent, which the words of the Council seem to imply, at least touching the Saints, quorum illae similitudinem gerunt; as when we praise a Picture of such or such a person, that it is a very come∣ly and lovely Picture, this praise naturally has a reference to the Per∣son whose Picture it is, in virtue of the similitude betwixt the Picture and the Party.
Or else this Reference, without any regard to personal Similitude, is from the Direction of the Intenti∣on of the Devotionist, that he intends upon the seeing and bowing, sup∣pose, to the Image of Christ, the bles∣sed Virgin, or any Saint, to take this occasion to worship Christ, the bles∣sed Virgin or the Saint thereby, the Image being but at large a symboli∣call Presence of them, it being not regarded whether the Symbol or I∣mage have any personal Similitude with the party it represents or no. 5. But now as for the former it is evident, that it is infinitely uncertain whether any Image of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or of this or that Saint, be like the carnal figure of these persons while they were alive upon earth, or no. Nay, it is in a manner certain to the contrary, none of these holy Souls being given to such follies as to have their Pictures drawn while they were alive. See my Part 1. Book 1. chap. 14. Mysterie of Iniquity. But being it is extremely impro∣bable
but an Image should be like some or other, that are either now alive, or have lived on the earth since the beginning of the world, ac∣cording to this first supposition, this Honour or religious Worship inten∣ded to Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any other Saint, will not onely misse them, but certainly fall on some o∣ther who, in stead of being Saints, haply are or have been very vile and wicked persons. 6. But besides, no Saints are wor∣shipped before they be in Heaven, nor indeed are properly Saints till then; and the Glories in their Pic∣tures that are about their Heads shew plainly that they intend to represent the Saints in their present condition of Glory in Heaven. Whence it is plain that the Images are nothing like them they are made for. For how can these Images of brasse or stone or wood, or any other mate∣rials, bear the Image of a separate Soul, which all the Saints are for the present? And what likenesse can
there be betwixt the glorious body of Christ Heavenly and spiritual, and an Image of any terrestriall matter? No more then betwixt a piece of Dirt or Soot and the Sun or bright Mor∣ning-star. And, which is most of all to be considered, what terrestriall Image can possibly represent him that is truly , God-man, and is not the Object of our Adoration but as he is this Divine Complexum as well of the Divinity as the Humanity? But what Statuarie can carve out the Ef∣figies of the Deity? So that the pre∣tense of this Reference of the Ho∣nour to the Prototype in this first sense thereof is very weak and vain. Nor, though there were this natural Reference, would it follow that we are to honour them this way, it being so plainly forbid, and there being better ways then this, viz. the commemorating and imitating their Vertues. 7. And for that second sense, it is indeed disinvolved of those former
Difficulties; but greater here occurr. For as touching our Saviour Christ, forasmuch as his pretended Image is but his symbolicall Presence, the doing of Divine Worship towards it is again plain Idolatry, as appears by that Example of the Israelites, who worshipped the golden Calf in refe∣rence to Jehovah, as appears plainly Exod. 32. 4, 5. in the Story. And for the blessed Virgin and the rest of the Saints, that Incurvation toward their symbolicall Presences is flat Idolatry, is mani∣fest from the eighth, ninth and tenth Conclusions of the first Chapter, and the fifth, nineteenth and twen∣tieth of the second of this Trea∣tise. And indeed thus to make the Ima∣ges of the Saints so called onely their symbolicall Presences, and so to worship them before these Images, is an attributing Divine Honour to them. For this naturally does de∣clare that they have at least a terre∣striall Omnipresency, which no in∣visible Power which we know has
but onely God. But to make a low Obeisance to an absent person God knows how many millions of miles off, is still a more forced and ridi∣culous thing. And therefore the sa∣luting of the Saints thus at their sym∣bolicall Presences or Images, and in the mean time acknowledging them to be in sede Beatorum, (which they do, and must do, unlesse they ex∣clude them Heaven,) is to acknow∣ledge one Soul to fill Heaven and Earth with its presence, which is that vast Privilege of God Almigh∣ty onely; and therefore this Worship to them is gross Idolatry, as suppo∣sing such a Perfection in them as is no-where but in God. Besides what was intimated before, that let this Reference be what it will, there being an Incurvation or Prostration before Images, whether they be mere Symbols or exact Re∣presentations, it must be ipso facto I∣dolatry by the seventh Conclusion of the first Chapter. From whence it follows, that the Saints are not ho∣noured
by this worshipping of their Images, but hideously reproched, it supposing them to be pleased and gra∣tify'd with that which is an abomi∣nation to the Lord, and a grofs trans∣gression of his express Commands. It implies, I say, that they are ambitious, vain-glorious and rebellious against God. And therefore they that the most vehemently oppose this way of honouring of them by Images and In∣vocation are the most true and faith∣full Honourers of them, they so zea∣lously vindicating them from the great Reproches these others cast upon them. So far are they from being guilty herein of any Rudenesse or Clownishnesse against the Saints of God.
CHAP. VIII. The Doctrine of the second Council of Nice touching the Worship of I∣mages, (to which the Council of Trent refers,) that it is grosly Idola∣trous also. 1. BUT now as for the other Reason of these Tridentine Fathers, whereby they would support their Determination in this Point, viz. the Authority of the second Council of Nice held about the year 780, (to omit, that long before this time the Church had become asymmetral, which yet is a very substantial Consi∣deration) I shall onely return this brief answer. The God of Israel, which is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has given this expresse com∣mand to his Church for ever, Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven I∣mage, thou shalt not bow down to it, nor worship it. But the second Council of Nice says, Thou mayst and shalt bow
down to the Image of Christ, of the blessed Virgin, and of the rest of the Saints. Now whether it be fit to be∣lieve and obey God, or men, judge ye: I might adde farther, men so silly and frivolous in the defense of their O∣pinion, so false and fabulous in the Allegation of their Authorities and the recitall of miraculous Stories, as Chemnitius has proved at large in his Examen of the Council of Trent. 2. I will give an Instance or two. No man lighteth a candle, and putteth it Mat. 5. 15. under a bushell; therefore the Images of the Saints are to be placed on the Altars, and Wax-candles lighted up before them, in due honour to them. Again, Psalm 16. But to the Saints that are on the Earth: But the Saints are in Heaven, say they, therefore their Ima∣ges ought to be on the Earth, &c. As for the Miracles done by Images, as their Speaking, the Healing of the sick, the Revenging of the wrong done to them, the Distilling of rorid drops of balsame to heal the wounded, sick or lame, their Recovering water into a
dry Well, and the like, it were too tedious to recite these Figments. But that of the Image of the Vir∣gin, to whom her Devotionist spake when he took leave of her, and was to take a long Journey, intreating her to look to her Candle, which he had lighted up for her, till his return, I cannot conceal. For the Story says, the same Candle was burning six months after, at the return of her De∣voto. An example of the most mira∣culous Prolonger that ever I met withall before in all my days. Such an Image of the Virgin would save poor Students a great deal in the ex∣pense of Candles, if the thing were but lawfull and feasible. 3. From these small hints a man may easily discover of what Autho∣rity this second Council of Nice ought to be, though they had not conclu∣ded so point-blank against the Word of God. But because that Clause in this Paragraph of the Council I have recited, Id quod Conciliorum, praeser∣tim verò secundae Nicaenae Synodi, &c.
may as well aim at the determination of what these Fathers mean by that debitus honor & reverentia which they declare to be due to the Images of Christ and the Saints, as confirm their own Conclusion by the Authority of that Nicene Council, we will take no∣tice also what a kinde of Honour and Reverence to Images the Nicene Council did declare for, and in short it is this; That they are to be worshipped and adored and to be honoured with Wax-candles, and by the smoaking of Incense or Perfumes, and the like. Which smells rankly enough in all conscience of Idolatry, as Grotius himself upon the Decalogue cannot but acknowledge. But this is not all. The Invocation of Saints, their Me∣diation and propitiating God for us for adoring their Images, healing of Diseases, and other Aids and Helps, besides Ora pro nobis, are manifestly involved in the Worship of these Images, according to that Nicene Council.
4. And truly, according to the Collections of Photius in Justellus, one would think that they meant the Cultus Latriae to the Image of Christ, they using the word , as if that Worship which was done to the Image passed through to Christ him∣self, which would not be sutable to him, if it were not Divine Worship. And where that word is not used, yet the sense makes hugely for it. As in this Paragraph touching the second Council of Nice according to Photius; . This seventh Synod, saith he, (that
is to say, the second of Nice) with joint suffrages hath established and ratify'd the worshipping of the Image of Christ, for the honour and reverence of him that is expressed by it; this Worship and Honour being done in such manner as when we approach the holy Symbols or Types of our most holy and Divine Worship: (for the word is .) For we do not stop at them, nor restrain our Worship and Devotion to them, nor are we divided toward heterogeneous and different Scopes or Objects; but by that Service and Worship of them that appears divided are we carried up devoutly and undividedly unto the one and indivisible Deity. Whereby it is plainly declared, that that very Wor∣ship which passes to the Deity is done towards the Image of Christ first or jointly, as being one and the same un∣divided Worship in truth and reality; as also that this Worship is that Wor∣ship which is called Latria, and is due to the highest God onely. 5. But that religious Worship is done to the Images of all the Saints
seems imply'd in what comes after∣wards, where it is said, that this second Council of Nice, (which Photius calls . That this Council has not one∣ly established and appointed that the Image of Christ should be honoured and worshipped, but the holy Images of the Virgin Mary and of all the Saints, accor∣ding to the excellency and venerability of their Prototypes. For even by these are we carried up into a certain uni∣tive and conjunctive vision, and thereby are vouchsafed that divine and super∣natural conjunction or contact with the highest of all desirables, that is, God himself. 6. Can any thing more inflame the Souls of men with that mysticall lust after Idols then the Doctrines of this
Nicene Synod? For as for the Image of Christ, the same Devotion and Worship is done to that which is done to God himself. And for the Images of the Virgin Mary and the rest of the Saints, though that Worship is allot∣ted them onely that is proportionable to their Prototypes, yet they are wor∣shipped such a way as that thereby, while we adhere to their Images or Statues, we are declared to be made fit for and to be vouchsafed a tactual Union with God himself. What Phil∣trum more effectual to raise up that Idolomania, that being mad and love∣sick after Images and Idols, then this? What can inrage their Affections more towards Idolatry, then to phan∣sie that while they worship Idols, and cling about dead Statues, that very in∣dividual act (and therefore it cannot be too intense) is that wherewith they are united to, and lie in the very Embraces of, the ever-living and true God? 7. The sense of the Synod is, ac∣cording to the representation of Pho∣tius,
that we worship and unite our selves with God as well in the wor∣shipping the Images of the Virgin and of other Saints, as in the worship∣ping of the Image of Christ. So that all is religious Worship, and conse∣quently grosse Idolatry, it being done to Stocks and Stones and such like senslesse Objects. For the drift of all Idolatry is, when it is questioned, and craftily defended, that through the Worship of Daemons and Images they reach at the Worship of, and the joyning their Devotion to, the first and highest Godhead. Wherefore the Council of Trent declaring with the second Council of Nice, that is to say, the blinde leading the blinde, they have both fallen into this dread∣full Pit of Idolatry.
CHAP. IX. The meaning of the Doctrine of the Coun∣cil of Trent touching the Worship of Images more determinately illu∣strated from the general Practice of the Roman Church and Suffrage of their Popes, whereby it is deprehen∣ded to be still more coursly and Pa∣ganically Idolatrous. 1. BUT it may be it may give more satisfaction to some, to know what is the Church of Rome's own sense of this Honor debitus she declares ought to be done to the Ima∣ges of Christ and the Saints. Putting off a man's Hat, and lying prostrate before them, the Council does not stick to instance in by the bye. But because the Council calls this neither Dulia, nor Hyperdulia, nor Latria, some will, it may be, be ready to shuffle it off with the interpretation of but a civil Complement to these Images or their Prototypes.
But since the Council of Trent has declared nothing farther, what can be a more certain Interpreter of their meaning then the continued Cu∣stome of their Church, and the sense of such Doctours as have been even sainted for their Eminency, as Tho∣mas Aquinas and Bonaventure, who both of them have declared that the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with the Worship of Latria, the same that Christ is worshipped with? 2. And Azorius the Jesuite affirms that it is the constant Opinion of the Theologers, (their own, he means, you may be sure,) that the Image is to be honoured and worshipped with the same Honour and Worship that he is whose Image it is. Which is not unlike that in the Council of Nice, , in the foregoing Citation. But that they are all capable of religious Worship, the Council of Trent it self (as well as Bellarmine and others, if not all the Theologers of that Church,) does plainly acknowledge, in that it deter∣mines
for their Invocation, which is competible to no invisible Power but the Godhead it self. Wherefore it is manifest that their Images are wor∣shipped with religious Worship also. 3. But we shall make still the clear∣er judgement thereof, if we consider the Consecration of these Images which the Council of Trent declares are to be worshipped. For the Con∣secration and Worshipping of them makes them perfectly as the Idol-Gods of the Heathen, as Octavius jea∣ringly speaks of the Heathen Gods, that is, their Idols, in Minucius Felix: Ecce funditur, fabricatur, scalpitur; non∣dum Deus est. Ecce plumbatur, constru∣itur, erigitur; nec adhuc Deus est. Ecce ornatur, consecratur, oratur; tunc po∣stremò Deus est. Behold it is clothed or adorned, it is consecrated and prayed unto; then at length it becomes a God. And if this will doe it, the Church of Rome's Images will prove as good Idol-Gods as any of them all. 4. Chemnitius recites some forms of Consecration: I will cull out one∣ly
those of the Images of the blessed Virgin and of S. John. That of the Virgin is this: Sanctify, O God, this Image of the blessed Virgin, that it may aid and keep safe thy faithfull people; that Thundrings and Lightnings, if they grow too terrible and dangerous, may be quickly expelled thereby; and that the Inundations of Rain, the Commotions of civil War, and Devastations by Pa∣gans, may be suppressed by the presence thereof. Which is most effectual to make all men come and hurcle under the protection of the Virgin's Image in such dangers, as under the Wings of the great Jehovah. This is hugely like the consecrated Telesms of the Pa∣gans. But let us hear the form of the Consecration of the Image of S. John also: Grant, O God, that all those that behold this Image with Reverence, and pray before it, may be heard in whatso∣ever Streights they are. Let this Image be the holy Expulsion of Devils, the con∣ciliating the presence and assistence of Angels, the protection of the faithfull;
and that the Intercession of this Saint may be very powerfull and effectuall in this place. What a mighty Charm is this to make the Souls of the feeble to hang about these Images as if their Presence were the Divine Protection it self? 5. These Chemnitius recites out of the Pontificall he perused. But the Rituale Romanum, published first by the command of Paulus Quintus, and again authorized by Pope Urban the eighth, will doe our businesse suffici∣ently, they being both since the Coun∣cil of Trent; and therefore by the Ex∣position of these Popes we may know what that debitus Honor is which the Tridentine Fathers mention as that which ought to be done to the Images of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any other Saint. For the Consecration of their Images runs thus: Grant, O God, that whosoever before this Image shall diligently and humbly upon his knees worship and honour thy onely-begotten Son, or the blessed Virgin, (according as the Image is that is
a-consecrating, or this glorious Apostle, or Martyr, or Confessor, or Virgin, that he may obtain by his or her Merits and Intercession Grace in this present life, and eternall Glory hereafter. So that the Virgin and other Saints are fellow-distributers of Grace and Glory with Christ himself to their Supplicants before their Images, and that upon their own Merits, and for this Service done to them in kneeling and pouring out their Prayers before their Statues or symbolicall Presen∣ces. What greater Blasphemy and Ido∣latry can be imagined? Ornatur, con∣secratur, oratur, tunc postremò fit Deus: that is to say, The Image is pray'd before, but the Daemon pray'd unto. There is no more in Paganism it self. And yet by the Pope's own Exposi∣tion this is the debitus Honor that is owing to the Images of the Saints. Consider the latter end of the last Conclusion of the first Chapter, and the forms of Invocation in the fourth and fifth, as also the eighteenth Con∣clusion of the second Chapter.
6. This is all plain and expresse ac∣cording to the Authority of their Church. And that, besides their Ad∣oration and Praying before thse I∣mages, (which, considering the Po∣stures of the Supplicant and the I∣mage, is as much praying to them as the Heathens will acknowledge done to theirs,) there are also Wax-can∣dles burning before them, and the Ob∣lation of Incense or perfuming them, Feasts likewise, Temples and Altars to the same Saints, and the carrying them in Procession, (which was the guize of ancient Paganism,) is so well known, that I need not quote any Authours. And that this is the practice of the Roman Church jointly and coherent∣ly with their Worship of Images, is manifest to all the world; and that therefore it is as arrant Idolatry as Paganism it self, and consequently real Idolatry by the third Conclusion of the first Chapter. And lastly, it is to be noted that the Council of Trent, naming the debitus Honor of Images, and not excepting these in known
practice then amongst them, must of all reason be conceived to mean these very Circumstances, as Paganicall as they are, of the Worshipping of them. 7. And the rather, because they do pretend to rectify some Miscarriages in the business of Images, as any un∣lawfull or dishonest Gain by them, all lascivious Dresses of the Images, all Drunkenness and disorderly Riot at their Feasts, and the like. Which methinks is done with as grave cauti∣on against Idolatry, as if they had decreed that all the Whores in Rome should forbear to goe in so garish ap∣parell, that they should be sure to wear clean linen, to be favourable to poor younger Brothers in the price of a night's Lodging, that they keep them∣selves wholsome and clean from the Pox, and the like; which were not the putting down, but the establishing, of Whores and Whoredome in the Papacy. And so are these Cautions touching Images. Exceptio firmat re∣gulam in non exceptis. Wherefore these Circumstances of Idolatry be∣ing
not named by the Tridentine Fa∣thers in their Exception, they are thereby ratify'd. Which yet are so like the old Pagan Idolatry, that Lu∣dovicus Vives, one of their own Church, could not abstain from pro∣fessing, non posse aliquid discrimen o∣stendi, nisi quòd nomina tantùm & ti∣tulos mutaverint; That onely the Names and Objects were changed, not the Modes, of the ancient Ido∣latry of the Heathen. 8. If the Council of Trent would have really and in good earnest recti∣fy'd their Church in the point of Ima∣ges, they should have followed the Example of that skilfull and famous Physician Dr. Butler, they should have imitated his Prescript touching the safe eating of a Pear, viz. That we should first pare it very carefully, and then be sure to cut out or scoup out all the Coar of it, and after that fill the hollow with Salt, and when this is done, cast it forthwith into the Ken∣nell. This is the safest way of dealing with those things that have any in∣trinsick
Poison or Danger in them. See those most wholesome and judici∣ous Homilies of our Church of En∣gland against the Perill of Idolatry. 9. And thus much shall serve for the setting out the Idolatry of the Church of Rome so far as it seems to be allow'd by the Church it self. But for those more grosse Extravagan∣cies, which, though they have con∣nived at, yet they would be loath to own upon publick Authority, I will neither weary my self nor my Rea∣der by meddling with them. Such as the making the Images to sweat, their Eyes to move, the making them to smile, or lour and look sad, to feel heavy or light, or the like. Which does necessarily tend to the engaging of the people to believe and have ∣fiance in the very Images themselves, as those Consecrations also imply which I cited out of Chemnitius, and which that Rhyme seems to acknow∣ledge which they say to that Face of Christ which they call the Veronica. Which Rhyme runs thus:
Nos perduc ad patriam, felix ô Fi∣gura, Ad videndam Faciem quae est Christi pura. Nos ab omni macula purga Vitio∣rum, Et tandem consortio junge Beato∣rum. And with such like blinde Devotion do they likewise speak to the Crosse: O Crux, spes unica, Hoc Passionis tempore Auge piis Justitiam, Reisque dona Veniam. This must sound very wildly and ex∣travagantly to any sensible ear. And yet the invoking any Saint before his Image for Aid and Succour, (the I∣mage bearing the name and represen∣tation of the Saint,) with Eyes and Hands lift up to it, is as arrant talk∣ing with a senslesse Stock or a Stone as this, and as gross a piece of See Ch. 1. Con∣clus. 10. Ido∣latry, though approved of by the Authority of the Roman Church. But I intended to break off before.
CHAP. X. Severall important Consectaries from this clear Discovery of the gross Ido∣latry of the Church of Rome; with an hearty and vehement Exhortation to all men, that have any serious re∣gard to their Salvation, to beware how they be drawn into the Commu∣nion of that Church. 1. THus have we abundantly de∣monstrated that the Church of Rome stands guilty of gross Idola∣try according to the Concessions and Definitions of their own Council of Trent; that is to say, though we charge them with no more then with what the Council it self doth own, touching the Adoration of the Host, the Invocation of Saints, and the Worshipping of Images. But we must not forget, in the mean time, that the Crime grows still more course and palpable looking upon the particular forms of their Invocation of the Saints,
and the Circumstances of their wor∣shipping their Images, and yet rati∣fy'd by the Popes, and corroborated by the uncontrolled practice of their whole Church: Which therefore must in all reason be the Interpreter of the minde of the Council. So that there is no evasion left for them, but that they are guilty of as gross and palpa∣ble Idolatry as ever was committed by the sons of men, no lesse grosse then Roman Paganism it self. 2. From whence, in the next place, it necessarily follows, that they are the most barbarous Murtherers of the Servants of God that ever appeared on the face of the Earth. For indeed if they had had Truth on their side so far, as that the things they required at the hands of the Dissenters had been lawfull, (though not at all neces∣sary;) yet considering the expresse voice of Scripture, which must be so exceeding effectual to raise consci∣encious Scruples, and indeed to fix a man in the contrary Opinions, be∣sides the irrefragable Votes of com∣mon
Sense and Reason, and the Prin∣ciples of all Arts and Sciences that can pretend any usefulnesse to Reli∣gion in any of its Theoreticall Dis∣quisitions; I say, when it is so easie from hence, if not necessary, for some men to be born into a contrary con∣sciencious Persuasion, it had undoubt∣edly even in this case been notorious Murther in the Pontifician Party, to have killed men for dissenting from the Doctrine and Practice of their Church. But now the Murtherers them∣selves being in so palpable an Errour, and requiring of the Dissenters to profess Blasphemies and commit gross Idolatries with them, which is open∣ly to rebell against God under pre∣tense of obeying Holy Church, as they love to be called, they murthering so many hundred thousands of them for this Fidelity to their Maker, and their indispensable Obedience to the Lord Jesus Christ, this is Murther of a double dye, and not to be parallel'd by all the barbarous Persecutions un∣der
the red Dragon, the Pagan Empe∣rours themselves. 3. From which two main Conside∣rations it follows in the third place, that, considering the fit and easie con∣gruity of the names of the Seven Churches and of the Events of the seven Intervalls (denoted by them) to the Prefigurations in the Visions, there can be no doubt but that by Ba∣laam mentioned in the Epistle to the Church in Pergamus, wherein Antipas, that is, the Opposers of the Pope, are murthered, the Papal Hierarchy is understood; as it is also by the Pro∣phetesse Jezebel in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, who was also a Murtheresse of the Prophets of God, and both of them expresly Patrons of Idolatry, as is manifest in the very Text. Nor is it at all wonderfull that Ba∣laam and Jezebel, the one a man, the other a woman, should signifie the same thing. For the false Prophet and the Whore of Babylon in the follow∣ing Visions of the Apocalypse signifie
both one and the same thing, viz. The Hierarchy of Rome, from the Pope to the rest of their Ecclesiastick Body. 4. And what I have said of the Vi∣sion of those Seven Churches, the same I say of all those Expositions of the thirteenth and seventeenth Chapters of the Apocalypse, and that of the little Horn in Daniel; namely, The words of the Prophecies being so naturally applicable to the Affairs of that Church, besides the demonstration of Synchronism, that the weight of those two foregoing Conclusions being ad∣ded thereto, there cannot be the least doubt or scruple left, but that those Interpretations are true; and that the Church of Rome is that Body of An∣tichrist, that Mother of Fornications and Abominations of the Earth, that is, of multifarious Modes of grosse Idolatries, or that scarlet Whore on the seven Hills, that is also drunk with the bloud of the Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus. 5. And that therefore, in the fourth place, in the Church of Rome the Poi∣son
exceeding the Antidote, there can be no reason that Salvation should be hoped for there. It is a sad and lamen∣table Truth, but being a Truth, and of such huge moment, it is by no means to be concealed. What God may doe in his more hidden ways of Providence, he alone knows. And therefore we cannot say that every Idolatrous Heathen must perish eter∣nally: But to speak no farther then we have commission, and according to the easy tenour of the Holy Scrip∣tures, we must pronounce, though with great sadnesse of heart, that we have no warrant therefrom to think or declare any of the Popish Religion, so long as they continue so, to be in the state of Salvation; and especially, since that voice of the Angel which sounded in the Intervall of Thyatira, saying expresly, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues; and the Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Be not deceived, neither Chap. 6. 9. Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor Adul∣terers,
&c. shall inherit the Kingdome of God. And those of the Church of Rome are bound to continue Idolaters as long as they live, or else to re∣nounce their Church; and therefore they are bound to be damned by ad∣hering to the Roman Church, unless they could live in it for ever. For he that dies in such a capital sin as Idola∣try without Repentance, nay, in a blinde, obstinate perseverance in it, how can he escape eternal Damna∣tion? 6. But though we had kept our selves to the Apocalypse, the thing is clear in that Book alone, ch. 22. ver. 14, 15. where all Idolaters are ex∣presly excluded from the Tree of Life: Blessed are they that doe his Com∣mandments, (and one of them, though expunged by Rome, is, Thou shalt not worship any graven Image,) that they may have right to the tree of life, &c. For without are dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murtherers, and Idolaters, and whoso loveth and maketh a Lie. All these are excluded
the Heavenly Jerusalem, and from eating the Tree of Life. Of which who eateth not is most assuredly de∣tain'd in eternall death. As it is writ∣ten in the foregoing Chapter, that Murtherers, and Whoremongers, and Apoc. 21. 8. Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second Death. What sentence can be more expresse then this? 7. But besides this Divine sentence against them, they are also , they are self-condemned, or at least give sentence against themselves, while they so freely pronounce that no Idolaters are to be saved; which they frequently doe, to save their own Church from the reproach of I∣dolatry. For, because some Prote∣stants have declared for the Possibili∣ty of Salvation in the Romish Church, they farther improve the favour to the quitting themselves of the guilt, from others hopefull presages that by an hearty implicit Repentance of all their sins (even of those that are the
proper Crimes of that Church,) they may, through God's mercy in Christ, be delivered from the punishment. This piece of Charity in some of our Party they turn to the fencing off all imputation of Idolatry from them∣selves, arguing thus; That no Idola∣ters can be saved: But those in the Romish Church may be saved, accor∣ding to those Protestants opinion: Therefore those in the Romish Church are no Idolaters. But most assuredly while they thus abuse the Charity of some, even by their own Proposition they must bring the sentence of Condemnation from all the rest upon their own heads, as they have herein given it against themselves, in saying that all Idolaters are damned, or that no Idolater can be saved. For it is demonstrated as clear as the Noon-light, in this pre∣sent Discourse, that the Church of Rome are Idolaters. 8. And in that of those of our Church that say they may be saved upon a sincere and hearty implicit Re∣pentance
of all their sins, (wherein they include the Idolatries and all o∣ther Miscarriages which they know not themselves guilty of, by reason of the blinde Mis-instructions of their Church,) no more is given them by this then thus, viz. That they are sa∣ved by disowning of and dismembring themselves from the Roman Church, as much as it is in their power so to doe, and by bitterly repenting them that they were ever of that Church as such, and by being so minded, that if they did know what a corrupt Church it is, they would forthwith separate from it. So that in effect those of the Roman Church that some of ours con∣ceit may be saved, are no otherwise saved, if at all, then by an implicit re∣nouncing Communion with it, which in Foro Divino must goe for an actual and formal Separation from it. In which Position if there were any Truth, it will reach the honest-min∣ded Pagans as well; but it can shelter neither, unless in such Circumstances, that they had not the opportunity to
learn the Truth, which since the Re∣formation, and especially this last Age, by the mercy of God, is abun∣dantly revealed to the world. So that all men, especially those that live in Protestant Nations or Kingdoms, are without all excuse; and therefore be∣come obnoxious to God's eternall wrath and Damnation, if they relin∣quish not that false Prophetesse Jeze∣bel, as she is called in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, who by her cor∣rupt Doctrines deceives the people, and inveigles them into gross Idola∣trous Practices. 9. Thus little is conceded by those of our Reformed Churches that speak most favourably of those in the Church of Rome. And yet this little must be retracted, unless we can make it out, that any of that Church are capable of sincere and unfeigned Re∣pentance while they are of it. For to repent as a Thief, because he is a∣fraid to be hanged, is not that saving Repentance. But to repent as a true Christian none can doe, unlesse he
has the Spirit of God, and be in the state of Regeneration. For true Repentance arises out of the detestation of the uglinesse of Sin it self, and out of the love to the pul∣chritude and amiablenesse of the Di∣vine Life and of true Vertue, which none can be touched with but those that are Regenerate or born of God. Now those holy and Divine Senti∣ments of the new Birth are so contra∣ry to the Frauds and Impostures, to the grosse Idolatries and bloudy Mur∣thers of the Church of Rome, which they from time to time have perpe∣trated upon the dear Servants of Christ, that it is impossible for any one that has this holy sense, but that he should incontinently fly from that Church with as much horrour and af∣frightment as any Countrey-man would from some evil Spectre, or at the approach of the Devil. 10. He that is born of God sinneth not, saith S. John: How then can they 1 John 5. 18. be so born whose very Religion is a Trade of sin, and that of the highest
nature, they ever and anon exercising grosse acts of Idolatry? besides that they are consenting (by giving up their belief and suffrage to the mur∣therous Conclusions of that Church) to all the barbarous and bloudy Per∣secutions of the Saints that either have happened or may happen in their own times, or ever shall happen, by that Church; they become, I say, guilty thereof by adjoyning them∣selves to this bloud-thirsty Body of men, with whom the Murther of those that will not commit Idolatry with them, and so rebell against God, is become an holy Papal Law and Statute. And therefore, I say, how can any man conceive that those men are born of God who are thus deeply defiled with Murtherous and Idolatrous Im∣purities, but rather that they are in a mere blinde carnal condition, and uncapable, while they are thus, of any true and sincere Repentance, and consequently of repenting of their daily Idolatries which they commit,
and ordinarily (to make all sure) in ipso articulo mortis, and therefore are out of all capacity of Salvation while they are members of that Church? As plainly appears both by this pre∣sent Reason fetch'd from the nature of Regeneration, as also from the judgement of the Romanists them∣selves touching the state of Idolaters after this life, and chiefly from the ex∣presse sentence of the Spirit of God in Scripture, as I intimated before. 11. And therefore, in the fifth and last place, it is exceeding manifest how stupid and regardless those Souls are of their own Salvation, that con∣tinue in the Communion of the Church of Rome; and how desperate∣ly wilde and extravagant they are who, never having been of it, but having had the advantage of better Principles, yet can finde in their hearts to be reconciled to it. This must be a sign of some great defect in Judgement, or else in their Sincerity, that they ever can be allured to a Re∣ligion that is so far removed from God and Heaven.
12. But this Church, as the woman in the Proverbs, is, I must confess, both very fair of speech and subtil of heart, and knows how to tamper with the simple ones right skilfully. She knows how to overcome all their carnal sen∣ses by her luxurious Enticements. She has deck'd her bed with coverings of Prov. 7. 16, 17. Tapestry, with carved works, with fine linens of AEgypt. She has perfumed her bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinna∣mon. She entertains her Paramours with the most delicious strains of Mu∣sick, and chants out the most sweet and pleasing Rhymes, to lull them secure in her lap: Such as those Ido∣latrous forms of the Invocation of the Virgin Marie, and of other Saints, which I have produced, of which she has a numerous store. Unto which I conceive the Prophet Isay to allude in that passage touching the City of Tyre, representing there mystically the relapsing Church of Rome: Take Isa. 23. 16. an harp, goe about the City, thou harlot that hast been forgotten, make sweet Melody, sing many Songs, that thou
mayst be remembred. See Synopsis Pro∣phetica, Book 2. ch. 16. 13. She gilds her self over also with the goodly and specious Titles of U∣nity, Antiquity, Universality, the power of working Miracles, of San∣ctity likewise, and of Infallibility; and boasts highly of her self, that she has the power of the Keys, and can give safe conduct to Heaven by Sacerdo∣tal Absolution; and, if need be, out of the Treasury of the Merits of Holy men of their Church, which she has the keeping and disposing of, can adde Oyl to the Lamps of the unprovi∣ded Virgins, and so piece out their Deficiency in the works of Righte∣ousnesse. Such fair speeches and fine glozing words she has to befool the judgements of the simple. 14. But as to the first, it is plain that that Unity that is by Force is no fruit of the Spirit, and therefore no Sign of the true Church: nor that which is from free Agreement, if it be not to good Ends. For Salomon describes an Agreement of Thieves
or Robbers, heartening one ano∣ther to spoil and bloudshed, and to enter so strict a society as to have but Prov. 1. 14. one purse. And therefore for a com∣pany of men, under the pretense of Spirituality, to agree in the inventing or upholding such Doctrines or Ficti∣ons as are most serviceable for a worldly design, and for the more ea∣sily riding and abusing the credulous and carnal-minded, thereby to be masters of their Persons and Wealth, this is no holy Unity, but an horrid and unrighteous Conspiracy against the deluded sons of Adam. 15. And for Antiquity and Univer∣sality, they are both plainly on the Protestants side, who make no Fun∣damentals of Faith but such as are manifestly contained in the Scripture; which is much more ancient, and more universally received, then any of those things upon whose account we separate from the Church of Rome, which are but the fruits of that Apostasie which, Synops. Prophet. lib. 2. c. 5. after four Hun∣dred years or thereabout, the Church
was to fall into according to Divine Prediction. So that we are as ancient and universal as the Apostolick Church it self, nor do we desire to appear to be the members of any Church that is not Apostolicall. And for their boast of Miracles, which are produced to ratifie their crafty Figments, they are but Fictions themselves framed by their Priests, or Delusions of the Devil, according as is foretold concerning the coming of Antichrist, that Man of Sin, (which the Pope and his Clergy most assu∣redly is,) namely, that his coming is after the working of Satan, with all 2 Thess. 2. 9. power, and signs, and lying wonders. So that they glory in their own shame, and boast themselves in the known Character of Antichrist, and would prove themselves to be Holy Church by pretending to the Privi∣leges of that Man of Sin, and by ap∣pealing to the palpable signs of the Assistence of the Devil. For from thence are all Miracles that are pro∣duced in favour of Practices that
are plainly repugnant to the Doctrines of the Holy Scriptures. 16. But now, as for their Sanctity, what an holy Church they are, any one may judge upon the reading of the Lives of their Popes and History of their Cardinals, and other Religious Orders of that Church of Rome; how rankly all things smell of Fraud and Imposture, of Pride and Covetous∣nesse, of Ostentation and Hypocrisy; what monstrous examples of Sensua∣lity their Holinesses themselves have ordinarily been, of Fornication and Adultery, of Incest and Sodomie; to say nothing of Simonie, and that infer∣nall sin of Necromancy. But for Mur∣ther and Idolatry, those horrid Crimes are not onely made familiar to them, but have passed into a Law with them, and are interwoven into the very Essence of their Religion. Judge then how holy that Church must be, whose Religion is the establishment of Idolatry and Murther. Of the latter of which Crimes the holy In∣quisition is an Instance with a witness.
And yet that Den of Murtherers, whose Office it is to kill men for not committing Idolatry, with the Church of Rome must needs bear the title of Holy. 17. And for their pretense of Infal∣libility, it is expresly predicted in the Apocalypse of S. John, as well as their laying claim to Miracles. For as the two-horned Beast is said to doe great Apoc. 13. 13. Wonders, and to bring fire from Hea∣ven, which two-horned Beast is the Pope and his Clergy; so Jezebel, which is the same Hierarchy, is called the Woman that gives to her self the title of a Prophetesse, whose Oracles Apoc. 2. 20. you know must be infallible. For she does not mean that she is a false Pro∣phetesse, though indeed and in truth she is so. And the Pope with his Clergy is judged to be so by the Spi∣rit of God, in that he is called the false Prophet, as well as the two-horn∣ed Apoc. 16. 13. Beast, in those Visions of S. John. And while he pretends himself to be a Prophet, even without Divine Revelation, one may plainly demon∣strate
that he is a false one from this one notorious. Instance of Transub∣stantiation; which is a Doctrine re∣pugnant to common Sense and Rea∣son, and all the Faculties of the Mind of man, and bears a contradiction to the most plain and indubitable Prin∣ciples of all Arts and Sciences, as I have proved above. So that we may be more sure that this is false, then that we feel our own bodies, or can tell our toes and fingers on our hands and feet. Judge then therefore whe∣ther is more likely, that the Church of Rome should be infallible, or Tran∣substantiation a mere Figment, espe∣cially it being so serviceable for their worldly Advantages, and they being taken tardy in so many Impostures and Deceits. So that Infallibility is a mere Boast. 18. And now for their Sacerdotal Absolution, that they can so safely dis∣misse men to Heaven or secure them from Hell thereby, this power of their Priest is such another vain Boast as that of Transubstantiation. Except
a man be born again, he cannot enter in∣to John 3. 3. the kingdome of God. And the form of words upon one's Death-bed can no more regenerate any one, then their Quinqueverbiall Charm can transubstantiate the Bread and Wine into the Body and Bloud of Christ. Where the form of Absolution has any effect, it must be on such persons as are already really regenerate and unfeignedly and sincerely penitent: which I have shewn to be incompe∣tible to any one so long and so far forth as he adheres to the Roman Church. So that in this case one AEthio∣pian does but wash another, which is labour spent in vain. There must be a change of Nature, or no externall Ceremonie nor words can doe any thing. For the form of Absolution is not a Charm, as I said, to change the nature of things, but onely a Ticket to passe Guards and Scouts, and to procure safe Conduct to the Heavenly Regions. But if by Regeneration and due Repentance one has not contracted an alliance and
affinity with the Saints and Angels, but is really still involved in the im∣pure and Hellish nature, the grim Of∣ficers of that dark Kingdome will most certainly challenge their own, and they will be sure to carry that Soul captive into a sutable place, let the flattering Priest have dismissed her hence with the fairest and most hope∣full circumstances he could. This is the most hideous, the most dangerous and the most perfidious Cheat of that Church of Rome that ever she could light on for the damning of poor cre∣dulous Souls, that thus superstitiously depend on the vain breath of their Priest for the security of their Salva∣tion. 19. And yet they are not content with this Device alone to lull men se∣cure in wickednesse, but besides their pretense of singing them out of Pur∣gatory by mercenary Masses, and pe∣cuniarie Redemptions by Pardons and Indulgences, and I know not what Trumperies, they allure men to come into their Church as having
that great Store and Treasury of the Merits of Holy men and women, their works of Supererogation, which they pretend to have the keeping and dis∣posing of. So that a poor Soul that is bankrupt of her self, and has no stock of Good works of her own, may suf∣ficiently be furnished for love or mo∣ney by the Merchants of this Store∣house. Which, besides that it is a blasphemous Derogation to the Me∣rits of Christ, is the grossest Falshood that ever was uttered. For these Holy men, as they are called, and Virgins, were, God wot, themselves most miserable Sinners, and died in most horrid Idolatries, as dying in the Practices of that Church; and he that comes to that Church does necessarily become a grosse I∣dolater himself; besides that he sets to his seal and makes himself accessory to all that innocent bloud, the bloud of those many hundred thousands of Martyrs for the Protestant Truth, which that Woman of bloud that sits on the Seven Hills has with the
most execrable Circumstances imagi∣nable so frequently murthered. So that a Soul otherwise passable of her self would be necessarily drown'd in this one foul Deluge of Guilt: so far is she from having any relief or ad∣vantage by reconciling her self to the Church of Rome. 20. Wherefore who-ever thou art that hast any sense or solicitude for thy future state and Salvation, be∣lieve not this Woman of subtil lips and a deceitfull heart, and give no credit to her Fictions and high Pre∣tensions; but the more she goes a∣bout to magnifie her self, do thou humble her the more, by shewing her her ugly hue in the glasse of the Holy Scriptures. If she boast that she is that holy Jerusalem, a City at Unity within it Psal. 122. 3. self, whenas the rest of the World are so full of Sects and Factions; tell her that she is that carnal Jerusalem, wherein Christ in his true Members hath been so barbarously persecuted and murthered, and that the Stones
of her buildings are no living stones, but held together by a mere iron vio∣lence, and the Cement of her walls tempered with the large effusion of innocent bloud; forasmuch as she is that two-horned Beast that gave life Apoc. 13. to the Image of the Beast, and caused him to decree that as many as would not obey his Idolatrous Edicts should be slain. This is the power of your Unity, which is not from the Spirit of God, but from the spirit of the Devil, who was a Murtherer from the beginning. But the Division of us Protestants is both a sign of our sincere search after the Truth, and a more strong Testimony against you of Rome, in that we being so divided amongst our selves, yet we so unani∣mously give sentence against you: your Miscarriages and Crimes being so exceeding grosse, that no free eye but must needs discern them. 21. If she vaunts of her Antiquity; give her enough of it, and tell her she derives her pedigree from that great Dragon, the old Serpent, that Apoc. 12. 9.
is called the Devil and Satan, that Murtherer of mankinde. Ye are of John 8. 44 your father the Devil, saith our Savi∣our, and the works of your father will ye doe. We grant that the Visage and Lineage of your Church reaches even beyond the times of the Apostles, the two-horned Beast reviving the I∣mage of the Pagan Beast, the great red Dragon, by bringing up again his old bloudy Persecutions and Ido∣latries. It suffices us, that our Church began with the Apostles. If she glories in her Universality, and in her large Territories; tell her, she is that GREAT City which spiri∣tually Apoc. 11. is called Sodom and AEgypt, where our Lord was crucified: And that she is Babylon the GREAT, the mother of Fornications and the Abo∣minations of the Earth. If she boast of the power of the Keys, and of Sacerdotal Absolution; tell her that he that is holy, he that is Apoc. 3. true, he that has the Key of David, he that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth, that is to
say, our Lord Jesus Christ, will never part with these Keys to his invete∣rate Enemy, that notorious Man of Sin, or Antichrist. If she spread before thee her good∣ly wares of mercenary Masses, of Pardons and Indulgences, of the mu∣tuatitious Good works of their pre∣tended Holy men and women; or the Wealth and externall Glories of their Church, and varieties of rich Pre∣ferments and Dignities; say unto her; that she is that City of Trade of whom it is written, that no man bui∣eth Ac. 18. her merchandise any more; and again, Alas, alas! that great City that was cloathed in fine linnen and purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls: For in one hour so great riches are come to nought. For her Merchants were the great men of the Earth, and by her Sorceries were all Nations de∣ceived. And in her was found the bloud of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth. 22. If she would amaze thee with
the stories of the wonderfull Miracles done by her; tell her that she is that two-horned Beast that doth great won∣ders, Apoc. 13. 13, 14. and that deceiveth them that dwell on the Earth by means of those Miracles which he had power to doe in the sight of the ten-horn'd Beast; or that false Prophet working Miracles, and de∣ceiving Apoc. 19. 20. them that receive the mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, who together with the Beast is to be ta∣ken, and cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone; or lastly, that Man of Sin and Son of perditi∣on, whose coming is after the working 2 Thess. 2. 9. of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. If she would inveagle thee with her pretenses of Infallibility; tell her that she is that Woman Jezebel, that Apoc. . 20. calleth her self a Prophetesse; or the Prophet Balaam, that insnared the Apoc. 2. 14. Israelites in Idolatry; and that very false Prophet that together with the Apoc. 19. 20. Beast is to be cast alive into the lake of burning brimstone. 23. And lastly, if she would gull
thee with that specious and much∣affected Title of Holy Church; tell her that the Spirit of Truth in the Di∣vine Oracles, let her commend her self as much as she pleases, gives no such Character of her, but quite con∣trary, declaring the See of Rome to be the Apoc. 2. 13. Seat of Satan, and their Church Apoc. 3. 9. his Synagogue; the Pope and his Clergy to be Apoc. 2. 13, 14. Balaam the son of Bozor, who loved the wages of unrighteousnesse, and who was the Murtherer of Christ's faithfull Mar∣tyr Antipas; to be that Apoc. 2. 20. Woman Jezebel who calls her self a Prophe∣tesse, but was indeed a Sorceresse, and a murtherer of the true Prophets of the Lord; to be also that Apoc. 19. 20. false Prophet, that is to be taken alive, and cast into the lake of fire and brimstone; to be that Apoc. 11. 8. great City that spiritually is called Sodom and AEgypt, where our Lord was crucified; to be Apoc. 13. 11. the Beast that has the horns of a Lamb, but the voice of the Dra∣gon, decreeing Idolatries and cruel Persecutions against God's people;
to be that Apoc. 17. Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth; the Woman on the seven Hills, that is drunk with the bloud of the Saints and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus; and, lastly, to be that 2 Thess. 2. Man of Sin, that notorious Antichrist, that oppo∣seth and exalteth himself above all that is called God or is worshipped, whose coming is with all deceivableness of unrighteousnesse in them that perish, because they receive not the love of the truth that they may be saved. For which cause God sends them strong de∣lusion, that they believe a lie. That they all might be damned that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in un∣righteousnesse. As well , as , as well all they that love the Romish Lies and Impostures, as all they that invent them, are here plainly declared in the state of Damnation. With this Nosegay of Rue and Wormwood antidote thy self against the Idolatrous infection of that strange
Woman's breath, whose lips yet drop as an hony-comb, and her mouth is Prov. 5. 3. more smooth then oyl. And be assured that that cannot be the true Holy Church wherein Salvation is to be ex∣pected, which the Spirit of God has marked with such unholy and hellish Characters, let her boast of her own Holiness as much as she will. 24. And if she return this Answer to thee, That this is not to argue, but to rail in phrases of Scripture; do thou make this short Reply, That whiles she accuses thee of railing a∣gainst sinfull and obnoxious men, she must take heed that she be not found guilty of blaspheming the holy Spirit of God. I confesse these Propheti∣call Passages apply'd to such persons as to whom they do not belong were an high and rude strain of Railing in∣deed, and quite out of the road of Christianity and common Humanity: But to call them Railings when they are apply'd to that very Party to whom they are really meant by that Spirit that dictated them, is indeed to
pretend to a sense of Civility towards men, but in the mean time to become a down-right Blasphemer against the Holy Ghost that dictated these Oracles. And that they are not mis-apply'd, any impartial man of but an ordinary patience and comprehension of wit may have all assurance desirable from that demonstration of the truth compriz'd in the eight last Chapters of the first Book of Synopsis Propheti∣ca; to say nothing of the present Ex∣position of the Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches in Asia. 25. Wherefore, O serious Soul, whoever thou art, be not comple∣mented out of the Truth and an ear∣nest pursuance of thine own Salvation from a vain sense of the Applauses or Reproaches of men, or from any con∣sideration what they may think of thee for attesting or standing to such Verities as are so unwelcome to ma∣ny ears, but of such huge importance to all to hear. For no lesse a Game is at stake in our choice of what Church we adhere to, that of Rome or the
Reformed, then the Possession of Hea∣ven and eternall Life. Wherefore stand stoutly upon thy guard, and whensoever thou art ac∣costed by the fair words and sugar'd speeches of that cunning Woman, (who will make semblance of great solicitude for thy future Happinesse, most passionately inviting thee to re∣turn into the bosome of Holy Church,) be sure to remember what an Holy Church she is according to Divine de∣scription; and that if thou assentest to her smooth Persuasions and crafty Importunities, thou dost ipso facto (pardon the vehemence of expres∣sion) adventure thy self into the jaws of Hell, and cast thy self into Matth. 23. 15. the arms of the Devil. God of his mercy give us all Grace to consider what has been spoken, that we may evermore escape these Snares of Death. Amen. THE END.
