M2824A 17163890 106084
Some Meditations on the History recorded in the first fourteen Chapters of Exodus, in Meeter. The Sons of Jacob dwelt in Egypt, where Ch. 1. v. 7. 9. Their great Encrease made the Egyptians fear. Two causes of it are assign'd; the one, They'l joyn with foes, the other, they'l be gone. 10. Stay now, let's think: And was there Cause indeed To have such thoughts of honest Jacobs seed? Would they betray the Land where they were bred, Gen. 12. 10 42, 1. Where their fore Fathers more then once were fed In their distress? No, no, this could not be, They had more holy ingenuity. Or would they leave their Native Country? leave A fruitful Goshen; and themselves bereave Of house and home, and knew not where to go? No, never think it; They'd more wit then so. But yet there's somewhat in't; perhaps 't may be Pharo'h was conscious to himself that he, Had wrong'd them in there liberties; and craves To keep them still, as profitable Slaves; Had stinted their Religion; (for that Nation Mayn't sacrifice th' Egyptians 'bomination.) Ch. 8. 20 Perhaps their thoughts his thoughts thus represent: Why shall wee Pharo'bs happiness resent? Why shall we fight? what matters it, since we Must still be Asses, who the loaders be? What? is our publique worship nothing worth? Gods Heav'nly Ordinances? Come; let's forth
Into the wilderness; 'tis better there With God, then with these black Egyptians here Joseph's forgot, and we requited thus: Ch. 1. 8. Ge. 47. 20. occulta revelans Gen. 41. 45 He got him all, who now takes all from us: Had Zaphnath paaneah this fore-known; He'ad ne're so strengthen'd him, to spoyle his own Conscience thus works, thus speaks, what no man dares That's no Courtflatterer; that no man spares. Come let us wisely deal with them (saith he) v. 10. Lest they the Landlords, and we Tenants be: Let's tax them roundly; make them serve with rigor; 14. Mortar and bricks lay on, lay on, with vigor. Their bitter lives shall sweeten mine, their charge My Treasuries and Treasures shall enlarge, 11. But 't was a policy, which God ne're blest; The more they grew, the more they were opprest. Yet hee'l not leave it so; hee'l next assail A private Plot, when publique force does fail. He calls the Midwives; bids them slay the Boyes, 15. Preserve the Girls; there's ruine without Noyse. The Females may be sav'd to serve our lust; The Males destroy, for them we dare not trust: This age let's well keep under, and their breed, This will prevent, that none shall them succeed. Come, this will do our business.—Ney pray stay; Gods promise sure will lay a rub ith' way: Abrahams line must lengthen'd be; his heirs Ps. 45. 16. Gen. 17. 5. 8. Must live to see the Land of Canaan theirs. The Midwives fearing God more then the King) Wave th'hangmans strangling office, and do bring v. 21. A flye excuse; Thereby his craft befool: Oh! 'tis not every one will make a Tool. Dirty employment's only fit for those That Dirty fellows are; Carrion for Crows. God made them Houses—such will better be, 21. Then rais'd by reward's of iniquity.
But, since these will uot do't; he next will try, Who'le give a cruel pledge of loyalty? He charges all his people, nor did doubt, 23. But Blood-Hounds might be found among the rout: As after Saul found none amongst his friends, 1 Sam. 22. 17, 18, 19. His Loyal Israelites, to work his ends, Yet had an Edomite (fit for the job) That slew Gods Priests, and overthrew their NOB. And now is Moses born; hid for a while; Ch. 2. 2. v. 3. 5. Expos'd; made Pharoh's Grandson by a wile. God counter-plots the plotter; makes him keep (Wolfe as he was) a Shepherd for his Sheep. 10. Let none as born in a bad time, repine, Whom God may for some special work design; It matters not what Age, or in what Nation; So that we serve him in our Generation. Act. 13. 36 11. Moses is grown a Man; goes forth to see His poor oppressed Brethrens miserie. Does an Heroick act of Justice; smites 12. 13. 14. 15. A sierce Egyptian; Chides two Israelites That were a wrangling, but had such reply, As made him first to fear, and then to fly. Thus oft, who others, would make friends gets foes; And he, that will part fighters, meets with blows. He dwelt with Revel; Zipporah he marries; 21. 22. 23. 24. Has Gershom by her, and long there he tarries, Till he was quite forgot, and Pharoh dead, Till God his covenant remembered. Let none think, God forgets us, or neglects; He lookes on Israel, and them respects. 25. Let none think Gods time long, for he best knows, When we are fit for mercies, they for woes. Now is he call'd from keeping Jethroes sheep, Ch. 3. 1. To feed Gods flock, and them to guide, and keep. As after, some Apostles from their trade, Eishers of Fish, Fishers of Men were made. Mat. 4 19
A noble change; but time rously, he shrinks; v. 11. Alas! it is too high for him, he thinks. Though in the Burning-Bush God had declar'd The burthen'd Israel should at last be spar'd. Ch. 3. 8. Yet could he not discern how it should be Effected by so mean a Man as he. Can I before the Mighty Pharo'h stand? 11. 12. 13. 8. VVhy not? (says God) Ile lead thee by the hand. And will the Israelites believe poor mee? Yea that they shall (sayes God) by what they 'I see. Jehovah shews him wonders, cures his fears; Ch. 4. 2. Strengthens his faith, that he might strengthen theirs See here, and imitate a humble soul: See here a faith, that does a fear controul. Yet fear Repullulates, hee'd fain be free: I am not fit: Send whom thou wilt for me. 13. Bold cowardise, that dares Gods precept break; Yet feares before a mortal Man to speak: Blind Sensuality, that counteth even A Glittering Gloworm to the light of Heaven. He pleads a sloath of speech, would not be sent, 10. Because (forsooth) he was not Eloquent: Whereas Court-Preechors must be Glib and free, Smooth-tongu'd, as I am not (O send not mee) Neither before, not since I spake with thee. 10. God condescends to weakness, and allow'th His brother Aaron to become his mouth. 14. And now are answer'd all his little pleas And now he must away without delaies. Delaies are dangerous, but yet take heed, We mind our hast no more then our good speed: He takes his leave; proceeding with his wife, 10. And Son uncircumcis'd; whereby his life Is brought in danger, 'twas because that he 24. To Israel a comforter would be
By Covenant, and yet neglects the Seal: Wilt thou (says God) my holy will reveal? Declare my name to others, that they fear it, And thou thy self forget me? I'le not bear it. Reformers must Reformed be: Who Preaches, Must first believe and practice what he teaches. Moses thus warn'd, his Son doth circumcise: 25. Draws blood from Gershom, tears from Zipporahs eyes. Oh Bloody husband (cryes she) Man of blood: 26. Carnal relations often hinder good. But it is better friends then God t' offend; Make friends our enemies, keep God our friend. Now on he goes; his brother Aaron meets him. 27. (Sent forth by God) and brotherly he greets him; And hand in hand they into Egypt go, 29. Congregate Israel, and to them show Gods wondrous works, and gracious words; which said, 30. 31. Israel believes, worships, and bows the head. Approaching mercies, when they do appear, Should be receiv'd with reverence, and fear. To Pharo'h fruitful Egypts mighty King, Ch. 5. 1. Next they address, and do this message bring; The God of Jacob saith, Let Israel go, And worship me; the Lord will have it so. The Lord? (sayes Pharo'h) stay; I do not know him; 2. Nor any Suit, or Service that I owe him; Who is the Lord? The Hebrews God (say they) 3. Hath us commanded; Let us go wee pray. A three-days Journey in the desart, there To Sacrisice, for otherwise we fear Hee'l angry be; if we neglect his word, Hee'l fall on us with Psstilence and Sword. Here's Gods command, and Israels request, Whereby in humble manner he is prest: Israel's in danger, if they do not do it; If Pharo'h lets them, then let him look to it.
If they a Sword, and Pestilence do fear, Then what may He, that is their hinderer. But hee's resolv'd. Go; get you gon (says he) Moses and Aaron; to your burthens; yee 4. Doe hinder business; you that are but two Doe stay the work that many hands might doe. 5. Then doth he call the Taskers; makes this Law; Require the Tale of Bricks, allow no Straw. 7. 8. 8. For they are Idle; hence arise their cries, Let us go worship God, go sacrifice. Wretched uncharitableness is thine, That thinkest all Religion but designe. Not to please God, onely our selves to please: Not inward comfort, but for outward ease. Lay on more work, and keep them at it hard: 9. Their vain religious canting ne're regard. 'Tis said; 'tis done; they find it to their grief. 10. 14. 15. And first they fly to Pharo'h for relief: Oh! Why are we thus hardly dealt withall? How can we work without materiall? 16. Thy people are in fault, and wee are beaten: Pharo'h (instead of helping them does threaten, 17. Sends them away with scorn: Go Idlers, go, (Youl'd serve the Lord? Serve Mee:) I'le have it so. Hear how the Harpy harps upon that word; You'r Idle; you would go and serve the Lord? A Pharoh's better farther off then nigh one; Sheep little get, by comming near the Lyon: This will not do; Moses and Aaron next 20. They met, but being grieviously perplext, They charge them as the cause of all their wo; 21. Had it not been for you, 't had not been so. You made's believe and put trust in the Lord, And this hath put in Pharo'hs hand a sword. Never was so severe th' Egyptian rod, 23. Till you perswaded us to worship God.
Moses to God complains, Why was I sent 22. To Israel, their sorrows to augment? Jehovah answers; I do hear their cryes; Ch. 6. 5. See their distresses; I do Sympathise: Do feel their loads. Moses again is sent With a new Covenant, new encouragement. 6. 7. 9. But Israel, that under griefs doth languish, Cannot hear God nor Moses for their anguish. O men of little faith that cannot see For tears, th' Almighties Al-sufficiency! O! men of feeble spirits, that for one Rough passage, doubt of their redemption! O little love you shew, that will depart From your Religion, for a little smart! Moses again is sent unto the King: 11. But now (alas) his faith is wavering; For, if (saith he) Israel will not hear 12. My message, Pharo'h will much less I fear.) But God doth charge him and his brother both, 13. And therefore in they go (though very loath.) Thus Stars of greatest magnitude (wee see) With fogs and clouds sometimes obscured bee. Thus strongest pillars of the Church, with weight Will bow a little, till God set them right. When into Pharohs presence they were come. He frowning sayes, what will these troublesome And ill bred fellows have? they know our will: They have our answer: Will you ne're be still? Where's your commission? mak't appear that you Are sent of God, and that your God is true. Shew us some tricks our High Priests can doe this By power from our Gods Isis, Osiris, Our Garden gods, Leekes, Onions; (O the dotage Nascutur in hortis numina. Ch. 7. 10. That shreds divinity to make their Pottage:) Then Aaron cast upon the ground his rod; 'Tis chang'd into a Serpent by his God.
The Jugling-wizzards Pharo'h calls, and they 11. Perform the like: But soon are made a prey, To Aarons Serpent, all their Magick fry. 12. Thus solid Reason swallows sophistry. Pharo'h is hardned: Tush! (saith he) for this 13. I care not, while it doth not bite, but hiss. Thus some men Comets to a jest do turn, Because they onely blaze, and doe not burn; Although (perhaps) sometimes they do foreshew Burning of Cities, and of Navies too. They shall not go; no? Sure it were as good, You did permit them: Next sign shall be Blood; 17. 18. 19. 21. Blood in the rivers, choaking all the fishes; Blood in your ponds, stone pots, and wooden dishes; Blood that shall putrifie the air, and stink; Blood in the waters, you shall lothe to drink. 'Tis done: Hell vicars ape this too: His will 22. Is obstinate; Pharo'h is Pharo'h still. This is the first plague, and indeed 'tis great, (Though greater follow) 'tis about their meat: Though some are of opinion, and will tell ye Fish is no meat, for you may fill your belly Therewith, and yet keep fasting daies. But I (Saving their reverence) think it drollery. Now enter Frogs filling their region, Ch. 8. 2. Water, and Land (a frog's Amphibion) Some swim in broths, some baked in their bread. 3. Some are cold crawlers in their naked bed. Some mufick croak to Pharo'h, and perchance, 4. Some in his Presence-Chamber skip and dance. 'Tis true his Priests had try'd what they could do, And (through permission) frogs they brought up too: But can they drive them down? Now let them prove it They can bring mischief but they can't remove it. Thus when, with Moses, they dare enter lists, Th' appear Enchanters but no Exorcists.
Moses must be entreated now to pray, This loathsome judgment may be ta'ne away. Wretches may need, and beg the prayers of those Sometimes, whom otherwhile they most oppose. And in design would their religion use, Whose Persons and Religion they abuse. Now that, in this, his turn might served be, He makes a promise; Israel shall go free: 9. 8. Tis the word of a King, set thoughts at rest, It shall be done: There's honour in this breast. Goodness and greatness, did they alwaies meet, Then peace and righteousness would alwaies greet; But 'tis the Scripture saith; men that are high Ps. 62. 9. In their degree (in th Abstarct) are a lie. Moses doth try his truth, prayes off the frogs: 12. 13. 15. They die on Land and onely live in bogs. Th' Egyptian respited, the Gypsie playd; Retracts his word, denyes what he had said. A complicated sin; he breaks his word, Not onely with the men, but with the Lord. The matter of his Cov'nant was sublime, Encreases guilt, and aggravates the crime. God is offended greatly, and now must The wonder-working Rod enliven dust. 16. Beggars and Cheats they were before, and now Lousy Egyptians all, from Throne to Plow. 17. 18. Then try the Artists (Chaplains of the House And all there Art can't feign a little Louse. Jannes and Jambres time is out, and all 2 Tim. 3. 8. Their store is spent, Jannes and Jambres fall; Those two Arch-flamins of his kingdom, those That Pharo'h hardu'd, Moses did oppose; Who now themselves confess it is Gods hand, 19. Isa. 26. 11. Lu. 23. 47 Act. 16 17 That thus afflicted had th' Egyptian land. Though sinners long persist, and will not see. Heaven will at last, by Hell, acknowledg'd bee.
But Pharo'hs lofty spirit will not hear'm; 19. 24. princeps muscarum 22. More judgments must come on, and he must bear'm. Then grievous swarmes of flies possess the air As if Belzebub had dominion there. Goshen is free.—Herein his power he shows To save his people when he plagues his foes. Men make distinctions with mischeivous heart: God seals for safety, keeps them still apart. Moses, O Moses help me (Pharo'h cryes) Go worship now your God, go sacrifice; 25. Only let it be in the Land, I pray, To going out, reason of state saies nay. He would compound a Gallimauphery; Part Gods command, and part state pollicy. Methinks I hear him say; What does possess Your minds to worship in a wilderness. 'Twere more august here: Loe (for your contents) Wee'l Temples lend Utinsels, Ornaments. You may your own God keep and conscience too Though amongst us, like us you seem to do. But 'twil not do; a little more he yeelds: 26. 28. Let it be wilderness, but near our fields; For if from us you do depart too far, We shall suspect, you doe intend a War. Once more (sayes Moses) to my God I'le cry; 29. But deal not any more deceitfully. And reason good he now should be suspected That former obligations had rejected. The fly is gon. Pharo'h is still the same 31. 32. What shall we say to him that knows no shame? Come Murrein slay the cattel; Spare no mans, Ch. 8. 3. 4. But let it be onely Egyptians. He that would Israels have at his dispose Keeps not his own, all covet and all lose. Pharo'h is hardned still: Come sprinkle ashes 7. 8. For botch and blayne; Ile whip with soarer lashes;
Let the Magicians feel them; try their skill 11. 12. 13. 14. To cure themselves. Pharo'h is hardned still. And still shall plagued be; ev'n on his heart: An inward searings worse then outward smart. Sad is his case, that's raised high alone 16. To shew Gods Justice and his Power upon. Now warn them of a Storm, and let us see, 18. 19. 20. If all Egyptians are as bad as he: No; Some believe and fear; follow direction, And for their goods and servants get protection. It was a Storme indeed; Fire, Thunder, Hail, 23. Extreams of heat and cold made hearts to fail; The Fire ran on the ground; as sad September Taught us to know; will teach us to remember. The fire dispers'd it self over the land, As if continued by a secret hand. Shall we hear more of Pharoh? Yes: His cry Is Moses, Aaron, help me or I dye: 27. Hee's now grown penitent (at least in shew) Oh I have sin'd (he speaks it falsely true) I and mine wicked are, your God is just: (It is enough) pray him in whom you trust: 28. Dreadful experiments do prove him stronger; I'le let you go, and ye shall stay no longer. Can any now make any doubt but he To all his promises will faithful be? A gentle mildeness does the man discover (As Snakes in Winter till the Storms be over) Though charity cannot but judg him right, Yet is he false in the All-seers sight. Well, well, (says Moses) let it be; I know Y'are naught, and to your ruine will be so: 29. 30. 33. 34. The Haile is gon: What say you? Shall we go: And serve our God? Answer directly: No. My promises were made in fear, I'me told By all my Casuists, such do not hold.
Then look for Locusts, such as have not been; Ch. 9, 4. 5. 6. 7. Such multitudes, the earth shall not be seen. This said, the Prophets leave him: But the threat So srights the Egyptians, that they him intreat To lay to heart, Egypt is plagued so, Onely for Israels sake; O let them go! Tis strange that Intercessors for them be Instruments of his rage, their misery. Well call them then (saies Pharoh) ask them who? 8. What is the Number of them that would goe? What Number? (is replyed) why even all; 9. Men, Women, Children, Cattel, great and small. Nay; that shall never be; I'le breed your Sons; 10. They are my Wards: Go; leave your little ones. Unreasonable men; I see it well, If I concede an inch, you'l crave an ell. You onely ask'd for men alone; 'twas given; Now you'l have all: Look to't: So for th they'r driven 11. The promise (sure) had choak'd the man, without Distinction and a lie, had help'd him out. Hee'l have them in a rope; 'T was his intent To draw them back in time convenient. He never me'nt to let them quite go free, But had an eye unto posterity. Now the strange locust come; Obey command; 14. 15. Devouer every green upon the land. God can make use of Frogs, Lice, Locusts, Elyes, Thus to subdue his proudest Enemies. Insects commanded by the Lord of hosts Are Concquering-Armies over him that boasts. Gods messengers are hastned in; 'tis true, 16. O I have Sin'd against your God, and you. Forgive I pray this once, pray God above, 17. That now he would this onely death remove. Here's a confession larger then before, And pardon asked: Sure now hee'l sin no more.
You'd think so; but no good fruit can he bring; Judicial hardness is a dreadful thing. The Locusts are blown off; but oh! alas! 19. 20. The King's no Changeling, he is where he was. O let not Mankind suffer by him; for Nature does Monsters (such as he) abhor: Nor Reason, nor Philanthropy allows, To think all men, like him, persidious. Palpable three days dark ness next must tell 21. Their final ruine, prodromous of Hell. But Goshen all this long and dreadful night, 23. Had, as a pledg of Heavenly glories, light: Pharo'h may now be hear (though not be seen) 24. Calling for Moses, and as if't had been A Credible he tells him, really He meant to let them go; (a real lie) Only your Cattel leave behind (says he) eave your Estates, your Persons shall go free. Let's hunt the Plot, was it his Avarice To sell them their Religion at a price? Or was't good Husbandry save what he could, Seeing he could not have all that he would? Or, was it Policy to draw them back, When Wilderness makes them begin to lack? For when this heat is o're (perhaps he thought) They will repent what they've so dearly bought. What e're it were; his Grant doth not suffice, They must have where withal to sacrifice. 25. ivil as well as Sacred Liberty, n all respects, their God will have them free. ea? say ye so? I thought (quoth Egypts King) That Heaven-born souls minded no earthly things; And that you did believe, God would supply All things, both for your life and piety. But since you'l have it so; to let you see My love, I'le not give leave, but banish ye:
See, that you see my face no more, Petitions 28. I'le have no more, nor tedious repetitions Of that same, Let my people go: be gone. Moses went out in Anger; which in one Chap. 11. 8. So meek was much; but yet behind him leaves A dreadful word; Pharoah, my God bereaves 5. Thee of thy First-born; all thy Sons shall dye, For my Sons sake; and a sad mid-night-cry Ch. 4. 24. 6. 8. Shall fill the Land, and (stout as is thy heart) Thou and thine shall entreat us to depart. Brave Souls make no unworthy compositions, Nor will admit of sordid Propositions; Moses hath conquer'd and must triumph now, 8. And proud Egyptians must before him bow. He now is great whom lately they did slight, 3. Both in the Courtiers and the Country's sight. Next he prepares his People to be gone, Appoints the Door-mark, bids them every one Ch. 12. 13. Ch. 11. 2. Of the Egyptians Gold and Jewels horrow; Who lend with joy, what they must lose with sorrow. Justice gives them to Jacob for a spoil, Ch. 12. 36. Ezek. 39. 10. Who had enrich'd themselves by Jacob's toil; Who in their eyes at last does favour find, Who had so long to them been so unkind. The blow is given whether at heart or head, 24. 30. But so it is in every house one dead. Pharoah awakes, arose, cryes out dismaid, Go Worship (not as I) but as ye said. 31. 32. Take all your flocks, do all your God requires; And last of all their Blessing he desires: As Esau did, Pharaoh doth, blessing crave, Which neither he, nor he, deserv'd to have: Had he done like the Mede-Darius, true. Ezr. 6. 10. He might have then expected it as due. But this doth shew, that wicked men distrest, Do value by God's people to be blest.
After seven precepts, let my people go, After three promises, it shall be so. Urg'd by the Egyptians, Israel hasts away; 33. 34. 38. Lap up their Dough unleav'ned as it lay. A mixed multitude follow anon; Prosperity will have its hangers on. And now their Dough unleavned Israel bakes; 39. Liberty sweetens mean unleav'ned Cakes. And now they've time to count the time they spent 40. In a strange Land, and what they underwent. Four hundred thirty years just was their stay, God brought them out the self same promis'd day. 41. 17. He led them forth not by the nearest cut, Through the Philistins (great opposers) but From Succoth march they on by God's direction, Ch 14. 2. Camp by the Sea-side, under God's Protection; Though Pharoah fancies them in great distress, 3. shut up, entangled in the Wilderness; And with six hundred Chariots doth pursue, 7. 9. 10. 11. 12. And chosen Horsemen, quickly comes in view: Israel fears, chides Moses, wish for Graves In Egypt, wish they'd liv'd and di'd there slaves. The last four Lines two Wonders make appear; That Pharoah should have hope, and Israel fear; Considering all the Wonders that had been; What th'one had felt, and what th'other had seen, These Wonders are no Wonders (you will find) Compar'd to Wonders, that are yet behind. But Moses bids them only stand, and see, 13. What should their safety, Egypts ruin be. The Angel that before them did appear, 19. Removes behind, the Pillar guards the rear: On that side darkness, and on this side light, 20. To Israel day, to the Egyptians night. The Sea divides on each hand; mounts on high, 21. Like VVater-walls, the sandy floor is dry: 22.
There march the Israelites within the hollow, And boldly do the proud Egyptians follow; 23. On whom the Lord an angry look does cast; Troubles the Host, and stayes their Overhast; 25. Till Israel is landed on the shore; The Sea returns, and Egypt is no more. 30. I'ved done the story; now sit down and muse, I've set before you good and evil; chuse. Now let the Sinner (if he durst) be bold, And Obstinate, who hears this story told, Now let the feeble, fearful, trembling saint From this day forward never more be faint. May this a Warning and an Arming be To Men Concern'd: O Lord I heg of thee, Cui Gloria in Excelsis & hominibus Pax. FINIS.
