M2969 31355499 110500
Mount AEtna's Flames. OR, The Sicilian Wonder, Really manifesting and plainly demonstrating, the prodigious effects of that dreadfull Spectacle of those furious Flames of Mount AEtna (an Island call'd Sicily in the King of Spain's dominions,) which in 40 days time destroyed the Habitations of twenty seven thousand persons, made two hills of one a thousand Paces high a peice, and hath allready much Indanger'd the famous City of Catania which the Inhabitants are forc't to desert for fear of ruine and destruction. Tune of, Troy Town. Mount AEtna CATANIA COme hear a wonder, people all Of an vnwonted proigy. A mountain that destroys up all Itn the Isle of Sicily, The flames are fierce, no stop can be Put so its fury as we see, Of all the wonders in the world of which the learned men do wre, Nor one like this, is to be found and brought to blew and publick sight Though strange, 'tis true I witness can 'tis known to many a learned man. In Sicily an Island fair under the rule of Spain's great King, A mountain is, without compare which doth to many sorrow bring, Sad is their fate  so nigh These sad conclusion for to try. Mount AEtna it is call'd by name a fearfull sight for so behold, Old Authers hath describ'd the same therefore to speak I may be hold The flames which do from thence proceed Makes many a melting heart to bld, Catania that City fair full fiftéen miles from this same place Is threatned with the flames so near the people in a wofull case, Least thy should fear, as neighbours do Which makes their heart, be full of woe. The fiery flames from thence procéed and cinders, they fly up amain, Whilst Sulphur mines the same doth féed and rolling stones, return again, A sad and dismall fight to sée For souls in that perpierity. From out the rock a river slides like burning streames unto the eye. And in a Channell strange it glides with flames that sée to seals the sky▪ Nothing is séen but smoak and fire Which makes the people all admire. Six hundred yards into the Sx this burning river drives by force, Still flaming most impetuously it kéeps it's dreadfull fiery course. No fish nor fowl, the same comes nigh Put presently fall down and dye. The Second Part to the same Tune. TWo ocks in one this same hath put each one a thousand paces high, And what dame nature wisely cut it doth deface most furiously: VVater and fire, good servants are But once being Masters, rags and tear. Do but observe and you shall find that former age ner did know, Nor e're did sée, time out of mind such flames from AEtna's mount to glow A dreadfull sight it is to see Huge stones like Atomes test should be. In forty dayes it did destroy the habitations and the home. Of twenty seven thousand m and left them all abroad to route. Castles and Towns it Swallows dwn A fearfull sight as are was shown. The bideans noise and ings loud which ecchoes from this dreadfull place Whilst flames ascend as in a loud poor people are in wofull safe, The a, and water do conspire To show themselves like flames of fire. The towns, this earthquake hath destroy'd was worth some Millions of good gold, People of all sorts it anoy'd by lodging in the fields so cold, Pass souls what pitty they deserve Which now for want olye and starve, Then he bt take a serious view of what do follow in this place, And all your greif it will renew to see what towns it down did race, And then give thanks to God on high That we such sorrows are not nigh. And last of all observe the form of this prodigious mountains birth. Which rocks and hills doth overturn and doth deface, our Mother earth. And then conclude this story's Which I have set forth to Poor . A List of the most considerable Towns and places ruin'd and destroyed by the dreadful Earth-quake and Eruptions. The Town of Nicoloss wholly Ruin'd by the Earthquakes. The Towns of Pad Tre Castagne the greatest part destroyed by the Earth∣quake. The Towns of La Guardia Malpasso Cayo Rotundo La Potielli Antonino Pietro Mostorbianto Montpiler La Annunciata Falicchi Plachi , Wholly Over∣flowed, Consu∣med and lost in this Flery Inun∣dation, with all the Lands be∣longing to them no Footsteps of them remaining. The Towns of Mascalncia St. Giovanni de Galr. Rusin'd in part. The large Gardens and Vineyards of Albanelli Overflown and Destroyed. The Famous Piece of Antiquity of Marcus Marcellus much Ruin'd. Madonna de Monserrat destroyed, besides many Castles, Fars, and other places: which have rn the same Fortune, whose Names we for bravity pass over, Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and J. Wright.
