M48 15277035 103355
Sports and Pastimes: OR, SPORT for the CITY, AND PASTIME for the COUNTRY; With a touch of Hocus Pocus, or Leger-demain. Fitted for the delight and recreation of Youth by I. M. Amat. Art. There's no Hobgoblins here for to affright ye, But innocence and mirth that will delight ye. Licensed Feb. the 4th. 1675/6. Roger L'estrange. LONDON, Printed by H. B. for Iohn Clark, at the Bible and Harp in West-Smithfield. 1676.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. IT is as customary now a dayes to have a Preface or Epistle to a Book as a Title, and least I should seem singular, or make my self a mark for squintey'd Critticks; I do tell the Reader, an Epistle to him is the same property that a Link is to a Man walking home late: He hopes by that and the help of good words, if he
be examined, to pass without danger; yet when he comes to the Gates, if he meet with a Proter thats an Ass, or with a Constable that loves to lay about him with his Staff of Authority more then he needs, then let the Party that stumbles into these pudles of Ignorance, be sure either to be struck down with Barbarism (which cutteth worse than a Brown-bill) or to be committed and have the severest censure laid upon him, let him be never so well and so civilly bound up in fair behaviour; though he be a man even printed in the best Complements of Curtesie, though he give never so many sweet Languages, yea, and have all the light of understanding to lead him home; yet these Spirits of the Night will hale him away, and cast him into darkness. In the self same scurvy manner does the world handle poor Books: When a Reader is intreated to be Curteous, he grows uncivil; if you sue to his Worship, and give him the stile of Candido Le∣ctori, then he's proud and cryes mew; If you write me rily, he calls you Bouffon; seriously, he swears such stuff can't be yours: But the best is, that as in Spain, you shall have Fellows for a
small piece of Silver take the Strapadoe, to en∣dure which torture another man could not be hi∣red with a great Sum; so they that have once or twice layn upon the rack of publick Censure, of all other Deaths do least fear that of the Press; of that wing I hold my self one, Envy has oft hit me, but can't hurt me; barking Curs seldom bite. The design of this was for the recrea∣tion of Youth, especially School-boys, whose wits are generally sharpned on such Whet∣stones; for number abundant more might have been added, but since there are many things of this nature, I have omitted for the major part those I knew were in Print before; of such you may be furnished out of English Parnassus, Hocus Pocus Iunior, &c. As these take, I shall furnish you with more and new varieties. Vale.
The Prologue. SOme Hocus Pocusses, no doubt, may quible, And say, what meant this Fellow thus to scrible, And thus our quality for to invade? If he runs on so, he will spoil our Trade: When it gets in the City 'mongst the Boyes, Then down goes all our Hocus Pocus toyes. Nay, if it comes amongst the Country Swains, They'l find our Cheats and kick us for our pains: The Egg-box, Melting-box, the Globes and Balls, Must have no entertainment in their Halls. Then let's go travail in some other Land, And there we'l shew our nimble slight of hand; Where this Book goes no room's for us to stand. In answer then I say, this is one bit, Until the whole Ioynt be drawn off the Spit: This will not in the least, hurt Sons of Art, But Bunglers only they must feel the smart, Avant therefore, begone, I bid Adew T'those that know nothing, yet pretend to shew.
SPORTS AND PASTIMES. To seem to turn Water into Wine. TAke four Beer bowl glasses, rub one in the inside with a piece of Allum; let the second have a drop of Vinegar in it, the third empty, and the fourth as much clean water in it as your mouth will contain: Have ready in your mouth a clean rag with ground Brasil tied close in it, that the bulk may be no bigger then a small Nut, which must lye betwixt your hind teeth and your cheek; then take of the Water out of the glass into your mouth, and return it into the glass that hath the drop of Vinegar in it, which will cause it to have the perfect colour of Sack; then turn it in your mouth again, and chew your bag of Brasil twixt your teeth, and spout the liquor into the
empty glass, and it will have the perfect colour and smell of Clarret; returning the Brazil into its former place, take the liquor into your mouth again, and presently spout it into the glass you rub'd with Allum, and it will have the perfect colour of Mulberry Wine; and so in many other wayes, which for brevity I omit. To seem to conveigh a Card out of a Nut. HAve a large Hasel-nut, prepared thus: Bore a small hole at the heel of the Nut, then pick out the Ker∣nel with a needle, fill the Nut with Ink, and stop the hole up artificially: Have this in your Pocket in readiness when you intend to be merry; then amongst other Tricks shewing, or when you are at Cards, say, I'll shew you such a Trick you never saw in your lives: Take a Card out of the Pack and pill off the inside; then shewing them the Card that stand by, say, Take notice what it is, I will roul this up, and by the Art of Leger de Mane, conveigh it into a Nut, then cunningly disposing of the roul'd up Card; pull the Nut out of your Pocket, and say, Crack that Nut and then you shall find it: Which being done the Ink runs in his mouth, and by his sputtering causes laughter to the Beholders. How to catch Mag-pyes or Crows. TAke Oculus India Berries a penny worth (you may have them at any Apothecaries) dry them and beat them to powder, then take an ounce of Flower and Brandy, and make it into Batter, as thick as the good
Wives makes their Puddings; then take the guts of a Duck, Hen, or any Poultrey, empty them and put in this Batter, type up the ends, and fling them into the Trees that Mag-pyes or Croes use; and when they come to feed on them (as that they will soon do) you shall have sport enough, for they will not be able to fly, but tumble on the ground like a drunken Man, that you may take them with your hands. How to catch Eels. TAke a Calf or Sheeps liver with the blood of it, then shred it small and mix it with the blood, get a small Bottle of the newest Hay you can, and put the Li∣ver into the Hay, the major part in the middle of it, then bind up the Hay fast with Hay-bands, and put it into a place where you know there is Eels, sink it under water with stones; put it into the water in the Evening, and rise early in the Morning, going saftly to the place, when on a sudden pull up your Hay by the rope, and you shall have your desire. I have taken sixty-four Eels at once by this means, notwithstanding many dropt into the water. To make sport with an Egg. IF you are drinking in Company, or otherwise that you are disposed to make sport, have ready a Penny-worth of Quicksilver in a quill, sealed fast at both ends with good hard Wax, then cause an Egg to be hard boyled or roasted, and take a small bit of the shell of the nar∣row
end, then thrust in your quill of Quicksilver, and lay the Egg on the ground, you shall have sport enough, for it will never leave tumbling about so long as there is any hear in it. Probatum est. To fetch a Shilling out of a Handkerchief. TO do this you must have a Ring of wyer, such a one as you generally hang your Keys upon, but less in the rotundity, then a take a handkerchief and put there∣in a Shilling; twisting the handkerchief round, the form of the Shilling will appear: Then say, that you may be certain it is here, I'll shew it you once more; and taking out the Shilling convey the round wyer into the hand∣kerchief, which being twisted will seem to be your Shil∣ling: the better to deceive, you may rap the edge of wyer wth your small stick, then open the wyer and force one end through, and you may easily wyer-draw it out; then produce the Shilling which you have in the palm of your hand, saying, look you here is the Shilling, you held the handkerchief very fast: In the mean time ask, Who gave me this Shilling? He who you had it off, will soon answer, I. Then thank him for it, saying, It's more then I had gave me this two dayes. To cause the Beer you drink seem to be rung out the handle of a Knife. TO do this you must have a small piece of Spunge with drink put in it privately, then unseen place this be∣hind your right ear; but let not the Spunge be to big nor to
full of liquor, least you be discovered; then taking a Knife stick it with the handle upward in a Table or Stool, (but observe when you go about these Sports, to place your Company before you) then bid them look, saying there you see is nothing of wet, either on the handle or upon the Table; so stretching your empty hand, and ta∣king up the knife by the handle, bend your hand towards your ear darting the point; saying, Now some Body cross my arm; and speaking some powerful words, as Iubio sceleriter heigh berry bisco, then have you a fair opportu∣nity to take the Spunge into your hand from behind your ear, and stretching forth your hand squeeze it gently, and after a little harder, which makes it run the faster to the amazement of the Company; saying, thus could I do till I drowned you all; so sprinkle a little in their faces, which will cause them to shut their eyes whilest you con∣vey away the Spunge. To deceive one with three seeming pieces of Tobacco pipe. ROul up a piece of white Paper as hard as are your Lottery Tickets, till it is as thick as a Tobacco pipe, then fasten the outward edge with a little startch or past, having so done cut the ends even; have this in your hand, break two pieces in the sight of the Company, snake the three together in your Hat, then cast them upon the Table; saying, How many pieces of Pipe is there under the Hat? Every one will be apt to say, three; lift up the Hat the better to urge them, clapping it down presently: Say, Now I'll hold you a wager, there is but two pieces of Pipe under the Hat; which when laid, take up the Hat,
and their folly will soon be discerned, by your cutting the Paper with your Knife. To win a Wager at Running. LAy your wager thus, he that comes last of you two to the Gate, Wall, or Stile you run to, shall lose the wager; which will soon be granted giving him odds enough, as such a distance before you, then start and run as fast as you can, letting him you run with be before you, when you see him at the mark, run you a clear contrary way; and when you come to your Company demand your wager, which will soon be granted, when they discover your lay, that not he which came first to the place should win, but he which was last should lose; you came not at it at all, then he must needs confess his folly in the loss of the wager. To know what is Cross or Pile by the ringing. THis must be done by Confederacy as thus, when the Money is filipt up and you blind-folded, then your Confederate that stands by, if it be Cross says, What is't? If it be Pile, What is it? And your deceit is not taken notice of. To wrap a wag on the knuckles. TAke a Knife in your right hand by the point, then setting the point to a vein in the wrist of your left hand; saying to one that stands by you, Pray put a piece
of Tobacco Pipe betwixt my fingers, and you shall see how the blood will spring out of this vein; which he will be ready to do to see the conclusion, then give him a smart blow with the handle of the Knife, when he is paing the Pipe betwixt your fingers; telling him your work is done. To make one laugh till the tears stand in his eyes. TAke three pieces of Tobacco-pipes, and put them be∣twixt your four fingers, one betwixt each finger, then drop them one by one; saying, Now let me see which of you all can do this trick: The verriest Ape will pre∣sently be imitating; then pretending to place them even, gripe his fingers fast together, and you shall have your desire; which will cause no small laughter to the Com∣pany. To fox Fish. TAke Oculus India Berries, two Penny-worth (you may have them at the Apothecaries) dry them and beat them to Powder, then take an ounce of Wheat flower, the white of an Egg, and as much Aqua vita (or if you cannot have it, Brandy may do) as will make it into a Paste; then throw it in small Pellets into a Pond or standing Wa∣ter, where there is fish, and in a quarter of an hour you shall have sport enough; they will float above water in such manner, as you may take them up with your hands, such as Roach, Tench, Dace, Carp, &c. Some say this poysons them, and are afraid to eat Fish so taken; but
it's contrary, for they will come to themselves in a little time, if the water be not too much mudded; this may be used in Ponds that have schrubs or sedges, where the Fish cannot well be taken any other way. But I caution all, that they practice not this without licence from the Owners, least the Whipping-post or Pillory be their reward. A Philosophical Experiment. TAke a Beer bowl glass put it half full of water, then take a Basen or wooden Bowl, and put the water out of the glass into it, set fire of a piece of white Paper, throw it into the water that is in the Bowl or Basen, and suddenly while the flame is in cover it with the glass, you shall see the water suckt out of the Basen, and hang in the glass. To cure the Tooth-ach. THis must be done by Confederacy, I have won ma∣ny a Pinte of Wine by it; you must pretend you are grievously troubled with the Tooth-ach, making wry faces and pretending a great deal of pain. Then sayes your Confederate, I will undertake to cure you in a quarter of an hour, it is plain but a very safe and easie way; he then takes a thimble full of salt, puts it in a piece of white Pa∣per, twists it up; Then sayes, Hold this to your cheek on that fide your pain lyes, and it will soon be gone. You shaking your head at him, ask him, If he can find none to sport with, but you that are not disposed? He
then presses you to try his Receipt; which with seeming unwillingness take, and hold it to the cheek a small time. Then he will ask you, What do you feel any ease? You spitting much, say, Yes, truely I find it much abated. Then he will say to perfect it, Lay down your Paper upon the Table, step into the yard and wash your mouth with two Spoonfuls of cold water. Now sayes he to the Com∣pany (in your absence) You may see what conceit does, I'll take and throw out the Salt (which he does in their sight) and puts the like quantity of Ashes in the Paper, laying it twisted as before in its place; then coming in take up the Paper again, holding it as you did before: The Company will be laughing and fleering at (as they think) your ignorance; then privately conveigh the Ashes away with the Paper, and another Paper of Salt like the former (as you must have in readiness before) hold to your cheek. Your Confederate asking you, Well what think you now? Why indeed much alteration, would one have thought that so simple a thing as a little Salt should work so great an alteration? Then will one or th'other in the Company say, Why do you think you have Salt in the Paper? you say, Yes, I saw it took out the Box. He layes you a wager presently that it is not Salt; when by opening the Paper his folly is discovered, with no small sport to the Company. To bring two pieces together. TAke a piece of Money in your right hand, and an∣other in your left, then stretching them both asun∣der; say, Would it not be a pretty Trick, to see me
bring these two pieces together my hands thus asunder? Which is done by laying that upon a Stool or Table out of your left hand, and turning your self round take it up with your right. To win a Wager at Feeling. MAke a mark with choak at the further end of a Room, about the bigness of a half Crown; then say, I'll hold a wager, no one molesting me, I will be blindfold as close as you will, and yet hit that choak with my finger, the first time my finger touches the Wall: Which every one, for the imagining difficulty, will be apt to take you up; when your wager is laid, take a Nail, tye a long string to it, that will reach to the place where you are to stand, then drive the Nail in the middle of the mark made in the Wall, and so by the guide of your string you perfect your task. An easie way to take Cunnies in abundance. GO into the Woods, Lanes, or Fields where Cunnies are, then put out a couple of small Land-spannels, chace them into their Burroughs; when you have so done, stop them with brakes or fern, or what else you can get, leave two or three holes open, so many as you can well ma∣nage with Hayes, Nets, and Men, then make a fire of combustible stuff, as brakes or litter, at the mouth of one of the Burroughs, so as the wind may drive the smoak in, or for want of these you may it do with Brim-stone in a pot well lighted, and put it into the hole, stopping
the mouth of the hole; and you shall presently have sport enough, for they will not endure the smoak in the ground, but will boult out so long as there is one in the ground. I have seen, when I was a Boy, a Horse-load taken at a time in this manner, in Combe-wood in Warwick∣shire. Although this be a speedy way of taking, and for clearing Land in which sometimes they do much mischief, yet I caution all that are not Owners, or that have no licence, to beware of using this way of taking Cunnies, least they be taken for Knaves. To take wild Ducks in abundance. TAke the lights of a Sheep or Calf, cut them in small pieces as big as Frogs or the like, then take Jack hooks well tafted to tough wiers, tye three or four of these to a stick, strong enough to hold your Game, and do this with as many hooks as you have, fasten or tye the sticks a certain distance one from another, with strong pack-thred, then throw them in a Pond or River where wild Ducks use; do this in the Evening, for that is their gene∣ral feeding time, then come early the next Morning with a good Spaniel, if you have him, to fetch them out; or if not, you may fasten a cord to your pack-threds first, and so pull them to you. But when you use this, be sure you carry Company enough with you, or carry them home undeserned, least you find sawce to yoru Ducks.
To make sport with a Maid-Servant. IF the Maid locks up the Victual or Cellar-dore, as there is too many do, contrary to the wills of their Masters and Mistresses, for a speedy revenge use this Re∣ceipts; take Ants eggs the quantity of a small Nut-shell full, then dry them, beat them to Powder, and conveigh them into her broath or drink; in half an hour you shall have sport enough, for she will fart without measure, endeavouring to hide her self, but cause all Chamber dores to be lock'd before hand, then follow her where she goes, and ask her, If she is not ashamed to fart so? You need not fear her disobliging you again, for she will quick∣ly smell the plot. Or thus: Observe when the Cock is treading the Hen, then nimbly snatch a feather out of his Tail, put this privately into the Broom, and when she goes to sweep the House, she cannot leave farting so long as the Broom is in her hand. To make liquor boil out of a Pot. VVHen you see a Brass or Iron Pot with boyling Li∣quor over a fire, throw but a piece of Tobacco pipe into it, and it will force all the Liquor to come out: But have a care that no Children be in the way, that are no able to shift for themselves.
To keep an Host from froathing his Pots. IF you observe your Host to froath much, take in the Summer time the skin of a red Herring, and rub over the inside of the Pot; if in Winter he uses you so, when he sets the drink on the fire, throw a copper Farthing into it, and I'll warrant you he froaths not that Pot in a good while, for it melts a hole through the bottom, and all his drink runs into the fire. To hatch Chickens without a Hen. TAke Hen dung a good quantity, dry it extraordinary well upon the Tiles of the House in a Sun-shiny day, then beat it to Powder, get a pound of Hens feathers and mix with this dung, take new laid Eggs, and put them into a large wooden Bowl, in the midst of the fea∣thers and Powder of Hens dung; then, if your conve∣niency will allow, put the Bowl into an Oven, as many Houses have Ovens out of use, keep a small breathing fire in it, either with small Coal dust, or Char-coal, for so I did it, stop up the Oven with the stoper only, in three Weeks time you shall have Chickens; watch them that you may help them to chick: If you intend for Cocks, chuse long Eggs, and hold them betwixt your self and the Candle, to see if they have the Cocks tread in them, otherwise they will not come to perfection. This is held the best way for the hatching of Game Cocks. Probatum est.
To cause it to freeze by the Fire side. PUt or splash some water upon a Stool by the fire side, set the Stool never so near the fire, it will not hin∣der the freezing; then take a pewter Pot or Basen, put therein a handful of Snow, and a handful of Salt, stir these together till they be dissolved, which will soon be, then look and you shall see a thick Ice upon the Stool, take the Bason up by the brims, and it will take the Stool up with it. To win a Wager of a Wag. LAy with him, if he will, that you place a Candle in the Room that you and all them in the Room may see it, at the time where he cannot; which is done by setting the Candle on his head. Another to take a string off a Pipe. TAke a long Tobacco Pipe, then put it into ones hand whom you intend to trick, put a piece of pack-thred both ends tied fast over the Pipe; bid him hold one end fast in one hand, and the other end fast in the other hand; then say, I will take this string off this Pipe, without breaking the Pipe, loosing your hands, or breaking or cutting the string, which will seem strange; so speaking to the Company, Let me see any of you all do this: Which they not knowing how to do, will be very desi∣rous to see you do it; then taking the pack-thred and
slip it over his hand upon his arm, the Trick is done, which will make laughter, that so easie a thing could not be discovered. To make sport in Company. WHen you are shewing Tricks, and have done so ma∣ny as you can well, then say, To conclude I will shew you the best and cleaverest Trick that ever I did in my life; and that is, I will set a Pot full of Water at one end of the Table, and make it move of it self to the other end, without the help of thred, or any thing else, to draw it: But beforehand have the Crown of your Hat smutted with some blacking, such as will be made by holding a Candle under the bottom of a tin Candle-stick. Saying, This being done by Black Art, we must every one change Hats for the present, and every one do as I do, and say as I say: Then rubbing the Crown of your Hat about your face, they all fall a rubbing likewise; cry out, Iubeo sceleriter hi-pass, or any such conjuring stuff: But they seeing the Pot not move, will fall a laughing; the Fel∣low that is blackt not mistrusting they laugh at him, will be kept in his ignorance, to your greate Pastime. To seem to strike three choaks through a Table. TAke a piece of choak, and choak the Nails of three of your fingers well on your left hand unseen, then bid them look under the Table to see nothing is there, choak three spots upon the Table, then clapping your left hand under the Table, clunching it, the choaks will come of
your Nails into the palm of your hand, and striking the palm of your right hand upon the choaks rubs them out; say, Now see I have struck them through the Table, when drawing forth the left hand, it seems so done by the choaks they see there. To convey a two Pence away. HAve a small bit of soft Wax stuck on the Nail of your middle finger, lay a two Pence in the palm of your hand, let it lye in sight, then clunch your hand and it will stick to the Wax; saying, Presto 'tis gone, opening hand and fingers the deceit is not discovered. To play the wag with a dairy Maid. IF you conveigh a bit of Soap no bigger then a Nut into the Churn, she may Churn till her eyes are out, and never make Butter. To make sport with Bells. TAke three small Bells such as Children have at their Corrals, one of the three be planted or hung in your sleeve, the other two which are in sight to the Company, bid them view them, and put one in one hand, and one in the other hand, then put the second into the left hand, and say, Now you think they are both in one hand; which if they have seen your palm before, will imagine you have it still in your right hand, and shaking the right hand the Bell will jingle; then say, Which hand will you
have them both in? They will be apt to say, the left, as thinking they are in the right, then opening both hands you leave them in wonder. To cause Worms or Maggots seem on Meat. TAke Cat-guts and cut them to a length small and great, then strew them upon Meat hot as it comes out of the Pot. Some will eat none; others will deride the Maid that drest it: But the Meat is not at all pre∣judiced by it. To write that it cannot be read, but by them that under∣stand it beforehand. TAke the juice of an Onion or Lemmon, when you have a mind to write any private business to your Friend, that you would not have discovered, then take a clean Pen and dipping it in the juice as in Inck, write your mind and seal it up; when it comes to your Friend, it is but holding it to the fire, and it may be read plainly. To cut the Blowing Book. MAke a Book seven inches long, and about five inches broad, and let there be forty-nine leaves, that is seven times seven contained therein, so as you may cut up∣on the edge of each leaf six notches, each notch in depth a quarter of an inch, with a googe made for that pur∣pose, and let them be one inch distant, paint every thir∣teenth and fourteenth Page., which is the end of every
sixth leaf, and beginning of every seventh, with like co∣lour or picture; cut off with a pair of sheers every notch of the first leave, leaving only one inch of Paper, which will remain half a quarter of an inch above that leaf, leave an other like inch in the second part of the second leaf, clipping away one inch of Paper in the highest place a∣bove it, and all the notches below the same, and so or∣derly to the third, fourth, &c. so as there shall rest up∣on each leaf one only nick of Paper above the rest, one high uncut inch of Paper must answer to the first, di∣rectly in every seventh leaf of the Book; so as when you have cut the first seven leaves in such manner as I have described, you are to begin the self same order at the eighth leaf, descending in like manner to the cutting other seven leaves to twenty-one, until you are past through every leaf, all the thickness of your Book. Now you shall understand that after the first seven leaves every 7th. leaf in the Book is to be cut; you must observe that at each bum-leaf or high inch of Paper seven leaves distant, opposite directly and lineally one against the o∣ther, through the thickness of the Book, the same Page with the Page precedent to be painted with the like Co∣lour or Picture, and so must you pass through the Book with seven sorts of Colours or Pictures; so as when you shall rest you upon any of these high inches, and open the Book you shall see in each one colour or Picture through the Book, in another row another Picture. To make the matter more plain unto you, for this Trick is very artificial, let this be the description thereof: Hold the Book in your left hand, and between your fore-finger and thumb of your right hand; slip over the Book in what
notch you list, and your thumb shall alwayes rest at the seventh leaf; namely at the high inch of Paper, from which your Book is strained, it will fall or slip to the next; which when you hold fast and open the Book, the Beholders seeing each leaf to have one colour or picture, in such varieties all passing continually and directly through the whole Book, will suppose that with words you can discolour the leaves at your pleasure. To ingrave or write any thing upon the Blade of a Knife. MElt Bees-wax, and with a rag or feather dipt in it, stroak the blade of the Knife, the whilst it is as thick of the wax as is the blade, then take a pin or needle, and write what Verse, or draw what Flowers you please thereon; but observe, that in so doing you write hard, that the point of the Pin may touch the blade of the Knife; the Wax being thus race't, and the desired part of the blade bare, take a Pencil of hair, and dip it in Aqua fortis; (which may be had at the Apothecaries) then with it wipe over the blade of the Knife, and it will lodge in the vacancies or strokes, you made with your Pin, place the Knife upon a Table, so as it may lye level, and let it remain there ten or twelve hours; then pare off the Bees-wax, and your intent will be accom∣plished: For want of Aqua fortis use Spirit of Vitriol.
The Egg-Box IS lookt upon to be as good a Trick, and as cunning a slight as any that is done, by those that know not the manner of doing of it: But because it cannot be so well express'd in words, I have put these Figures under∣neath to explain it.
A. the Egg-box, made in the fashion of two Bee-hives, put one upon the other. B. the upper-shell. C. the inner-shell, covered over artificially with the shell of an Egg. D. the lower part of the Box. Putting B, which is the outward shell, upon C. and both upon D. as it stands, makes the Box perfect. To do this Trick call for an Egg; then bid all the Standers by look on it, and see that it is a real Egg, setting your Box on the Table, upon the foot D, take off the upper-part B, C. with your fore-finger and thumb then placing the Egg in the Box; say, You see here it is fairly in: And uncovering it again, say, Likewise you shall see me here take it fairly out; putting it into your Pocket in their sight: Open your Box again, saying, You see here is nothing; close your hand about the middle of the Box, and take off B, by the bottom, you say, There is the Egg again; which do so appear to the Spectators to be: Clapping that in again, and taking the lip of C, in your fore-finger and thumb, say, There 'tis gone again. I saw one shew this, and the Globes, and the Melting-box so well, that the ignorance of the People cried out, he was a Witch; and had not he prostituted his Implements to their view, that so they might discover his slight, he had been thrown out of a Window two Stories high. The Melting-Box IS another artificial slight, which is shewn in these fol∣lowing Figures, made in the fashion of a screw, that so the lips may hang without discovery.
F, the out-part of the Box. G, the first in-part. H, the second in-part. I, a round Case made of Plush or Leather, with a Button upon the top, and wide enough to slip on and off. Have in the bottom of the Box F, a small quantity of kill'd Quicksilver, which may be done with the shavings of Pewter, or fasting spittle; In the second part, which is H, let there be six single Pens, put this into the first or out-most part, then put G, into H, and the Box is perfect. When you go to shew this Trick, desire any in the Company to lend you six Pens, and you will return it safe again: But requesting withal that none will meddle with any thing they see, unless you desire them, least
they prejudice you and themselves; then take the Cap off the Box, and bid any one see it, and feel it, that there may be no mistrust; so likewise take the Box entire, holding your fore-finger at the bottom, and your thumb on the upper-part, turning it upside down, say, You see here is nothing; then putting in the Six-pence, put the Cap over the Box again, as the Box stands covered upon the Table, put your hand under the Table, using some Canting words; then take off the Cap with your fore-finger and thumb, so as you pinch the inner-most Boxes with it, and set it gently upon the Table, then put the kill'd Quicksilver out of the lower part into your hand, turning the Box with the bottom upward, and stirring it about with your finger, say, Here you see it melted, now I will put it in again, and turn it into six single Pence; suddenly take the Cap as you took it off, returning it again, bid them blow on it, then take off the Cap as you did before, only pinch the upper-most lip in it, and setting it upon the Table, hold the Box at top and bot∣tom with your fore-finger and thumb; then put the six single Pencel, after they are view'd and seen to be so, in again, and return the Cap as before; saying, Blow once more, if you intend to have your Six-pence in the same forme you gave it me; then taking the Cap off by the button, holding the Box as before, put out the Six-pence, and return the Box into your Pocket. This is a very good slight, if well performed, which is done by often use.
The Globe IS a Trick not inferiour to the best that is shewn with Boxes; It is a Box made in four pieces, and a Ball so big as is imagined to be contained therein: The Ball serves in the same nature as the Egg does in the Egg-box, only to deceive the hand and eye of the Spectators; this Ball being made of Wood or Ivory, is thrown out of the Box upon the Table for every one, to see that it is sub∣stantial; then putting the Ball into the Box, and letting them that stand by blow on the Box, you take off the upper-shell with your fore finger and thumb, there ap∣pears another and of another colour, as red, blew, yel∣low, or any variety of colours upon each Ball, that is so imagined to be, which indeed is no more then the shell of Wood ingeniously turned and fitted for the Box; as you may see in these following Figures. L. the out-shell of the Globe, taken off of the Fi∣gure M, N, an Inner-shell. O, the cover of the same.
P, the other Inne-shell. Q, the cover of the same. R, the third shell. S, that which covers it. These Globes may be made with more or less varieties, ac∣cording to the desire of the Practitioner. The Egg-Box, Melting-box, Globes, Balls, the wooden
Bell, and many other things in this nature, are made and sold by Mr. Rob. Spooner, Ivory-turner, at the Achorn in the Long-walk, between Christ Church and the Lume-Hospital. To seem to cut a hole in a Cloak, Scarf, or Handkerchief, and with words to make it whole again. TO do this you must have a piece of the Stuff ready in your hand, the sample of that you intend to cut; then amongst other tricks shewn by you, clap your hand full upon the place you intend for your mark, then drawing hollowly the false piece, cause it to be cut off, and griping your hand shew the hole from whence the piece came, then nimbly clapping your other hand upon the place, and slipping the piece away, which is in your hand, which is done by pretending to feel in your Poc∣ket for a needle, to sow it up again; but drawing out your hand from your Pocket, say, I have no needle, but I have a charm that will do as well; so uttering some Canting words, bid them blow upon it; and pulling your hand from the place, does not a little satisfie the curiosity of the Persons, which thought they had been damnified. How to pinch a Cloak, that it shall not be discovered in a twelve Month. VVHen you are to go to a Feast or Wey-goose, take a pound of Confidence, and two pound of Im∣pudence, with a quantity of Oyl of Theft, mix these
well together, then anoint your face and hands there∣with; You having opportunity at Dinner-time to perceive where the Cloaks are laid, to fix upon one of the best and newest: So soon as you have fill'd your Paunch, rise from the Table, pretending business, and confidently clap∣ing it on, march impudently away with it. This Charm will last for a twelve Moneth; but at the end if your Ma∣ster Satan should betray you, and cause you to be brought before Justice, deny it stifly; and if that won't do, plead a mistake, and say, If this is Adam's? mine was as good that I left in the place, although you brought in none: A secure way to defend a burn in the hand. Probatum est, Robin Hog. To cause a Knife leap out of a Pot. VVHen you are in Company and intend mirth, have a Pot, full Pot fashion, standing upon a shelf or Mantle-tree, then take a piece of Whale-bone about three inches long, let it be pretty stiff, it will spring the better, take also a new stiff Card, and fold it down the middle longwise, cut a hole through both folds at each end, half an inch or more from the ends, put one end of the Whale-bone in at one end the Card, bend it like a bow, then put the other end of the Whale-bone into the other end of the Card, set this in the Pot with two inches or more deep of water; then place the handle of your Knife upon the upper-most part of the Whale-bone, with the point upwards: Using these words or the like: Come here to your Master. Will you come, or will you not?
Then you won't come? Will you come, or shall I fetch you? By which time the Card will be soaked with the wa∣ter, and the Whale-bone springing bursts the Card, and tosses out the Knife, as you may see in these following Fi∣gures. Being no small wonder to the Beholders. T, The Knife as it is to be set in the Pot. V, The Whale-bone bent, and put into the Card, with the Knife set upon it, by the help of a small bit of soft Wax to stop its slipping off. To take three Button moulds off two strings. Take a piece of round pack-thred a yard long, cut it in the middle, double one of the pieces, slip a Button mould over that double, then double the other, put the end of the double into the end of the other about half an inch, then double it back and slip the Button mould over
it, and it will keep it fast, then slip the second Button mould over one end of the double pack-thred, and the third over the other end, so that the first is in the middle, and by its thickness keeps the noose of the string undisco∣vered, put two of the ends int one Man's hand, and the other two ends into anothers; then taking one end from one, and another from the other; say, To make them yet faster here I tye them, and giving each end into his hand again, put your hand over the Button moulds, and bid them be sure to hold fast, give them a small riggle, and it will remove the middle-most, and the three will come all off: As is shewn in these following Figures.
D, the first Mould slipt upon the string dubbled. E, the second string put through the first. F, the bent of the second string, in the fm of a loop. G, the other two Moulds put on one at  end of the string. H, the three closed and tied on. The two Parties that hold the Cords in their hands, ha∣ving twisted both the ends upon their fing▪ clap you you your left-hand over the Moulds, and with the fore∣finger and thumb of your right hand move the middle∣most out of his place, and the noose opens whereby they all come off, and both strings whole. To cut a Glass with a piece of match-cord. YOu must have a piece of well dried match-cord, light it that it may have a good coal, then take a Beer bowl glass, and hold the march to the edge of the glass, have your finger ready wet, and when the glass is very
hot clap your finger to the hot place, and it will suddenly crack about a quarter of an inch downward: then keep the coal of the match the like distance from the end of the crack, and as it follows so move your hand; and cut it screw fashion, otherwise it will not hold together, till you have cut it to the bottom, or like waves: When you have done it, and that it is cold (as that it will soon be) take it by the foot and turn it downward, it will stretch so that you may put your finger betwixt each cut, then turn it up again, you may drink a glass of Beer in it and not spill a drop. This I learnt of an ingenious German. The Art of using the Mosaical Rod, to find out hidden Treasure. THe Miracles of this Branch are worthy of considera∣tion, and the thing found by the great Sympathy there is betwixt this and the precious Metals: For when it is gathered with the Ceremonies and Observations re∣quisite, that is to say with cleanliness; and gathered up∣on
a certain day of the Summer Solstice, and a sprout of one years growth, it must be chosen forked like an V, or in the form of a Y, a clean Hasel and Red▪ the best time is a little before Sun-rise, and if Mercury is well dig∣nified, you may gather them upon any Friday. For when the Sun enters Cancer, the Woods and Plants in our Cli∣mate have more force then in other seasons▪ When you make use of it, hang at the single end a piece of what Me∣tal you will, and let it be made fast at the end of a little Cord, take the two ends of the Fork in your hands, as is shewn in the foregoing Figure, and hold it stedfast to∣wards the Sky, and the other end towards the Earth: And in this manner, when you are in a place to find something that is hidden, be it Gold, Silver, or other Metal: If that which is in the earth be more noble then that on the Wand, that on the wand will bend towards its Superiour, as ac∣knowledging inferiority. But when you begin to play it, say with devotion the charge; but this happens most likely to him, that hath in his hand the form of an V, appartain∣ing to Virgo, or G, in the hand, near the Sun. To draw an Egg throw a Ring. BOil an Egg hard, then put it in white Wine Vine∣gar, and let it lye three dayes and three nights, only shifting your Vinegar every twelve hours; and you may rowl it like soft Wax, and draw it through a Ring, or put it into a Viol. To put Pease into your Eye, and pull them out at your pleasure. THis seems to be a very difficult thing to those that be∣hold you; put six or seven Pease into the lower Eye-lid,
and thrust them out again at your pleasure: But it is so facile that any one may do it, observing that the Pease are hard and smooth; for there is nothing can be prejudiced, either in the Sight or Eye-string by so doing. An excellent Receipt, to cause a piece of Harts-horn grow into a large pair of Harts-horns. TAke a piece of Harts-horn, saw'd off or otherwise, then take Sperma Caeta half an ounce, dissolve it into Oyl with two ounces of strong Aqua vitae, put in your
Harts-horn, let it steep two or three dayes; when you have so done, have a large Glass of a Gallon or more, according to the largeness you intend your Horns should be: This Glass must be fill'd with half Water, half Urine; when the Harts-horn has lain its time in steep, in the first preparation, take it out and put it into this large Glass; when it is grown so large as the Glass can well contain, break the Glass off carefully, and you shall have the perfect form of a pair of Harts-horns: It is very hard and very brittle; but for an artificial conclusion, 'tis one of the best I ever saw. Another that comes not behind any in rarity. VVHich is a preparation made by Art as followeth: Saltpeeter one ounce, Crema Tarter one ounce, the best Sulphut half an ounce, pound them into Powder dividually, then mix them together, and having the Powder in a Paper about you, conveigh a grain of it into a Pipe of Tobacco, and when the fire takes it, it will give the report of a Musquet, but not break the Pipe: Or you may lay as much as will lye upon your Nail in a place, on certain small pieces of Paper, and setting fire to the Papers there will be the report of so many great Guns, but do no harm at all. To see to write a Letter in the darkest Night, that is without the help of Fire or Candle. TAke half a Pint of Gloe-worms, four hand-fulls of Iron-wort, two quarts, of Fountain water, distill'd together in a Glass-still to the Consumption of a quart;
then put it in a Christal glass, and seal it up close, it will hold its virtue seven years, and will cast such a lustre that you may see by it to write a Letter, or many other uses the ingenious may put it to. To make a preparation that, being anointed therewith, you may walk over a Bar of red hot Iron, and not be burnt: Hold fire in your mouth, and suffer no harm, although the fire therein be blown with Bellows: Take red hot Hea∣ters out of the fire; or wash your hands in molten Lead, and not be burnt. TAke half an ounce of Camphire, dissolve it in two ounces of Aqua vita, add to it one ounce of Quick-silver, one ounce of liquid Storax, which is the droppings of Mirrhe, and hinders the Camphir from taking fire, two ounces of Hematitis, a red Stone to be had at the Drugsters; and when you buy it, let them bear it to Powder in the great Morter, for it is so very hard that it cannot be done in a small one; put this to the afore∣mentioned Composition: And when you play your Trick, if it be to walk over a Bar of red hot Iron, rub your feet well therewith, and you shall receive no harm thereby. If to do any thing in that nature with your hands, use them so likewise; and so for the mouth: But your mouth must be quickly cleansed, otherwise it will cause a sallivation. 'Tis a very dangerous thing to be done in the mouth; and although they that practice it, use all the means they can to prevent danger, yet I (nor I think any Body else) never saw any one of these Fire-eators that had a good complexion: The reasons I could give, but 'tis known
the Sons of Art already; and the others deserve none. Some have put bole Armoniack into this Receipt, a cold thing and spoils the whole, and have omitted Hematitis and Storax, not understanding that is it the major heat that over-powers the minor; but they had as good a shit; and I caution every one to have a care how they use it. 'Tis in a Penny Book, the 59th. Receipt, how to wash your hands in melted Lead, without danger of burning; but I'll warrant them burnt that use it. Another to eat Fire. ANoint your tongue with liquid Storax, and you may put a pair of Tongs into the fire, make them red hot, and with the help of this Oyntment you may lick them, until they be cold without danger: Likewise by prepa∣ring your mouth with this, you may take Wood-coals out of the fire, dip them into Sulpher powdered, and the fire seems more strange; but the Sulpher puts out the Coal, and shutting your mouth close puts out the Sul∣pher; and so they commonly champ the Coals and swal∣low them, which that they may do without offending the Body; but if they were bound to eat nothing else, it would be a very sick Trade. To make a Room seem to be all on Fire. TAke Sal Armoniacum half an Ounce, Camphir one ounce, Aqua vitae two ounces, put them into an Earthen Por, in the fashion of a Chamber-pot, but nar∣rower
something upon the top, then set fire to it, and the Room will seem to them that are in it to be all on fire; nay themselves will flap their hair and Cloaths, thinking they are all on fire, when there is no Body hurt, unless it be with fright. Have a care of shewing this, when any Women with Child are in the Room, for you your self that shew it (but that you knew to the contrary before) would be of the same mind. To set Pease or Beans when you sit down to dinner, and you shall have them above ground when you rise from the Table, or in an hours time. TAke half an ounce of the Gumm of Carranna, the like quantity of Oyl of Amber, dissolve them over a gentle fire till they be like a Sirrup; then put in your Pease or Beans, let them lye twenty-four hours; then take them and put them into a Bed of hot Mould, as Horse dung or otherwise, and you shall see them a foot above ground in two hours, and blossom'd in twenty-four hours: But you must observe to keep the Mould warm. To make an Egg fly into the Air. TAke an Egg and make a hole on both ends of it, blow out all what is in it, fill it full of Dew, or water where∣in Salpeter is dissolved, close it up with sealing Wax, and lay it in the Sun and it will flye.
To form a Snake like a Crocodil out of Water. TAke five leaves of Costmary, put them into a small-neckt Glas, into nine spoon-fulls of Pump-water; let it stand some certain time in the Sun, and there generates a living Snake like a Crocodil, to the admiration of them that behold it. A sheet of Paper called Trouble-wit. TRouble-wit has not its name for nought, and indeed is a very fine invention, by folding a sheet of Paper, as that by Art you may change it into twenty-six several forms or fashions: Take a sheet of fine Paper, fold it down the middle of the sheet long-wayes, when you have so done, turn down the edge of each fold outwards the breadth of a single Penny; then measure it, as it is so folded, into three equal parts with Compasses, which makes six Divi∣sions in the sheet, let each third part be turned outward, and the other in course will fall right, then pinch it a quarter of an inch deep, in the manner as you pinch a pa∣per Lanthorn, that is in pleats like a ruff: So that when the Paper lyes pinched in its form, it is in the fashion re∣presented by the Figure A: When closed together like the Figure B; unclose it again and shuffle it with each hand it resembles the shuffling a pack of Cards: Close it and take each corner inward with your fore-finger and thumb, it resembles a Rose for a Ladies shoo, as is seen in the Figure C. Stretch it forth from the same form, and it resembles a cover for an Italian Coach, as is shewn
by the letter D. Let go your Fore-finger and thumb at the lower end, and it resembles a Wicket to a Gate, or Parral to a Noble Man's Dore, as is shewn by the Letter E. Close it again, and pinch it at the bottom, spreading it on the top, and it is in the fashion of a skreen Fan, as it is shewn by F. Pinch it half way, and open the top, and it is in the fashion of a Shoomakers cutting Knife, which is shewn by G. Holding of it in that form, and with the thumb of your left hand turn out the next sold, and it is in the form of a curry Comb, as is shewn by the Letter H. For the rest of the Figures I would have had cut, but I am tied to six sheets at present, which will not contain them: But the Ingenious may learn it, by seeing this Trick once or twice done (since they have the manner of folding the Paper, which is a great help to do it.) The next fashion is a Butrice, such as Farriers use to pare their Horses heels withal. In the fashion of a Lawyers Desk. In the fashion of a Bridge made of wood, to carry Foot or Horse speedily over a River. In the fa∣shion of a Carriadge for a piece of Ordinance. In the fa∣shion of a dark Lanthorn. In the fashion of a Bow-pot. In the fashion of a Lanthorn with a rose at each end. In the fashion of a Court Custard. In the fashion of a Mince Pye, without any Meat in it. In the fashion of a Cardi∣nal's Cap. In the fashion of a Coster-mongers Cap. In the fashion of a Case for a Looking-glass. In the fashion of a Sugar-dish; and many more knacks to be plaid with it, which for brevity I omit. FINIS.
The TABLE. TO seem to turn Water into Wine. Pag. 1. To seem to conveigh a Card out of a Nut. 2. How to catch Mag-pyes or Croes. ibid. How to catch Eels. 3. To make sport with an Egg. ibid. To fetch a Shilling out of a Handkerchief. 4. To cause the Beer seem to be rung out the handle of a knife. ibid. To deceive one with three seeming pieces of Tobacco-pipe. 5. To win a Wager at Running. 6. To know what is Cross or Pile by the ringing. ibid. wrap a wag on the knuckles. ibid. To make one laugh till the tears stand in his eyes. 7. To fox Fish. ibid. A Philosophical Experiment. 8. To cure the Tooth-ach. ibid. To bring two pieces together. 9. To win a wager at Feeling. 10. An easie way to take Cunnies in abundance. ibid. To take wild Ducks in abundance. 11. To make sport with a Maid Servant. 12. To make liquor boil out of a Pot. ibid. To keep an Host from frouthing his Pots. 13. To hatch Chickens without a Hen. ibid. To cause it freeze by the Fire side. 14. To win a wager of a Wag. ibid. Another to take a string off a Pipe. ibid. To make sport in Company. 15. To seem to strike three choaks through a Table. ibid. To convey a two Pence away. 16.
To play the wag with a dairy Maid. ibid. To make sport with Bells. ibid. To cause Worms or Maggots seem on Meat. 17. To write that it cannot be read, &c. ibid. To cut the Blowing Book. ibid. To ingrave or write any thing upon the blade of a Knife. 19. The Egg-box. 20. The Melting-box. 21. The Globe-box. 24. To seem to cut a hole in a Cloak, and make it whole again. 26. How to pinch a Cloak, &c. ibid. To cause a Knife to leap out of a Pot. 27. To take three Button-moulds off two strings. . To cut a Glass with a match-cord. 30. The urt of using the Mosaical Rod, &c. 31. To draw an Egg through a Ring. 32. To put Pease into your Eye, and pull them out again. 33. To cause a piece of Harts-horn grow in a large pair of Harts-horns. ibid. Another that comes not behind any in rarity. 34. To see to write a Letter in the darkest night. ibid. To make a preparation that, being anointed therewith, you may walk over a Bar of red hot Iron, and not be hurt, &c. 35. Another to eat Fire. 36. To make a Room seem all on Fire. ibid. To set Pease when you sit down to dinner, and you shall have them above ground, when you rise from the Table. 37. To make an Egg to fly into the Air. ibid. To form a Snake like a Crocodil out of water. 38. A sheet of Paper called Trouble-wit. ibid. FINIS.
