M844A 31360621 110752
The Huntsman's DELIGHT: Or, The FORRESETRS Pleasant Pastime. To the Tune of, Amongst the Leaves so green a &c. F wh, 'twas thought that some ther ws withawn. The Der are wounded, but they are not slain, Yet so they're woundd, that they are or'etain; And in their taking, pitty it is shown: The Keepers swore great Oaths, upon their lives, They'd be as kind to them as Men are to their Wives, The pleasant Sprt this Ditty doth declare, Of the kind Huntsmen, and the Fallow-deer. COme all you young Maidens and lend an ear, Come listen a while, and you shall bear How the Keepers did sport with the Fallow-deer, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, derry derry down, Hey down down, ho down down, Hey down, ho down, derry derry down, Amongst the leaves so green a, The Keepers they would an a hunting go, And under their coats each carried his bow, And all for to shoot the bonny bonny Doe, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, derry derry down, Hey down down, ho down down Hey down, hodown, derry derry, down, Amongst the leaves so green a. They spyed five Does upon a hill, And to shoot at them was their good will, But none of them they ment for to kill, Amongst the leaves so green a. Hey down, &c. At the first Doe they shot, and they mist, The second Doe they clipt, and they kist; And they said them down where no Man wist, Amongst the leaves so green a. Hey down, &c. The one cryed out unto the other, I'm serv'd as my Father serv'd my Mother; But yet these joys we cannot smother, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. The third Doe she made great moan, Because that she was big with Fawn, VVhich made her to go weeping home, From amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. The fourth Doe could no longer stay, But she must be gone her way, For fear that the Keepers should her lay Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. But soon after she did repent, And to turn again she was fully bent, To lye down and take her heart's content, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. The fifth Doe leapt over the stile, But the Keeper he got her by the heel, And there he did both kiss and feel, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. They drew forth their arrows once again, And they shot at another a-cross the plain; She sigh'd, but it was with a pleasing pain, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down &c. He pricked her straightways with his dart But she cryed out she felt no smart, And therein say the Keeper's art, Amongst the leaves so green a. Hey down, &c. These fair Does, they leapt, and they ski Till leaping along, at length they were ti No sooner they fell, but the Keepers them Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. The Keepers did tumble them o're and o're, Though often they shot, they requir'd more They never had met with such sport before, Amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. These bold Huntsmen were all agreed, And by consent these fair Does did bleed; But after that they came often to feed Amongst the leaves so green a. Hey down, &c. Great Crowds came running over the Plain, Expecting to see these fair Does slain; But like Fools as they came, they returnd aga From amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down, &c. If it be true as old VVives say, Take a Doe in the Month of May, And a Forrester's courage she soon will ally, Amongst the leaves so green a. Hey down, &c. These Huntsmen were so gently inclin'd, They let them rise their courage to find; But away they tript so swift as the wind, From amongst the leaves so green a: Hey down derry derry down; Hey down down, ho down down, Hey down, ho down, derry derry down, Amongst the leaves so green a. LONDON: Printed for W. O. and sold by the Bookseller
