N1214 99833479 37956
The Noble Progresse Or, A true Relation of the Lord Generall Monks Politicall Proceedings with the Rump, the calling in the Secluded Members, their transcendent Vote for his Sacred Majesty, with his Reception at Dover, and Royall conduct through the City of London, to his famous Palace at White-hall. The tune is, when first the Scottish warrs began. GOod people he asken to my cast, Ile tell you all what did befall, and hapned of late. Our Noble Valiant Generall Monk, Came to the Rump who lately stunk, with their Councell of State Admiring what this man would doe. His secret mind there's none could know, They div'd into him as much as they could, George would not be won with their silver nor gold. The Sectarian Saints at this lookt blew, With all the rest of the factious crew, They vapour'd awhile and were in good hope; But now they have nothing left but the Rope. Another invantion then they sought, Which long they wrought for to be brought to claspe him with they, Quoth Uane and Scot Ile tell you what, Wée'l have a Plot and he shall not wée'l carry the swap. Lets Vote him a thousand pound a yeare. And Hampton Court for him and his Heire. Indéed quoth George ye're Frée-Parliament men To cut a Thong out of anothers mans skin. the Sectarian. &c. They sent him then with all his Host a To break our Posts and raise our Ghosts, which was their intent. To cut our Gates and Chains all down, Unto the ground this trick they found, to make him be ent: This Plot the Rump old so ; To cast an outu old my Lord, But in th  put unoo't, 'T was enough to intect both his horse and his foot, the Sectarian, &c. But when my Lord perceiv'd that night, What was their snight he brought to light, their knaveries all, The Parliament of Forty eight, Which long did wait, came to him streight, to give them a fall And some Phanaticall people knew, That George would give them their fatall due, Indeed he did requite them agen. For he pal'd the Monster out of his Den, the Sectarian, &c. To the House our worthy Parliament, With good Intent they boldly weut to Vote home the King. And many  people more, Stood at the doore and waited for, good tydings to bring, Yet some in the House had their hands much in blood, And in great opposition like Traytors they stood, But yet I beléeve it is very well known That those that were for him were twenty to one. But the Sectarian Saints at this lookt blew, With all the rest of the factious crew, they vapour'd awhile and were in good hope, But now they have nothing left but the Rope. THey cal'd the League and Covenant in, To read again to every man, but what comes next. All Sequestrations null and void, The people said none should be paid. for this was the Text. For as I heard all the propip They voted King Charles the first of May, Bonfires burning Bells did ring. And our stréets did eccho with God blesse ye King. At this the Sectarian Saints lookt blew, And all the rest of the factious crew, they vapour'd awhile and were in good hope, But now they have nothing left but the Rope. Our General then to Dover goes In spight of Foes or deadly blowes saying Uveleoy. And all the Glories of the Land, At his command there they did stand, in Tryumph and Ioy. Good Lord what a sumptuous sight' was to sée Our good Lord Generall fall on his knee, To welcome home his Majesty, And own his sacred Soveraignty, But the Sectarian, &c. Then all the worthy Noble Train, Came back again with Charlamain, our Soveraign great, The Lord Mayor in his Scarlet Gown, In s Chain so long went through the Town, in Pompe and State. The Livery-men each sine the way, Upon this great Tryamphant day, The rich Maces carried before, And my Lord himself the Sword he bore. Then Uiveleroy the Gentry did hug, For Generall Monk rode next to the King, With Acclamations, Shoots and Cryes, I thought they would have rent the skyes, The Conduits ravished with Ioy. As I may say did run all day great plenty of Wine. And every Gentleman of note, In's Velvet Coat that could be got, in glory did shine. There were all the Péeres and Barrons bold, Richly clad in Silver and Gold. Marched through the reet so brave, No greater Pomp a King could have, At this the Sectarian, &c. And thus conducted all along, Through out the throng till he did come unto White-hall. Attended by these Noble-men. Bold Heroe's kin that brought him in, with the Generall. Who was the man that brought him home, And placed him on his Royall throne T was Generall Monk  doe the thing, So God preserve our gracious King. And now the Sectarian. &c. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson.
