n232a 07951837 40680
A POEM, Condoling the DEATH of K. CHARLES II Of Blessed Memory: AND CONGRATULATING HIS Present MAJESTY. By JOHN NASH of Grays-Inn, Esq EXITƲS ACTA PROBAT. LONDON: Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. 1684 / 5.
A POEM, CONDOLING he Death of K. CHARLES II. Of Blessed Memory, &c. I. O thy eternal Exit from this Stage E'er Resurrection speaks thy Acts and Age. ersal Vote, Account select, CHARLES Gods Anointed, Gods Elect. his Image the Tribunal pass, shall praise th' Idea of his Grace. puissant Prince a Nestor dy'd, essings had his Life not multiply'd? se Memorial sacred, Royal Herse, k Muse pays an obedient Verse. ed, dos'd, and drown'd in Lachrymy, grows Rage, and Grief Stupidity. II. then, that Patience may Excess resist, rtues do in Mediums best consist. plainer Style, the plainer Truth appears, gives the greatest credit unto Tears. due Allegiance to the present Crown, all Professions shou'd their Sorrows own: manifest their Loyal Hearts, more sad the black Nation, in deep Mourning clad. 'tis our Duty to condole his Death, was the Law and true Religions Breath! ose Royal-Right Supremacy deserv'd, Orthodoxal Patronage observ'd: fender of the Faith, that's Protestant; which Great Charles ascends a Glorious Saint. III. to his Life, O mournful Muse Return, hose Justice guarded e'ery mans Concern; And Nothing Arbitrary would atchieve Unto his Ancient Prerogative. Where Liberty and Property did move, Safe by the Conduct of his Care and Love MONARCH of mighty Judgement, quick Access; Renown'd for Clemency and Tenderness; For Mercy, Pardon, Bounty, and Release. Oblivion and Protection to his Foes! So mild a Soul did Charity compose. Never rejecting any Contrite Case, A Precedent to Princes for his Grace. IV. Free from Ambitious as Tyrannick pride; Contented, Embassy's shou'd be deny'd. Rather than Bribes should an Affair effect, That might upon his Ministry reflect. By this just Rule, His Sovereign Reports Transcend the Monarchs of all forreign Courts. The same Man when restor'd, as Exile hurld, And the most Christian Ruler in the world. Great CAESAR's Lawrel, Olive-branch and Balm; Were most victorious, peaceable, and calm. Pacifick, and Heroick, Royal will! Spirit Angelick? Love did Law fulfil? Candor celestial; Mirrour of Mankind! A Miracle in Nature here divin'd. V. Whose high Oeconomy an Order bears Of Splendor, rais'd from Sublunary Stars; Until his Luster was in Heaven fixt, And with the divine Influence intermixt.
Now may his Glorious Rays rule day and night, And All Succession by his Sacred light, Head undisturb'd, till mortal Fit and Pain Disorder'd the Dominion of his Brain; Whose Apoplectick season, Bright, Serene, Were Signals of his Temper, Mind, and Mein. Prospect, Prediction, Omen of an Age, Happy and golden in the Heritage. VI. No Chronicle is needful to his Name, For Ages shall immortalize his Fame. Blest King! whose Reign did totally assawage, Two factious Plots of Villany and Rage; And fixt the Government in Church and State, So firm, that it surpasses humane Fate, Whereby the Art and Industry of man, To change the Model, is a Task in vain. Great was this work to do; and being done, With as Great Sence his Soul resign'd the Throne; Leaving the management of forreign Fact, To his Illustrious Brother to Transact. VII. Hail! Mighty James the Second, to compleat What Mighty Charles the 2d thought discreet, Wise in himself, in Council safe and great. To Thee, All native Aid and Force unites, As Ruler, and as Champion of their Fights, And as Preserver of their Lives and Rights. To Thee, No Forreign Play, nor bold Pretence, Dare falsifie a safe Obedience; But own Great James sole Master of Defence. To Thee, all Power as Principal must yield: Or as a Second to the English Field; Monarch of Prowess, and Propitious Shield. VIII. For whose Establishment in Peace, we bless Heaven and Earth with Popular Address. And Humors, And our Habits will be Gay, Upon Great JAMES's Coronation-day. Whose Vertue, Valour, are the Pearls of Pr Beset in Order by the best Advice. Presence a Spark, and Grandeur a Gem; Both ornamental to his Diadem. And Royal Robes with Scepter in his hand, Shews power of Peace and War at his comm Then with a Holy Hand Anointed King, Anthems and Hallelujah's we will sing. IX. Seamen shall send loud volly's of Huzza's▪ The Fleet and Tower-guns shall thunder Pr All Ports the duty of that Day shall brag, Since the High Admiral of the English Flag Is now the Potent Emperour of the Maine. Which Right he setled long before his Re Whom God preserve, to govern Sea and With Chequer mony'd and a Navy Ballance of Peace and Trade o'er Christ A Power only to this Province come▪ Lord Paramount to Monsieur's Flower de And Seignior's Half Moon the younger X. What is't that JAMES the Second cannot Who is the first of all Supremacy, And Laws can agrandize his Monarchy. May Parliaments in future Bills Tri-une, Grant what is Requisite and Opportune. No doubt Great JAMES is worthy of All Whose Word was in a lower station Just. No doubt to this Defender Any Gift May be committed to his prudent Thrift; Nay, 'tis a Loyal Debt without delay, (If Lives and Fortunes serve him) we And that the Session may explain Add. Vote for Supplyes shou'd be as Generous. As Royal Declaration Grationis. FINIS.
