p111 13084388 97284
A HUE and CRY AFTER THE REASONS Which were to have been given on Thursday September 18. 1679. TO THE LIEUTENANCY, BY Sir. T. P. and Others. Printed at LONDON, 1679.
A HUE and CRY AFTER THE REASONS Which were to have been given on Thursday last, Sept. 18. 1679. to the LIEUTENANCY, by Sir. T. P. and Others. WHereas a certain parcel of Things call'd Reasons, did lately pretend to address themselves in Writing to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, for the great good and preservation of the said City, but have not yet appeared, neither by themselves nor their Proxies, (Sir T. P. and Mr. F. J.) and therefore, as 'tis thought, have privately withdrawn themselves, or rather deserted the Great Cause of the City, which miserably lies at stake for want of them: It was therefore adjudg'd, by that great she Stickler in publick Business Madam Vulgar Opinion, That those Reasons lay under a vehement suspicion of being criminal by way of omission. Where∣upon a Council was call'd by the Lady Regent aforesaid; at which were present Good Sence, Sincerity, Judgment, Plain Meaning, Right Understanding, and several others: To whom Loyalty, Religion, and Government, made most heavy Complaints of a parcel of Gentle∣men, that call'd themselves Reasons, who had made use of their Names to their great scandal and disreputation, as if they were the commom Abettors and Fomentors of Mutiny and Rebellion, for which they desired satisfaction, and in regard they conceal'd themselves, that there might be a Warrant of HUE and CRY against them, to take them wheresoever they should be found: Which was granted, with the following Descriptions, for the better pursuit of the Parties.
THey are said to be fair-fac'd; the Locks of their Expressions long and dangling; smooth tongu'd, but very short sighted. They look like Saints, but have a black Mark upon their Foreheads, as if their Mothers had long'd for Mulberries. They have Ears indeed, but will hear no body speak but themselves; and are very positive in their Assertions, which makes them great Lovers of Coffee and Aromatic. Sometimes they will be very drunk, and then they talk down-right Treason; but when they are sober, there are no persons in the world more given to whispering. They are very young, and yet they speak very plain, but they want Teeth for the most part, which is a certain Sign to know 'em by: But as young as they are, no persons in the world have a greater conceit of their own Wit, as if they were all Minerva's chop'd out of Jupiter's Brain. In so much that they will thrust themselves before Kings, Councils, and Dukes, pretend to direct and determin, with a confidence beyond Presbyterian; and where they get the upper hand, will out crow a million of Dunghill Cocks. They go well habited, for their Wast-coats are of wrought Religion, their upper Coats of seeming Loyalty, with a lac'd Campain of Com∣plaint against Oppression. They have this Quality peculiar to them, that they will vanish of a sudden, for they are very airy; and there∣fore they that go to seize them must rub their hands in wet Sand, like those people that strip Eels. They are easily discover'd when they walk, for they crickle most shamefully in the Hams; and are oft-times so lame, that they are forc'd to support themselves with the Crutches of Popularity. Hear 'em but discourse, and you catch 'em presently. They are stiff Protestants, but care not a straw for Bishops; very worldly minded, for they pity the Loss of Trade to extremity. They are like Ben. Johnson's Pick-pocket; they tickle the Peoples Ears with a straw, the better to accomplish their Designs. In a word, Faction heads 'em, Tumult attends 'em, and Specious Pretence maintains 'em. O-O-O-yes, &c. If any Man or Woman, in City or Country, can make discovery where the Strength of these Reasons lies, for they covy all toge∣ther, let them bring them before Obedience to Princes, who is the sole Judge of their Plea, and is also ready to undertake them at all points: And they that can apprehend them for Reasons, shall be well rewarded for their pains. This Proclamation being made, it was then debated how to punish these Reasons so soon as they should be taken; and it was posi∣tively concluded, That they should be sent to the Hospital for Mad∣men, there to be physick'd, 'till Affidavit were made of their perfect Recovery. FINIS.
