p149 9378668 42901
AN EXPOSITION Upon the First Chapter of the Song of Songs, Handled by way of Question and Answer, FOR THE Information of the weakest Understanding. By SAMƲEL PACK. The Secrets of the Lord are with his Fearers, and he will shew them his Covenant. LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the Year MDCXCI.
To all my Dearly Beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of Ramsgate (in the Isle of Tha∣net in Kent) and all the adja∣cent Parts, who are constant Attenders upon my Ministry; Grace and Peace be multiplied. My Dear Friends, YOƲ may remember, that some Years ago (which was I think the second Summer af∣ter the Providence of God had cast me a∣mong you) I did insist Copiously upon this Subject, which I have now presented you with a Brevi∣ate of; and forasmuch as the Kindness I then received from you, gave me cause to hope, that my poor Labours found acceptance with you, I took encourage∣ment to present you with this Paper, in order to the helping of your Memories with some Hints of those Truths, which some of you have acknowledged to have been conducible to the Illumination of your Ʋnder∣standings, in that great Doctrin of Justification, by
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; and it is the earnest desire of my Soul, that the Lord will be pleased so to attend my poor Endeavours (in this Work) with the powerful Assistance of his Spirit, that they may conduce to the Mortification of your Sins here, and the Glorification of your Souls here∣after; for without Holiness in this VVorld, you must never expect Happiness in the VVorld to come; which Internal and Eternal Happiness of yours, is the earnest desire of him who is, Your Servant for Jesus sake, SAMUEL PACK.
AN EXPOSITION Upon the First Chapter of the Song of Songs. Verse 1. A Song of Songs because of Solomon. Question 1. Answer. WHY is this Book call'd a Song? Because it lays a solid Founda∣tion for a Beleiver's Spiritual Joy, as it reveals unto us the unconceiveable Love of Christ who is the Son of God's Love,Mat 3.17. Col. 2 9. Col. 1.9. Rom. 9.5. and in whom dwells the fulness of the God-head bodily, and in whom it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell, and who is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen. Quest. 2. Why is this Song of Solomon call'd a Song of Songs? Answ. Because it is the chief and principal Song,Eccl. 7.5. not only in opposition to all wicked and filthy Songs which Solomon call'd Songs of Fools; but also in Competition with many Songs of his own making, which the Spirit of God did not think meet to transmit to Posterity as Canonical or a Rule of Faith.
Quest. 3.Ver. 1. What other Reason may be given why this Song of Solomon is call'd a Song of Songs? Answ. Because it doth in a most excellent manner set forth the excellent perfections of Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; on which account it is deservedly entitu∣led, A Song of Songs, Rev. 17.14.19.16. Quest. 4. What other Reason may be given why this Song is call'd a Song of Songs? Answ. Because God by stamping such glory upon the Front of this Book, would for ever silence, or leave inexcusable, those Yokeless and black-mouth'd Sons of Felial, that have got such a sufficient stock of Confidence as to say, That this Book was only an Amourous Discourse that past between Solomon and Pharaoh's Daughter. Quest. 5. Why do you Translate that because, which we have Translated which? Answ. Because  is as often read a causative Particle as which, as in Isai. 53.12. and in a hundred places more. Quest. 6. What other reason can you give thereof? Answ. Because of the subsequent Preposition of, for it would be nonsense to read the words thus, A Song of Songs which of Solomon; but it is good sense to read the words thus, A Song of Songs because of Solomon; that is, it is a chief and principal Song, because it sets forth the tran∣scendent excellency of Christ, who is the chief and principal good. Quest. 7. Why do you Translate it a Song, which we have Translated the Song? Answ. Because there is no Emphaticum in the Hebrew, and we ought not to add to the Word of God. Quest. 8. Why do you read of Solomon, which of is not in our Translation? Answ. Because the Spirit of God has put in , and we ought not to leave it out. Quest. 9. Who is here intended by Solomon? Answ. The Lord Christ, of whom Solomon was a glorious Type,1 Kings 4.29, 30. Col. 2.3. Prov. 8.14. Isai. 40.28. not only in respect of his great wisdom, but as he was appointed by God to build the Temple; and so Christ was appointed by God to build his Church, of which Solomon's Temple was a Type.
Verse 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better than wine. Quest. 10. Who is it that is speaking those words? Answ. The Spouse. Quest. 11. What does the Spouse mean by let him kiss me? Answ. She is thereby manifesting her strong desires after the manifestations of the love of Christ her Spiritual Husband. Quest. 12. Why does the Spouse of Christ express his love by a word of the plural number . Answ. To shew that Holy greediness that is in a gracious Soul after an abundance of the love of Christ, as being ex∣posed to abundance of discouragements. Quest. 13. Why is the word better a word of the plural num∣ber,  goodnesses? Answ. Because of that abundance of goodness that is in the love of Christ, as it makes all things, even afflictions themselves, to conduce to our good. Verse 3. Because of the savour of thy good oint∣ments, thy name is as ointment poured forth; therefore do the virgins love thee. Quest. 14. Whose words are those? Answ. The words of the Spouse or Bride of Christ, in commendation of the Graces of his Spirit. Quest. 15. What is meant by the name of Christ? Answ. All his personal Excellencies by which he is pleased to manifest himself to his Saints. Quest. 16. What is meant by the name of Christ being like Ointment? Answ. Because the personal Excellency of Christ, revealed to a gracious Soul, has the same comforting and cleansing power upon the Heart, as Oyl has upon a wounded Body; and therefore Christ was anointed to heal the broken in Heart. Quest. 17. Why is this Oyl or Ointment express'd by a word of the plural number . Answ. Not only because of that fulness of Grace that is in Christ, but also because of that variety of comforting and purging Grace that is in him.
Quest. 18.Ver. 3. What is meant by the savour of this good Ointment? Answ. The experimental feeling thereof in our Hearts. Quest. 19. Who are meant by those Virgins? Answ. True Believers, which do not defile themselves with the love of sin. Verse 4. Draw me, we will run after thee: the king brought me into his chambers: we will be glad and rejoyce in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine: the upright love thee. Quest. 20. Whose words are those? Answ. They are the words of the Spouse. Quest. 21. What does the Spouse mean by drawing? Answ. She desires that God would by the power of his Spirit so bless all means that he useth with her, to draw her nearer to himself, that she might experience sweet Commu∣nion with him in duty. Quest. 22. What does the Spouse mean by saying, We will run af∣ter thee? Answ. It is as if the Spouse had said, Lord, if thou wilt, draw me nearer to thy self in duty, I will endeavour to draw others along with me. Quest. 23. What is here meant by running after God? Answ. A constant walking in the ways of God; that as the wicked desire to follow the Beast and their own beastly Lusts, so the godly desire with Caleb, to follow the Lord fully. Quest. 24. What is meant by running? Answ. To shew with what labour and diligence we ought to follow God in the way of his Commandments. Christian work is hard work, and therefore is sometimes expressed by striving and fighting, and here by running. Quest. 25. Who is here meant by this King? Answ. Christ himself, the King of Saints and Lord of Glory. Quest. 26. What is meant by the King's Chambers? Answ. The merits of the Death of Christ, together with all the advantages we gain by his Mediatorship; and for as much as the Hebrew word  signifies an inner Bed-Cham∣ber,1 Kings 22.25. which is a place of secrecy, rest and safety, I do conclude
that the Spouse is here speaking of the great delight she did experience in those Chambers of Gospel-Mysteries, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ reveals his everlasting love to a graci∣ous Soul, whereby it is filled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; and therefore says the Spouse in the next words, We will be glad and rejoyce in thee, while Carnal Professors take up with the History of the Gospel,Mat. 13.14. Eph. 3.4. Col 1.6, 27. which we may compare to the Hall, into which any may come that have occasion to come to the House: A gracious Soul is by the Spirit of the living God led into the Mystery of the Gospel, which we may compare to the inner-Chamber into which none do enter but special Friends. Verse 5. I am black, but comply (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon. As in the former Verse we may behold the Spouse in the loving embracings of her Beloved, solacing of her self in the Fruition of those inexplicable Delights, which are the blessed products of her close Communion with her Spiritual Husband in his Spiritual Chambers, in which she did delight and re∣joyce, and whose love she resolved to remember more than Wine; so we have in this Verse the Spouse under dismal Cir∣cumstances, sitting, as it were, with her blubbered Cheeks, her Eyes full of Tears, and her Heart full of sorrow; being un∣der the Tyrannical Power of her Internal, External, and In∣fernal Enemies, who are all combining together to make her Miserable: Such is Satan's enmity against a Gracious Soul, that he will not be wanting to give them a sufficient taste of his Malignant Emulation of their happiness, so far as to let them know that there is nothing but mutability wrote upon the choicest of all created enjoyments, of all which we have a hint in this Verse. Quest. 27. What does the Spouse mean by her being as black as the Tents of Kedar? Answ. As the Off spring of Kedar who was one of the Sons of Ishmael was of barbarous black Conditions,Psal. 120.5, 6. so it is reported that they lived in Tents covered with black Hair-Cloth,
to which the Spouse compared her self,Ver. 5. with respect to her sins and sufferings. Quest. 28. What does the Spouse mean by her being as comply as the Curtains of Solomon? Answ. The Spouse does thereby signifie, That however she is black and deformed, as in her self, yet she is beautiful and comply in Christ, as having his Righteousness imputed to her. Verse 6. Look not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked upon me: my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the vineyards; but my own vineyard have I not kept. Quest. 29. What blackness is it the Spouse is here bemoaning of her self under? Answ. As the principal radicals are here doubled  it does denote the extream blackness of the Spouse, both with respect to her sins and sufferings. Quest. 30. What does the Spouse mean by the Sun looking upon her? Answ. By that is meant the Sun of Persecution, and so it is taken Mat. 13. Quest. 31. What does the Spouse mean by the anger of her Mo∣thers Children? Answ. The Persecuting rage of those that pretended to be Sons of the Church, as they did own some Fundamental Truths, but she does not call them her Fathers Children or Sons , because those that are indeed Children of God dare not be persecutors of the Saints. Quest. 32. What does the Spouse mean by those Vineyards which her angry Persecutors made her a keeper of? Answ. Those false Churches which for fear of Persecution the Spouse did joyn her self with; for Churches are often ex∣pressed by Vineyards, whether they are true or false. Quest. 33. What does the Spouse mean by her not keeping her own Vineyard? Answ. Her forsaking of that true Congregated Church to which she stood related.
Quest. 34.Ver. 6. Were there any congregated Churches under Old Testament Administraions? Answ. No: but though this Book was wrote by Solomon when God had only his National Jewish Church, yet the matter contained therein relates to Gospel Administra∣tions. Verse 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loveth) where thou feedest, where thou causest thy flocks to est at noon: for why should I be as one that turn∣e aside to the flocks of thy companions? Quest. 35. Whose words are those? Answ. The words of the Spouse to Christ. Quest. 36. Why does the Spouse seem to boast of her love to Christ after her backsliding from him? Answ. If we read the words as they are wrote in the He∣brew line, they run thus, Cause to declare to me, O thou who lovest my soul: as if the Spouse  had said, Lord, while I can take no comfort in my love to thee, because of the mutability thereof, of which I have given a sad Demonstration in my backslidings from thee, yet with this I comfort my self, That though my love has appeared to be mutable to thee, yet thy love is immutable to me: But if we read the words as they are Translated, then they denote thus much, as if the Spouse had said, Lord, although I have, through human infirmity, for fear of Persecution, let false Churches have my Body, yet I am no backslider in Heart, Prov. 14.14. The Enemy had my Body, and too much of that too, but thou hast my Soul; thou knowest that my Soul loves thee, which love of mine I desire to manifest by my returning a∣gain to my former Station, and by my constant persisting in the good ways of God, whatever I suffer from my Mothers Children. Quest. 37. What does the Spouse mean by the Flocks of Christ resting at Noon? Answ. Their quiet and peaceable frames of Spirit in the heat and noon-time of Persecution.
Quest. 38.Ver. 7. Who are those that the Spouse calls the Compani∣ons of Christ? Answ. They are the Godly Pastors of those Flocks which the Spouse is enquiring after Communion with. Quest 39. But for as much as those Companions are generally understood of Hereticks, I desire to know the reason of your contra∣ry Judgment? Answ. 1. Because God does never in his Word call Here∣ticks his Companions 2. Because the Hebrew word  does denote God's joyned ones,1 Cor. 6 17. and he that is joynen to the Lord is one Spirit;Hos. 4.17. and the word is used in the singular to denote that oneness that is between the wicked and their Lusts. Quest. 40. But if those Companions are Godly Pastors, why does the Spouse say, Why should I be as one that turneth aside to the Flocks of thy Companions? Answ. This last whole sentence (except the last word) has no footing in the Hebrew, which reads the words thus, I will as, or like a covering upon the Flocks of thy Companions; and the leaving out of the Verb , which is the Indicative Mood, is that which is the ground of this Mistake; and this word and no other, is used throughout all the Old Testament; for I will be, except it be when I will be has a conversive , so that if we read  for I will be (which is always so read) then the words as they are usually taken run thus, Tell me (O thou whom my soul loveth) where thou feedest, where thou causest thy flocks to rest at noon; for I will be as one that turneth aside to the flocks of Hereticks. I might have given another reason why those Companions cannot be understood of Hereticks, and that is, because the Spouse resolves to be a covering to them which she would not be to Hereticks. Quest. 41. What does the Spouse mean by those words, I will be as a covering? Answ. The Hebrew word  does denote a Glorious covering,Isai. 61.3. and is used for a Garment of Praise, (but is never used for a Whores Vail, as some think) and the substance of that which I suppose is contained in the words, is this, That as the Spouse had by her backsliding from God disho∣noured
the Gospel, and weakned the Hands and Hearts of the Faithful, so now she does resolve by her Holy humble walking before God, to adorn the Gospel as much as ever she had defaced it; and that she would joyn unto her holy and close walking with God such a degree of courage and magnanimity of Soul, as that thereby she might be a means to encourage those in the ways of God, that had been discouraged by her former backsliding Example. Verse 8. If thou knowest not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the foot∣steps of the flock, and feed thy kids by the shep∣herds tents. Quest. 42. Whose words are those? Answ. They are the words of Christ to the Spouse after her backsliding from God. Quest. 43. Why does Christ call the Spouse the fairest among Women, who by her backsliding had made her as black as the Tents of Kedar? Answ. To shew that he had pardoned all her former backslidings, and also to encourage us to confess and forsake all our sins as the Spouse did, and then we shall not need to fear but we shall find mercy, though not for so doing, yet in so doing. Quest. 44. What Flocks are they that Christ would have his Spouse go by the footsteps of? Answ. The Flocks of those Godly Pastors before men∣tioned. Quest. 45. What is meant by the footsteps of the Flocks? Answ. That is, to follow the Examples of those that have through Faith and Patience inherited the Promises; as if Christ had said, O my Spouse, as thou hast been at a great loss in thy Spirits by imitating the wicked, and hast joyned thy self with them in their worship, so now if thou hast a desire to be acquainted with the form of my House, then be sure to tread in the steps of
those that are the most Holy in their Lives,Ver. 8. and the soundest in their Judgment. Quest. 46. What is meant by young Kids? Answ. Young Saints, that the Spouse by her Godly Example and Admonition had been instrumental to Con∣vert. Quest. 47. What is meant by the Spouse feeding of her Kids? Answ. The readiness of the Spouse to nourish the Faith and Hope of young Saints in God, by im∣parting to them the experiences she had of the pardon∣ing and comforting Grace of God to her Soul after her fall. Quest. 48. Why are young Saints call'd Kids? Answ. Because that as a Kid is a young Goat, so God is pleased thereby to let us know that we are by Na∣ture such Goats, as deserve to be at the last day set on the left-hand of Christ, and to pass under that dread∣ful sentence, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire. Quest. 49. VVho are interded by those Shepherds? Answ. Those Godly Pastors before mentioned. Quest. 50. VVhat is meant by the Shepherds Tents? Answ. The Divine Perfections of God, and his graci∣ous Promises of Protecting, Directing and Comforting Grace, for the supporting of his Ministers in the greatest of dangers, and in the worst of times. Quest. 51. Is there not a word in the Hebrew  which is twice left out? Answ. Yea: And whereas Christ says, If thou knowest not for thy self; his meaning is, If thou knowest not for thy own good: Job 35.6, 7. as if Christ had said, If thou art igno∣rant of thy duty, the damage will be to thy self; and if thou keepest close to thy duty, the advantage will be to thy self; for Man cannot be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself.
Verse 9. I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs chariots. Quest. 52. Why does Christ compare his Spouse to a company of Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots? Answ. Because of that Spiritual courage with which the Heart of the Spouse was fill'd after her cowardly forsaking of God;Job 37. from 19. to 25. for of all Beasts there is no Creature so couragious and fit for War as a Horse; and of all Horses there are none so good as East-Country Horses; and of all East Country Horses none so good as Aegyptian Horses; and of all Ae∣gyptian Horses none so good as those in Pharaoh's Chariots:Ezek. 17.15. 1 Kings 10.28. and therefore, as Peter did abound in courage, after his cowardly fall, so Christ seeing the same Spirit in the Spouse, his goodly house in the battel, who had arrived unto fresh cou∣rage, in her Spiritual warfare, against the Flesh, the World,Zech. 10.3. and the Devil, is pleased to compare her to a company of Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots. Verse 10. Thy cheeks are comly with rows, thy neck with chains. Quest. 53. What is meant by those rows? Answ. As Christ in the former Verse had compared his Spouse to a stately War-horse; so in this Verse we may see how he manages his goodly horse in the battel, and that is by his holy righteous Laws, which are Bridles in the Jaws of his People; for as War horses would be ungovernable and un∣serviceable to their Riders without Bridles to order their Mo∣tion, so the Saints are guided by the Laws of God put into their hearts, whereby God makes them serviceable for the treading down of his and their Spiritual Enemies, viz. The Flesh, the World, and the Devil; and such is the corrupti∣on of Nature that is in the best of Men, that they need the Bridle of God's Law to lay a restraint upon their Constitu∣tion sins; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin.
Quest. 54.Ver. . Why do you think that by Rows are meant Laws? Answ. Because the Hebrew word Laws here used for Rows,  comes of , which signifies an orderly course of things, and has such near affinity with  that signifies a Law, that the Spirit of God puts one for an∣other, as will appear by comparing 2 Sam 7.19. with 1 Chron. 17.17. And God does by the Bridle of his Law keep the Saints in an orderly course of duty. Quest. 55. Why do you leave out those words, Jewels and Gold? Answ. Because they are not in the Hebrew, and therefore our Translators have set them down in a different letter. Verse 11. We will make for thee borders of gold with studs of silver. Quest. 56. Who is it that is here speaking in the first person plural, We will? Answ. God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, who were from all eternity contriving a way how to beautifie us with the priviledges of the Gospel, exprest by Gold. Quest. 57. What is meant by Borders? Answ. Those Rows of Gold mentioned in the antecedent Verse, for the Hebrew word is the same in both Verses; and I suppose the reason why we have it Translated Borders, is, because that as Borders do set bounds to places, so the Gospel sets bounds to the Corruptions of the Saints. Quest. 58. Why are those Laws or Rows call'd Golden Rows in this Verse, which wanted the adjunct in the former? Answ. Because that as the Ornaments of a Bridle do in beauty exceed the Bit; so Gospel Priviledges and Gospel worship do far in Glory exceed a legal Ministry.Isai. 60.17. Quest. 59. What is here meant by studs of silver? Answer. The Hebrew word  signifies Specks, and is so used for Jacob's speckled Cattel; and it is used likewise in the singular  for one that is a Keeper or Master of Sheep, and may point at the Ministers of the Gospel; for as Rows of Gold and Silver do set off each other with glory and lustre in the Bridles of Kings War-horses, so the Golden Pri∣viledges and Institutions of the Gospel, being held forth and
administred by Gospel Ministers,Ver. 11. who are Vessels of Silver purified by the Fire of God's Spirit, do set off each other with glory and lustre. Verse 12. While the king sitteth at his Table, my spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof. Quest. 60. Who is here intended by this King? Answ. The Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Kings. Quest. 61. What is meant by the King sitting at his Table? Answ. The gracious Presence of Christ, with worthy Com∣municants at the Lords Supper. Quest. 62. What is meant by the Spikenard of the Spouse send∣ing forth its smell? Answ. The exercise of all the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit which is a blessed effect of the presence of Christ with us in that Glorious Ordinance, and therefore the Hebrew begins the Verse with , which denotes ever; and a gracious Soul ever experiences the exercise of Faith, and Love, and Humili∣ty, and Repentance, when it enjoys the Spiritual Presence of Christ at his Supper: I find also in the words a causative Par∣ticle  denoting thus much, That the Presence of Christ with us at the Supper, is the cause of the exercise of our Graces. Verse 13. A bundle of myrrhe is my well beloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. Quest. 63. Why does the Spouse compare Christ to a bundle of Myrrhe? Answ. To shew how sweet and delightful he was unto her; for Myrrhe was one of those fragrant Ingredients of which the Holy Oyl was made, which prefigured the Grace with which the humanity of Christ was abundantly replenished. Quest 64. Why does the Spouse compare Christ rather to Myrrhe than to any other of those fragrant Ingredients of which the Holy Oyl was made? Answ. Because though Myrrhe is sweet of smell, it is bit∣ter of taste; and this might be to signifie to us, that a Gra∣cious
Soul is as willing to embrace Christ in his bitterest Dispensations,Ver. 13. as in his most halcyon Providences. A gra∣cious Soul prefers the bitterest of Christ before all sweets without him, and is willing to wear a Crown of Thorns for Christ, as well as a Crown of Glory with him. Quest. 65. VVhy does the Spouse compare Christ to a Bag of Myrrhe? Answ. To signifie that those who once have Christ, shall never lose him; for as Job did conclude that not one of his sins could be lost that God had put up in his Bag, which is the very same word here used for Bundle ; so a graci∣ous Soul can never lose Christ that has a saving interest in him. Quest. 66. VVhat is meant by the Breasts of the Spouse? Answ. If we take the Spouse for the whole Church of Christ, then by her Breasts we understand the Ministers of the Gospel, which are to yield the sincere Milk of the Word for the nourishment of those Babes of Christ, which he begets by his Word and Spirit; but if by the Spouse we understand any particular True Believer, then it only shews that great delight they take in Christ,Eph. 3.17. and to have him dwell in their Hearts by Faith. Verse 14. My beloved is unto me, as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi. As in the former Verse the Spouse had compared Christ to a Bag of Myrrhe, to shew how excellent he is in himself; so in this Verse she compares him to a Cluster of Camphire, to shew how advantagious he is to her. Quest. 67. VVhat is here meant by Camphire? Answ. The word seems to come of the Hebrew word , which denotes Atonement: But Famous Ainsworth well ob∣serves, That Camphire is a Gum, and not the Fruit of a Tree brought forth by Clusters, and therefore he Translates it Cy∣press; and, with submission to better Judgments, I suppose the Holy Ghost may intend thus much, That as we bring forth our sins by Clusters, so Christ is a Cluster of Atone∣ment for their Expiation: but I shall leave the certainty of
the Mind of God in this Verse,Ver. 14. to such as have their Five Ta∣lents, and so pass on to another Question. Quest. 68. What is meant by the Vineyards of En-gedi? Answ. En-gedi is a very Fruitful Place in the Land of Cana∣an, and within the Lot of Judah, which was likewise call'd Hazazantamer, Josh. 15 52. 2 Chron. 20.2. where God gave Jehosaphat a glorious Vi∣ctory over his Enemies, and may denote thus much, That Christ is not only Fruitful in bringing forth Clusters of Atonement for Believers, but they shall also, through the Power of his might, overcome the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, as Jehosaphat did at En-gedi overcome Moab, Amon and Mount Seir: And as En-gedi is compounded of two He∣brew words, and does denote a Fountain of young Cches so it may hold forth the great Extent and Latitude of e r∣doning Atoneing Grace of Christ, and that it shou  be circumscribed within the bounds of the Jewish National Church, but should be extended to Gentile Churches which are here, as in other places, called Vineyards, though they were then but Pagans; and therefore might well be called a Fountain of young Goats. Quest. 69. But is not  a word of the singular number? How then can that denote a Fountain of Kids? Answ. So all Pharaoh's Horses and Chariots are expressed by the singular number.Ex. 15.1. Verse 15. Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair, thy eyes are doves eyes. As in the former Verses the Spouse had been commending of her Spiritual Husband Christ Jesus, so in this Verse Christ is commending that Beauty of his Spouse which he had put upon her. Quest. 70. What is meant by the Doves Eyes of the Spouse? Answ. The Ministers of the Gospel, which were before expressed by beautifying Specks of Silver, and by needful Breasts for the refreshment of the Saints by their heavenly Doctrin; so in this Verse they are expressed by Eyes, be∣cause they are to guid and lead the Spouse in the Paths
of Godliness,Ver. 15. as the Eyes of our Bodies are to guid and lead us in our way for the prevention of dangers; for which cause the Prophets were formerly called Seers, 1 Sam. 9.9. Quest. 71. Why are Ministers called Doves? Answ. Because of their Spiritual and Corporal Chastity, and also because of their innocency and harmlessness, and to shew how they are in this World exposed to all kind of wrongs and injuries by the Vulters of this World: and likewise as a Dove is a clean Creature, so true Ministers of Christ are such as are clean in their Ordination, and clean in their Conversation, and clean in their Worship, and clean in their Doctrin and Discipline. Verse 16. Behold thou art fair my beloved, yea pleasant; also our bed is green. As in the former Verse we have Christ commending the beauty of his Spouse, so in this Verse we have the Spouse returning the praise thereof unto himself, who is fairer than the Sons of Adam, and from whom proceeds every good and perfect Gift,Psal. 45.2. and in whom it pleased the Fa∣ther that in him all fulness of beautifying Grace should dwell. Quest. 72. What does the Spouse mean by her green Bed? Answ. Her fruitfulness in bringing forth Spiritual Chil∣dren, to her Spiritual Husband, when her Ministers are Spiritual Doves. Verse 17. The beams of our Houses are cedar, and our rafters of fir. As in the former Verse the Spouse had in a general way expressed her Spiritual fruitfulness, so in this Verse she is in a more particular manner demonstrating the truth there∣of, by the plurality of Churches that should be under Gospel-Administrations.
Quest. 73. What is meant by the Beams of our House? Ver. 17. Answ. The Ministers of the Gospel; for as the true Mi∣nisters of Christ are the Breasts and Eyes of the Church, considered as the Spouse of Christ; so if we consider of the Church as she is Gods Building, and his Spiritual House, so they are the Beams thereof, as Christ is the Foundation, the Corner Stone, and the Top-Stone thereof. Quest. 74. What makes you take the Beams of this House of God to be the Pastors thereof? Answ. Because the Hebrew word  comes of a Verb that signifies to Preach or Proclaim. Quest. 75. Why are those Beams said to be Cedar? Answ. As Cedars are tall, strong, flourishing, sound Trees, of a fragrant smell; so Pastors of Churches are or ought to be flourishers in Grace, strong in the Faith, sound in their Conversations, and sweet and fragrant in all their Civil Deportments before Men. Quest. 76. What is meant by Houses? Answ. Congregated Churches. Quest. 77. Why do you Translate the word Houses which we have Translated House? Answ. Because the Hebrew word  is of the plural number. Quest. 78. What is meant by those Rafters? Answ. Other Church-Officers which are considerably ma∣terials in Gods Building; and the ground of my Judgment is, because the word is used for Watering-Troughs or Gutters for Sheep to drink in;Gen. 30.38. and so godly Church-Officers ought in their respective Places to lay out themselves by their Godly Exhortations, and Comforting Admonitions, to comfort Gods Spiritual Sheep. Quest. 79. What is meant by Fir-Trees? Answ. Although I do not find the Hebrew word Broshime in any other place but this; that is, there is none the same verbatim, yet I find Broshime used for Fir-Trees, Psal. 104.17.  being turned to , which is usual with the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, and which, I suppose, was a strong inducement to our Translators to Translate  Fir-Trees.
Quest. 80. Why are Church-Officers expressed by Fir-Trees? Ver. 17. Answ. Because that as Fir-Trees are tall, straight, flourish∣ing Trees, of a sweet and fragrant smell, so all Church-Officers, as well as Pastors, ought to be Holy in their Lives, and flourishing in all the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit. And thus I have, in the improvement of my one Talent, given that account of this Chapter, which I humbly judge to be the Mind of God therein; and if my Labours find ac∣ceptance with the Saints, I will make a further progress into this Book. INIS.
