P2017 13506891 99831
Restauranda: OR THE NECESSITY OF Publick Repairs, By setling of a certain and Royal yearly REVENUE FOR THE KING. OR The Way to a well-being for the KING and His PEOPLE, proposed by the Establishing of a fitting Revenue for him, and Enacting some Necessary and Wholsome Laws for the PEOPLE. London, Printed by Richard Hodgkinson, for the Author, and are to be sold by Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun, over against Saint Dunstons Church in Fleetstreet, 1662.
REGI ET PATRIAE VERISQUE HONORIS ET FELICITATIS ANGLIAE CULTORIBUS, HASCE VELUTI MATE∣RIARUM SEDES, DICAT DEDICATQUE FABIANUS PHILIPPS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS. CHAP. I. REvenues of the Kings of England. Pag. 6 CHAP. II. Supplies and Additions to the Royal Revenues, and the many cares taken therein by Parliaments and otherwise. p. 14 CHAP. III. Ruine and decay of the Revenues. p. 30 CHAP. IV. The Remedies. p. 58
Some Errata's or faults escaped the Printer, which the Reader is intreated to correct and amend in this manner. PAge 2 line 15 dele by, p. 7. l. 10 dele may, p. 27 l. 26. for their read the, p. 68. l. 14. interfere, had in principio, & dele, in fine, p. 69. l. 5. for and worser. or worse, and l. 29. for which r. and p. 58. for Chap. l. r. Chap. IV. p. 81. l. 23. dele that, p▪ 83 l. 31. dele and and .
Restauranda, OR The necessity of Publick Repairs, by the setling of a certain and Royall yearly Revenue for the KING. OR The Way to a well-being for the KING and his PEOPLE proposed, by the establishing of a fitting Revenue for Him, and Enacting some necessary and wholsome Lawes for the People. A Long course of time, & Annosa vetustas, which weares out and subdues the most stubborne Rocks and Marbles, and crumbles into dust and ruin things of long duration, together with the neces∣sities, cares and affairs, which do usual∣ly busie Crowns and Princes and their Royall Revenues
in the protection and welfare of themselves and the people committed to their charge, may without the in∣considerate censures of those who think much of every Ayde and Contribution which they give towards the effecting or support of their own and their posterities happiness, be well supposed to be no small cause of wasting and lessening those Royal supports or means which our Kings of England have heretofore had to do it withall, and as streams running far from their springs and fountains without the help or company of other waters to augment or goe along with them, may be al∣lowed more then a little to drie up or languish, and might silence the murmur and complaints of those who can be content to beg & get all they can from the King, and by too often by false pretences concealing the worth or value of what they ask of him, doe gain thereby ten times more then they seem to request, or he intends to give them, and making no scruple to deceive him, which our blessed Saviour never taught them when he commanded to give to Caesar that which was Caesars, think it is Kingly to be cozened, and that he can never give, or be deceived too much; yet when he comes to demand any help or assistance from them, though it be but for a publick good and their own preservation, can crie out, burdens and oppressions, and as if he were some Ocean, never to be drawn drie, or Mountain never to be digged down or exhausted; an Elixir to transmute and enrich others without any wast or diminution of its self, or the Sun in the firmament, which can enlighten, heat, and nourish all things and be never the worse for it, marvail how he can come to want; and if they doe be∣lieve him to be in any necessity, are ready to lay the
cause or blame of it upon his Officers for taking more care of their own Estates then his, and for a thri∣ving way of Arithmetick, by substracting from his to increase and multiply their own; whilest many who have but lately tasted of his bounty, or whose Fathers, Grandfathers or Ancestors have lest them goodly In∣heritances, which were either of the guift of the King or his Progenitors; or purchased and gained by beneficial offices and places or imployments under them, can look upon every Subsidy, Tax or Assessment as a blast, or mildew of their corn, some plague or epidemicall dis∣ease, or a greater national calamity, and give them no better an aspect or entertainment then the children of Israel did their Egyptian Tax-masters when they were commanded to make their Tale of Brick and gather the straw, though they never repine or grumble at the same time at ten times a greater sum to a Merry-meeting or a Feast, or spent in a horse-race, a thousand or five hundred pounds lost in a night at dice, three or four hundred pounds spent in a Treatment or Banquet, or the large or sinfull expensive vanities of themselves and their wives and children. And too many, who would be thought to be bet∣ter Subjects and Patriots then others, can seem to hate a Civil warre, shrink at the imagination of the miseries thereof, tremble at a forreign Invasion Free∣quarter, Plunder, and the Outrage of Souldiers; com∣plain of want of Trade, or the guarding of the Seas; boast of the ancient honour and glory due unto their Nation, and take a pleasure to recount it to their chil∣dren, or read it in their Histories, and not a few also who in our late twenty years rebellion, and the spoils and af∣flictions
which attended it, could drive honester men then themselves into Taxes and Assessements, and think a million and a half in yearly Assessements for some years together, besides a fifth part of their real Estates, a twentieth of their personal, and many other of their Depredations amounting to more then all the Taxes and Aydes put together, which for five hundred years last past were imposed by our Kings and Princes, to be little enough to sacrifice to a mistaken godliness, will notwithstanding doe as very little as they can to contri∣bute any thing to the procuring and enjoying the blessings of peace and plenty, or avoyd the con∣trary. And do never so well esteem of their own policies, as when they can by pretences of debts, poverty, or charge of children, shift of necessary and publick duties, and by undervaluing of their own Estates, or overva∣luing others, make as smal an offering as they can to their oathes of Allegiance and Supremacy, and necessi∣ties of their Prince and Defender of their Faith as well as their Estates. And too too many whilst they cannot but acknow∣ledge if Scripture and the Lawes of God and man may be their guide and directors, that he hath lately by Gods mercy and a miracle redeemed them and their Laws and Liberties out of a slavery which stuck like a leprosie, and was like to be entailed upon them and their po∣sterities, rescued Religion, and gave them their Lands and Estates again which the just Lawes of the Land once called their Birthright had forfeited unto him, can by an unheard and not easily to be believed ingra∣titude, after his Act of Oblivion and Free-pardon, nei∣ther
deserved nor purchased, and preferments bestowed upon them, fall into such an oblivion as nature abhorres, and humanity must needs blush at, and not offer any thing in a benevolence ordered by Act of Parliament instead of a Tax or Subsidie. And very many of those which did give any thing (some loyal and right-hearted excepted) having obtained of the King to give away the principallest Flower of his Crown, by releasing of his Tenures in Capite and by Knights service, and promised him Tenures in Corde in part of satisfaction, would not be pleased to find the way afterwards to give him so much as the twentith part of their yearly vain and unne∣cessary expences towards the relieving of the publick and his private necessities. For the better information therefore of all such who are unwilling to part with a Fancy, that the Reve∣nues of our Kings of England are immense or largely sufficient for their occasions, and to dispose them to the duty which the Laws of God and Men have command∣ded and directed; and evidence the reason and neces∣sity which the King now hath to demand a supplement of his Revenue, and for his good people of England not to deny it him, and that the decayes and ruins thereof have not been occasioned only by an heretofore ill-ma∣nagement of the Finances, but by time, and an age of many ages, multiplicity of expences, indulgences to the people, and necessity of affirs and government, which exhausting the radicall heat and moysture, have so spent the spirits of the body politick, as they have brought it to that feinting, languishing and weak condition it is now in. It will not be inconvenient from the mountains and
hills of time to look down into the valleys of the ages past and take a short view (for a longer would better become the designe of a Volume then what is here briefly to be represented) of the Revenues of our Kings of England before and since the Conquest. CHAP. I. Revenues of the Kings of England. IN the Prospect whereof it will be more then a con∣jecture, that those of the Saxon race, before the Nor∣man Invasion, had in their Heptarchy (except Wales, and the barren and mountainous part of our Britain, to which the distressed Reliques of that Nation had for shelter and safety retired) the most part of the Lands and Revenues of the British Kings; that Egbert King of the West Saxons, and Alured, and after them Edgar sole Monarch of Albion and the Saxon Dominions, and his Successors, having possessed themselves of all the o∣ther Kings Estates, could not probably be without very large Demeasnes and Revenues, and that not only they, but all the succeeding Saxon Kings have made the support of themselves Regality, Government, and Affaires in and by the constant and certain Revenues and profits of their Lands in Demeasne and Service, which as a Sacrum Patrimonium and concomitant of the Crown, may by the ancient Charters of many of our Kings before the Conquest, the grant of the Manor of Malling in the County of Sussex by Egbert King of
the West Saxons, in An. Dom. 838. distinction of Crown Lands and Terra Regis (a great part of which were no other then what was since, and is now called Antient Demeasne) mentioned and recorded in Doomesday book, that Liber censualis and grand Register or Survey of the Lands of the Kingdome precedented by the Book or Roll of Winchester, made by King Alfred or Alured, a resumption of some of the Crown Lands in the reigns of King Stephen, Henry the Second, and Henry the Third, and several of their Successors the Articles enquired of in the succeeding Eyres, a Judgment in 6 Edw. 1. against the Abbot of Feversham for some of the Crown lands which were aliened by King Stephen. And the opinion of Bracton, a Judg in the later end of the reign of King Henry the Third lib. 2. de le∣gibus & consuetudinibus regni Angliae, that, Est res quasisacra res fiscalis quae dari non potest, nec vendi, nec ad alium transferri a principe, vel a rege regnante, & quae faciunt ipsam coronam & communem utilitatem re∣spiciunt, may be understood to be unalienable. And by the casuall and uncertain profits & revenues of the Crown Jure superioritatis, which to such as shall acquaint themselves with the Saxon Lawes, Customes, and Antiquities, will appear to be Escheats and Forfei∣tures, Mines Royall, Herriots, Reliefs upon the deaths of Tenants in Capite, and by Knights Service (which in those more gratefull times amounted to very much) the benefit of Tolls and Customes, Manbote, Blood∣ite, with many other Wita's and Wera's Capitis esti∣mationes, mulcts, penalties, and fruits of the Kingly Prerogative, which then, and with Wardships, Live∣ries, Profits of Annum diem & vastum Fines, Assart
lands, and Fines for Incroachments, Purprestures, and divers other things in many Kings reigns after the Con∣quest were used to be exactly and carefully collected by the Comites, or Earles and Governours of the Shires or Provinces who had the third penny, then accounted so much as to become an honourable allowance for their collecting it; and the Praepositi, Shire Reeves, and other Officers of the Crown, and in the Courts of Justice, as well great as small, and the Iters and Circuits of the Justices: and that when the sinnes and miseries of our Saxon Ancestors had enriched William the Conqueror, and entitled him to the Directum Dominium of all, and the utile Dominium of the greatest part of the lands and possessions of England: and he had given away much of it to his great Commanders, Friends, Allies & Souldiers (many of whom were not without their own patrimo∣nies and great possessions in Normandie and other trans∣marine parts) and glutted them with the spoils and in∣heritance of the English; and had to those large Terri∣tories and Demeasnes which he reserved to himself, and the Terra Regis and antient Demeasnes of King Edward the Confessor, which he united to the Crown a further increase by the no small Estates and Inheritances of some of his after unquiet great Nobility, as Edwin Earl of York, Ralph Earl of Suffolk, William Fitz-Osberne Earl of Hereford, Edric surnamed the Forrester Howard le Exul, Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, and divers other of the English and Normans. That which most concerned him and his successors in the reigns of William Rufus and Henry the First, the former of whom had his Estate augmented by the tem∣poralties and vacancies of Bishopricks, Abbies and
Priories, and the later by the Attainders and great Estates and Inheritance of Robert Mowbray Earle of Northumberland, Robert de Belesme Earle of Arundell and Shrowsbury, William Earle of Mortaigne and Corn∣wall, (both of them having much in demeasnes, and a great deal more in service for Aydes in warre, holden of them, their Coloni or Glebae adscriptitii, socage Te∣nants, which did most of their servile works without money, and paid them besides an annual Rent in corn and other houshold provisions,) was to quiet the ruined English, and by intermarriages of them and the Nor∣mans and Forreigners and other establishments, to as∣sure what was gained to their posterities, the plen∣ty and abundance whereof continuing through the reigns of King Stephen and King Henry the Second, who greatly inlarged his Dominions by the Dutchy of Aquitain, Earldomes of Aniou, Main, Poictou Touraine, and other Provinces and parts of France, the Lands of Henry de Essex his Standard-bearer by inheritance, forfeited for the treason of throwing it down and flying, and reporting that he was slain; the Earldome of Lincoln (Earldomes being then and long after not without great Possessions and Re∣venues belonging to them:) the Lands of William Peverell Lord of Nottingham; Conquest of Ire∣land, and whole Counties and Provinces there∣of comming to be the Kings Demeasnes and the forfeitures to Richard the First of many of his Nobility and others who had taken part with his Brother John in his usurpation of the Regall autho∣rity.
All which with the Escheats and Forfeitures of the Terra Normanorum in England, upon the losse of Normandy by King John unto the French, confis∣cated Lands of a great part of the English Nobility and Gentry, after the misfortune of Henry the Third, in the unquietness of many of his Barons and Peo∣ple, his better fortune in the battel of Evesham, and subduing them in the forty ninth year of his Reign, the accession to the Crown of the Earle∣doms of Derby, Leicester, Salisbury, and the Coun∣ty Palatine of Chester, with the vast Territories and Estates which belonged unto them, and many other lesser Escheats and Forfeitures; the Forfeiture of Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk and his Earldome, and great Possessions with divers other Escheats and Forfei∣tures, the Principality of Wales and the Conquest of Scotland in the Reign of King Edward the First, con∣fiscating of the lands of inheritance (for from the ma∣king of the Statute de Donis or Entails in Anno 13. of Edward the first, untill Anno 5 & 6 of Edward the sixth, Lands entailed were not forfeited for Treason) of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Lincoln and Derby; Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex; of the Lords Clifford, Warrein, Lisle, Tutchet, Cheney, Mow∣bray, Teyes, Aldenham, Badlesmere and Gifford, and ma∣ny other men of great note and eminencie to King Ed∣ward the second, the lands of Mortimer Earl of March, Edmund Earl of Kent, and the Escheat of the great E∣state and Inheritance of Hastings Earl of Pembroke to King Edward the third, with several other confiscations and forfeitures, and his Conquest of a great part of
France, the forfeitures of Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael dela Pooli Earl of Suffolk, of the Duke of Gloucester, Earles of Arundel and Warwick, and divers other great Inheritances to King R. 2. the marriage of John of Grant fourth son to King Ed. 3. to Blanch the sole daughter and heir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Leicester and Lincoln, making that of Lancaster to be as a Principality or little Kingdome, which by Henry 4, 5, 6, and 7th Kings of England com∣ing afterwards to attend the Royal Dignity, accompa∣nied by the forfeitures of the Dukes of Exeter and Al∣bemarle, Mowbray Earl Marshal, Earles of Kent, Salisbury Huntington, Northumberland, Stafford, March and Wor∣cester Owen Glendour; Lords, Hastings, Despencer, Fal∣conbridge, Bardolph, and many others to King H. 4. and the lands of the Earldome of Oxford long detained by him, confiscation of the lands of the Prior Ali∣ens, and all France conquered and in possession, and ma∣ny other great Estates coming to Hen. 5. by the Attain∣ders of Richard Earl of Cambridge, Earl of Northum∣berland, Henry Lord Scroop; the lands of Widevill Earl Rivers, and divers other Barons, the Dukedomes of Exeter and Somerset, and Earldome of Devonshire, and many other Lands and Inheritances forfeited to King Edward the Fourth, the Lands and Estate of Henry Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Stafford and Northamp∣ton, and Lord of Brecknock and Holderness, Henry Earl of Richmond, and Jasper Earl of Penbroke, with some other to King Richard the Third, accumulated by the great and Princely Inheritance of Richard Duke of York, and all the partakers of him and King Edward the fourth his brother, with the Lands and great Inheritance of the
Countess of Warwick, gained by King H. 7. his fortune at Bosworth-field, and the marriage and inheritance, of the Royal and principall heir of the white Rose; the confiscations of the lands of John Duke of Norfolk, Earls of Surrey, Warwick, Lincoln, Lords Lovel, Welles, Audley, and divers others, like many great rivers run∣ning into the Ocean of the Crown revenues, made its Lands and Estate to be as vast in Demeasnes, and Ser∣vice, as they were Princely and honourable. Which being likewise abundantly enlarged by King Hen. 8. by the unprosperous dissolution of the Abbey and religious Lands, which the envy of the Laity in the reign of King H. 4. had (over and above (as they said) what would serve for the remaning Clergy) computed to be sufficient and enough to maintain fifteen Earles (which after the rate of Earls in those dayes and their grand revenues, could not be a little) fifteen hundred Knights, six thousand two hundred Gentlemen, and an hundred Hospitals, besides twenty thousand pounds per annum to be given to the King (which was then more then one hundred thousand pounds per annum is now) and were at their dissolution six hundred forty and five Ab∣beys, Priories and Nunneries, ninety Colledges, one hundred and ten Hospitals, and two thousand three hun∣dred seventy and four Chanteries and free Chappels, then valued at one hundred-eighty six thousand fifteen pounds eight shillings penny farthing per annum. And together with the forfeited Lands and Inheri∣tance of Empson and Dudley, George Lord Rochford, Edmond de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, the Duke of Buc∣kingham, Earl of Surrey Lord Dacres, and divers others and the confiscation of his two great Favourites
Wolsey and Cromwell, the former of which left him the stately Palaces of Hampton-Court and White∣hall, and the recontinuing of divers liberties with∣held from the Crown by the Lords Marchers of Wales, made so great an accession and increase as the Court of Exchequer was not thought to be comprehen∣sive enough for the care and governance thereof with∣out the short-lived Courts of the Survay, and Augmen∣tation, and First-fruits erected by Act of Parliament for the separate management of the Ecclesiasticall Reve∣nues. By the dissolution whereof shortly after, and not trusting the Exchequer with the better care thereof, the regal revenues if Mr. Christopher Vernon, a late an∣tient and expert Officer of that Court hath not been mistaken, or miscast it, were not so little damnified as six hundred thousand pounds sterling; or if plenty had not as it most commonly useth, introduced profusion, and carelesness, might otherwise have been saved. Which with the Lands and Inheritance of the Duke of Somerset, and others attainted, added by King Ed∣ward the sixth, the forfeitures of the Duke of Northum∣berland; William Parr Marquess of Northampton, John Earl of Warwick, Sir Thomas Wyat and others to Queen Mary; the Lands of the Duke of Norffolk, Philip Earl of Arrundel, the Earls of Westmerland, Essex and Sou∣thampton, Sir John Perrot, Leonard Dacres, and others in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and hers as well as King Edward the sixth's ill advised and unhappy clyp∣ping and lessening the Lands and Revenues of many Bishopricks, Deans and Chapters; forfeitures of the Lord Cobham & Sir Walter Rawley, and of Winter, Grant,
and other the Gunpowder Traytors; the great revenues of the Earles of Tyrone and Desmond, and other large confiscated Escheats and forfeited Estates in Ireland, which came to King James (for before his reign and the subduing of Tyrone, that Kingdome as to the pub∣lick was a greater charge then profit) addition of Scot∣land and all the Appennages and Lands of the royal Brethren and Princes of the blood of England in their several times and ages, falling into the Regal Revenues, would have made a plentifull support for the Crown of England, if they had tarried (as they did not) one for another, and continued unwasted and unaliened. CHAP. II. Supplies and Additions to the Royall Revenues, and the many cares taken therein by Parliaments and other∣wise. WHich could not be prevented by a thousand sixty one pounds and three half pence per diem revenue ex justis reditibus, which William the Conque∣ror had in daily revenue, after his Knights Fees and his large gifts and rewards given to his friends and follow∣ers (which in the now value of money and rates of pro∣vision would a great deal more then treble that summe) as Ordericus vitalis, who was born in his reign, and di∣ed in the beginning of the reign of King Stephen, hath informed us exceptis muneribus regiis, & reatum redem∣ptionibus aliisque multiplicibus negotiis quae Regis Aerari∣um quotidie aduagebant, besides, Gifts, Presents, Confis∣cations,
and other things which did daily increase his riches, nor by sixty thousand pounds sterling,  by him in his Treasury, his Censas Nemorm, rents or profits of Woods, Escheats and incidents of Te∣nures in Capite and by Knight service, Hidage, Da∣negeld, Sponte oblata, for all Grants or Favours which passed from him, Cambium Regium, or benefit of Ex∣changes, rating of the Fees of the Officers of his House∣hold to a certainty per diem, taking accounts upon oath for all his monies issued out or imprest for repair of his Castles and Houses, and fines for granting of Priviledges and Liberties, Contributions to William Rufus towards the building of Westminster-Hall, three shillings upon every hundred Acres or Hide of Land in England to King Hen. 1. and his providence in making every third year a survey of his Woods and Forrests, changing of the penalites of mutilation of members into pecuniary mulcts, turning of his rents which were for∣merly paid in corn and other houshold provisions, into money, and six pence overplus in every pound for any loss or abatement which might happen in the value of money, which being then by reason of his often ab∣sence and residence in Normandy reckoned to be good husbandry, proved shortly afterwards by the change of times, & dearer rates of provision to be the contrary, and a great disadvantage to his Successors; one hundred thousand pounds in money, besides Plate and Jewels left by him in his Treasury, and possest by King Stephen, re∣sumption of divers Lands aliened from the Royal Re∣venue; reforming of the Exchequer by Hen. 2. re∣voking of all Grants of Lands aliened from the Crown, of the Castles of Clebury, Wigmore and Bridgnorth from
Mortimer, City of Gloucester and Lands belong∣ing unto it from Roger, Fitz Miles Earl of Hereford, Castle of Scarborough from William Earl of Albemarle, with many other Lands, Towns and Castles; and from William Earl of Mortain and Warren, base Son to King Stephen, the Castle of Pemsey and City of Norwich; notwithstanding that himself had granted them to the said William Earl of Mortaign in his agreement with King Stephen, alledging that they were of the Demeasnes of the Crown, and could not be alienated, calling of cer∣tain of his great Ministers of Estate to account, and im∣posing a Tax of two pence upon every yoke of Oxen in Ireland, and two pence in the pound by Act of Parlia∣ment of every mans Lands and goods in Normandy, to be paid in the year 1166. and a penny in every pound to be paid for four years following, for the relief of the Christians in the Holy warre, enquiring by his Justices Itinerants, and Articles in Eyre in England of the rights of his Crown and Exchequer, taxing in the 32. year of his reign all his Dominions in France, with the Tenth of the Revenues for that year of all, as well Clergy as Laity but such as went in person to the Holy warre, the tenth of all their moveables, as well gold as silver, and the tenth of the moveables of two hundred of the richest men in London, and of one hundred in York, banishment of William de Ipre Earl of Kent, with his Countrymen and followers, when they grew to be a burden to the Kingdome; nine hundred thousand pounds in money besides Plate and Jewels inestimable left in the Treasury to his Son King Richard the first, great summes of money gained by him by renewing Char∣ters and Fines imposed upon Sheriffs and Accomptants,
and such as had taken part with his Brother John in his usurpations, the tenth of all moveables granted to him, and the City of London giving him a voluntary contri∣bution towards his voyage into the Holy Land; banish∣ment of Otho Earl of York, the Son of his. Sister and all the Bavarians; a fourth part given him by Parliament of all spirituall and temporall Revenues, as much for move∣ables, and twenty shillings for every Knights Fee, re∣sumption of many Grants of Lands and Annuities, two shillings of every plough land taken for preparation of a journy to Normandy; examination of the Accounts of his Exchequer Officers, five shillings laid upon e∣very plough land for another forrain voyage, and a general survey made of his Lands and Profits. Three shillings for every plough land granted by Parliament to King John for his affairs in Normandy, one hundred thousand pounds taxed upon the Clergy towards his charges in Ireland, a thirteenth of all Spi∣rituall and Temporall mens goods, twenty six shillings eight pence for every Knights Fee two shillings upon every plough land, an Ayde of twenty six shillings and eight pence of every Knights fee towards his warres in Wales, with Escauge of such as held of him besides Benevolences, Escheats and Americiaments; twenty shillings of every Knights see towards his charges in Normandy, forty shillings at another time, and an Ayde for the marriage of his Sister Isabel to the Emperor Frederick. The fifteenth part of every mans moveables to King Henry the third for a confirmation of Magna Charta and Charta Foreste, fortieth part of every mans goods towards the payment of his debts, and a thirtieth part
afterwards granted by Act of Parliament, much of his Forrests and Woods converted to errable land, his Parks of Woodstock and Gillingham ploughed, many Grants made in his minority revoked, his great Officers as Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, Chief Justice of Eng∣land, and others called to account, Ranulph Britton Treasurer of his Chamber fined in one thousand marks, a great summe of money given by the City of Lon∣don to be made Toll-free, every one that could dispend in land fifteen pound per annum ordered to be knighted or pay a Fine; great summes of money gained by com∣position with Delinquents at seven years value of their Lands by the Dictū de Kenilworth, his houshold charges lessened, a meaner Port kept, less Almes given, his Jew∣els and the Crown royal pawned, Plate sold to pay his debts at no greater a value then the weight though the workmanship did cost as much, and the golden Shrine of Edward the Confessor, forty shillings for every Knights see twice assessed for his warres in Gascony, great sums of money raised of the Iewes, the banishment of the Poictouins and his half-brothers who had made it too much of their business to beg what they could of the Revenue, and by his own sometimes sitting in the Ex∣chequer to preserve it; thirty two thousand pounds sterling received of Leolin Prince of Wales propaee ha∣benda, and a resumption of divers of the Crown Lands which had been aliened. Nor by an Inquiry in Anno 4. of King Ed. 1, by Act of Parliament of the Castles, Buildings, Lead and Timber of the Kings, his Demeasnes, Parks, Woods, extent of Manors, forrain Parks and Woods, Pawnage, Herbage, Mills, Fishings, Freeholds, Cottages, Cur∣tilages,
customary Tenants, Patronages, Perquisits of Courts, Liberties, Customes and Services; a Subsidie in Anno 6. of his reign of the twentieth part of every mans goods towards the charges of his warres in Wales, the Statute of Quo warranto in Anno 18. to inquire and seise into the Kings hands all liberties usurped; a Sub∣side in anno 22. of his reign upon Woolfels and Hydes transported, a tenth of all goods, the eighth of the goods of the Citizens and Burgesses, a twelfth of the rest of the Laity, and a moiety of the Clergy; in anno 25. and in anno 26. the ninth penny of the Commons, the tenth penny of the Clergy of the Province of Canter∣bury, and the fifth of York, taking away much monies from the Priors Aliens, payment by the Clergy in anno 23 of all such summes of money which they had promi∣sed to pay to the Pope towards the maintenance of the Holy warres, and half a years value of their Ecclesiasti∣call livings and promotions, abased monies, four hun∣dred and twenty thousand pounds fifteen shillings and four pence raised from the Jewes, and a farre greater summe afterwards, contribution of ships and ship-money by the maritime Coasts and Counties in case of danger and invasion, sixty five thousand marks of silver received for Fines of some corrupt Judges, and great summes of money likewise for forfeitures by an Inquisition or Commission of Trail Baston. A fifteenth of the Clergy, and a twentieth of the Temporalty to King Edward the Second, in anno primo of his reign, the moveables and personal Estate of the Knights Templers in England, Contribution of ships and ship-money by the maritime Counties; a fifteenth in anno 6. and the great and rich confiscated personall
Estates of the two Spencers, Father and Son, and an Or∣dinance made pro Hospitio Regis, concerning the regula∣tion of his Houshold. Thirty thousand marks paid to King Edward the third in anno 2. of his reign by Robert Bruce King of Scots, to release his Soveraignity to that Kingdom; a tenth of the Clergy Citizens and Burgesses, and a fif∣teenth of others granted in anno 6. of his reign, Aids of ships & ship-money by the Sea-coasts; and in an. 13. the tenth sheep of all the Lords Demeasnes except of their bound Tenants; the tenth fleece of wool, and the tenth lamb of their store to be paid in two years; and that such of them or their Peers as held by Baronie, should give the tenth of their grain, wool and Lamb, and of all their own Demeasnes, and two thousand five hundred sacks of wool given by the Commons anno 14. the ninth of the grain, wool, and lamb of the Laity, to be paid in two years; the ninth of the goods of the Townsmen, and the fifteenth of such as dwelt in Forrests and Cha∣ses anno 17. forty shillings for every Sack of wool over and above the old rate anno 18. a Disme by the Clergy of Canterbury for three years, two fifteenths of the Commons, and two dismes of the Cities and Towns to be levied in such wise as the last in an. 20. two fifteens to be paid in two years anno 21. two shillings upon every Sack of wool, granted by the Lords without the Com∣mons in anno 22. three fifteens to be paid in three years: All such treasure as was committed to Churches throughout England for the Holy warre, all the goods of the Cluniacques, Cistercians, and some other Orders of Monks, half the wools of the Laity, and the whole of the Clergy; the jewels of the Crown pawned, im∣prisonment
of his Treasurer, abasing some of his and ordaining some of his Exchanges of money to be at London, Canterbury and York, monies abated in weight and made to pass according to former value, and the profits which the forrain Cardinals enjoyed in England during their lives, taken into his hands; one hundred thousand pounds received for the ransome of John King of France, great sums of money for the ransoming of David King of Scotland, Philip afterwards Duke of Burgogne, Jaques de Bourbon, and many of the French Nobility; fifty shillings granted by Parliament in anno 43. for every sack of wool for six years (by which im∣position only, as the Trade of Wools and Cloathing then flourished, the King, as it was computed, might dispend one thousand marks per diem) fifty thou∣sand pounds by the Laity, and as much by the Clergy, granted him by the Parliament in anno 45. to resume his right in France: a Poll-money by Act of Parlia∣ment of four pence for every person of of the Laity that took not almes, of every Clergy-man beneficed twelve pence, and of every Religious person four pence, in anno 50. and a resumption of divers of his Crown Lands. A Subsidie in the first year of K. Richard the second levied upon the great men, to spare the Commons, Poll-money of every person above fifteen years old, Fines of seaventeen shires in anno 21. and causing them to pay great summes of money for aiding the Duke of Gloucester, and Earles of Arrundel and Warwick; the Bohemians which pestered his Court banished, and a resumption of divers of his Crown Lands. A tenth of the Clergy, and a Subsidie of twenty
shillings upon every Knights Fee, twelve pence of every man and woman that could dispend twenty shillings per annum above reprises by their Lands, and so pro∣portionably according to their land revenues, twelve pence of every one whose goods were valued at twenty pounds, and proportionably to what it exceeded, gran∣to King Henry the fourth; seven hundred thousand pounds found in King Richard the second's Treasury, two fifteenths of the Commons in the sixth year of his reign, a tenth and a half of the Clergy, and of the Commons two fifteenths in the ninth, a Subsidie by the Laity, and half a mark a piece of the Stipendary Priests and Friars, in the tenth a Subsidie to be levied through the Realm, and in anno 11. a fifteenth, a re∣sumption of many Grants and Annuities, regulation of his Houshold, and banishment of the Gascoigners and Welsh, impoverishing him and the Kingdom by Petiti∣ons and Suits. Great summes of money given to King Henry the fifth by the Clergy, a Subsidie by the Clergy and Laity, a double Disme, and a fifteenth by the Laity, and in the 9th year of his reign two tenths of the Cler∣gy, and a fifteenth of the Laity, and another fifteenth in the same year, his Crown Royall and Jewels pawned, and a resumption of divers Lands and Annuities granted to unworthy persons. To King Henry the sixth in anno primo of his reign a Subsidie of five Nobles upon every sack of wool trans∣ported for three years, forty three shillings of every sack of wool carried out by Merchant strangers, a Sub∣sidie of twelve pence in the pound of all merchandize imported or exported, 3. shillings upon every Tonne of
wine for three years granted by Parliament, in 3. a Subsidie of three shillings upon every Ton of and of all other Merchandize twelve pence per pound, except woolfell and cloth or every Benefice of ten marks per annum, ten of that parish to pay six shillings and eight pence, of every Benefice of ten pounds per annum, ten parishioners to pay thirty shillings, and four pence, and so rateably for every Benefice: And of the Inhabitants of Cities and Boroughs every man worth twenty shillings above his Housholdstuff, and his own and wives Apparrel four pence, and upwards after that rate or proportion; in anno 8. a Disme and fifteenth of the Laity. Great summes of money raised by King Edward the fourth by penal Lawes and Benevolences, resumption in the seventh year of his reign of all manner of gifts which he had given from the first day of his reign; A Subsidie in anno 8. of two fifteens and a half, and in anno 13. a Subsidie. Some Taxes laid upon the people by King Richard the third, and a resumption of all Lands and Estate granted to Elizabeth Grey Queen of England. A Subside to Henry the seventh in an. 2. of his reign at a tenth of every mans goods towards the setting forth an Army into Britain anno 4. two fifteens of the Laity, and two Dismes of the Clergy, Poll-money, of every Duke ten marks, every Earle five pounds, every Baron four pounds, every Knight four marks, of every one worth forty shillings, twelve pence, of every one that took wages twelve pence, of every man above fif∣teen years old four pence; anno 6. great Benevolences, anno 11. a Subsidie towards his warres in Scotland, anno
Benevolences and great Fines upon penal Lawes, ghteen hundred thousand pounds left in his Trea∣sury▪ say the Historians, but as the Lod Treasurer Cecil Earle of Salisbury, informed King James four Millions and a halfe. Divers Subsidies granted to King Henry the eighth in anno 6. of his reign, and in anno 14. another Sub∣sidie upon goods, a years value for one year of all the Clergies spiritual livings, a great summe of the Laity in the Parliameat following; anno 25. a Subsidie of four pence per pound in goods from twenty shillings to five pound, from five pounds, to ten pounds, eight pence, from ten pounds, to twenty pounds, sixteen pence, from twenty pounds and upwards, two shillings, of all stran∣gers double, of all Strangers not Inhabitants four pence a head, of every one that had Lands, Fees, or Annui∣ties▪ eight pence the pound, from twenty shillings to five pounds, and so doubled according as they did for goods by several proportions, and of the Clergy three shillings in the pound; great sums of money and treasure by the confiscation of Cardinal Wolsey: Anno 26. tenths and first-fruits of the Clergy formerly paid to the Popes granted unto him; An. 36. a Benevolence; An. 37. a Sub∣sidie of six shillings per pound of the Clergy, two shil∣lings eight pence of the goods of the Laity, and four shilligs per pound of Lands, tenths of all Abby and Re∣ligious Lands reserved upon his Grants, two hundred thousand pounds paid by the Clergy of the Provinces of York and Canterbury to be excused from a Praemunire, and the vast and inestimable treasure in Money, Plate, Shrines, Jewels, Copes and rich moveables upon the spoil of the Abbies and Religious Houses.
An Ayde given by Parliament to King Edward the sixth, in the 2d. year of his reign, of twelve pence per pound of the goods of his naturall Subjects, two shillings per pound of Strangers for three years, of every Ewe kept in several pastures three pence, of every Weather two pence, of every Sheep kept in the Commons three half pence, and eight pence per pound of every wool∣len Cloth made for sale throughout England, anno 6. Commissions given out for sale of Church goods, an. 7. one Subsidie and two fifteens granted by Parliament, and the gain for some years made by the Coynage of Bullion sent from Sweden and returned in Mer∣chandise. One Subsidie of the Laity given to Queen Mary in anno 2. of her reign, eight pence in the pound, from five pounds, to ten pounds, from ten pounds, to twenty pounds sixteen pence per pound, and of all strangers double. To Queen Elizabeth in anno primo, a Subsidie and two fifteens of the Clergy, and a tenth of the Tempo∣ralty: Anno 5. a Subsidie of the Clergy and two fif∣teens of the Temporalty; Anno 8. a Subsidie of the Clergy, and a subsidie, fifteenth and tenth of the Tem∣poralty; Anno 13. a Subsidie of the Clergy, one subsi∣die, two fifteenths and a tenth of the Temporalty, an∣no 18. a subsidie of the Clergy, two fifteenths and tenths of the Temporalty; Anno 23. the like, Annis 27. & 29. the like; Anno 31. two subsidies of the Clergy and three subsidies and six fifteens of the Tem∣poralty; Anno 39. three subsidies of the Clergy and Temporalty, and six fifteens of the Temporalty; An. 43. four subsidies of the Clergy, and four subsidies
and eight fifteens of the Temporalty, the pawning of many of her Jewels, and mortgaging divers of her Lands. A Subsidie of Poundage and Tonnage, Wools; Woolfels and Leather anno primo Jac. two parts of Recusants Lands convicted; in anno 3. four Subsidies in the pound by the Clergy, and three entire Subsidies, and three Fifteenths and tenths, and three hundred and fifty thousand pounds for Subsidies unpaid to Queen Elizabeth; Anno 7. an Ayd to make his Son Prince Henry a Knight; Anno 18. two Subsidies of the Laity and three of the Crergy; Anno 21. three Subsidies and three fifteens of the Temporalty and some Subsidies of the Clergy. Primo Car. primi, three entire Subsides by the Spiri∣tualty; 3. Car. five entire Subsidies granted by the Spi∣ritualty, and as many by the Temporalty; great sums of money raised by Ship-money, and by an Act of Par∣liament for Poll-money, pawning all his Jewels, and the benefit for some years of Coynage, of two hun∣dred thousand pounds of Spanish Bullion, and returning the value in English Commodities. All which being great supplies and easements to the charges and burdens of our severall and successive Kings and Princes (and were not without some charge in the collection) would have been much greater if the peo∣ple of England, keeping close to a long custome of not only getting all that they can from their Kings and Common Parents, but returning as little as they could of their Aydes or Thanks unto them, would have per∣mitted them to arrive to a just or true valuation, or any more then a small part of what they should be content
to rate one another at, having by an Act of Parliament in 6. Ed. 3. obtained of the King, that from henceforth all Aydes should be taxed after the old manner; and not otherwise (the Subsidies being most commonly rated but at two shillings eight pence in the pound for goods, and four shillings in the pound for lands, with consideration of debts and other diminishing circumstances) and put in the Ballance and compared with that which was gi∣ven to the people, by the Confirmations of divers Kings and Queens of Letters Patents and Lands given therein, Coronation Pardons, the General Pardons of 21 Jac. those in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of some of our later Kings and Princes (for in the Reigns of many of the former, they were not so frequent, gene∣ral, or usuall.) The Act of Parliament of 21 Jacobi Regis, for debarring the Kings Title to concealed Lands after sixty years possession, where nothing within that time had been answered or paid to the Crown, or was in super, and the last all-surpassing Act of Indemnity and General Pardon granted by King Charles the second, would be farre surmounted by those and many other be∣neficiall Acts of Parliament, granted in every King and Princes reign, of liberties and benefits to the people. And were not enough or sufficient to repair the de∣cayes of the Regal Revenues, or keep them from a con∣sumption occasioned by their vast charges of our Kings as well in times of warre as peace, to keep their people in safety, peace and plenty, nor to cure the Revenue of a Hecticque Fever of almost 500 years continuance, though some of our Kings and Princes took some parts of Trade into their own hands to supply their necessi∣ties, as the Wool by King Ed. 1. Tinne by Ed. 3. that
and corn by Hen. 6. and Beer transported by Queen Elizabeth, and notwithstanding the care and provision of divers Parliaments to have the Crown Lands not alien'd or wasted and the care of the Laws of England, that the grants of the King shall be void where he is deceived or not truly informed: The Ordinance in the 21 of Richard the second that whatsoever should come to the King by Judgment, Escheat, Wardship, or any other∣wayes, should not be given away: That of primo King H. 4. ca. 6. that in a Petition to the King for Lands, Offi∣ces, or any Gift the value thereof shall be mentioned, and of that also which they have had of the Kings gift, or of other his Pregenitors or Predecessors before; and in case it be not, their Grants shall be void and repealed; the Ordinance of 21 R. 2. that the Procurer of any gift should be punished, continued untill 7 H. 4. untill the King should be out of debt, under penalty of forfeiting the double value for moving or procuring any such suit: The Sta∣tute of 4 of H. 4. cap. 4. that the King grant no Lands or other Commodities but to such as shall deserve them; and if any make demand without desert he shall be punished by the Councell, and not obtain his suit: In 11 Hen. 4, That Petitions for any such Grants delivered to the King be examined by his Privy Councell lest the Kings wants should light upon the Commons; and in 2 H. 6. That all the profits by Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, Escheats, and Forfeitures should be expended in helping to defray the charges of the Kings Houshold, an account of the Kings Revenue in 1. Hen. 6. in England, Ireland, Wales and Aquitaine, and of his charges and expences de∣livered into Parliament by Ralph Lord Cromwell Lord Treasurer of England, and the Dukes of Bedford and
Gloucester, and divers of the Lords of the Kings Coun∣cell appointed to consider thereof; the Acts of Parlia∣ment in 18 and 43 Eliz. That the Queen should be an∣swered for the overplus, of the value of Lands granted by her Letters Patents after the rate of threescore years pur∣chase: The abating in several Kings Reigns the expen∣ces of Houshold and of their Retinue Favourites Gifts and Rewards, and lessening of charges in Warre by Te∣nures in Capite and Knight Service; Aydes to make their eldest Sonnes Knights; and for the marriage of their eldest Daughters, Profit of Annum diem & va∣stum, Aides and Assistances by Grand and Petit Serje∣anties, Aurum Reginae, or something presented to the Queen in former Kings Reigns upon Grants of Lands or Estate, Licences to Trade with prohibited Mer∣chandize, raising their Customes, and sometimes farm∣ing out their Ships, Fines upon licences of Alienation or Pardons, Espargne of the Royall Revenue by the Marriages of the Heirs of the Nobility and Gentry of great Estates, and transplanting and inoculating of great and Noble Families and Estates into one another, not only for their good and advancement, but the peace and welfare of the Kingdome, and the checque which King James gave to suits and importunities at Court after that he had given away too much of his English Crown Lands to his craving Countreymen of Scotland, publickly declaring what kind of Suits or Requests might be demanded of him, and what he would not grant; his orders to have once in every quarter of a year Certificates or Accounts of moneys issued for his Houshold, Ward∣robe, Jewel-house, Chamber, Navie and Stables, and his care and advice with his Privie Councel for supplies
of his Revenues and regulating his expences, for that the Exitus was every year by affairs, troubles and cares of State, disturbances, and accidents often happening, a great deal more then the Introitus, the disbursements farre exceeding the incomes, the ordinary receipts coming farre short of the ordinary disbursements, and the extraordinaries very much out-going the ordina∣ries. CHAP. III. Ruine and Decay of the Revenues. BY reason of the great charges and expences which the Kings of England were at through their se∣verall Generations, to protect and defend themselves and their people (though some of them, as in all other conditions and sorts of men were sound to be less pro∣vident then others, and more easie to the flatteries of Courtiers, or the necessities or importunities of Favou∣rites or Followers, as King Edward the second and King Richard the second) sixty thousand Knights Fees, or maintenance for them given away by William the Conquerour of which the Religious Houses then, or in the near succeeding times, came to be possessed of 28115. the yearly value of which number of Knights Fees, if now they should be estimated but at ten thou∣sand, and valued but at the rate of twenty pounds per annum, as they seemed to be at the making of the Sta∣tute of 1 Ed. 2. would be worth two hundred thousand pounds per annum, and if at three hundred pounds per
annum, which is now the least of the improvement (Sir Edward Coke reckoning eight hundred, and others six hundred and eighty acres to a Knights Fee, and others at the least allowing a large proportion) would make three millions per annum sterling, two hundred and eighty Manors given to Godfry Bishop of Constance, which he left to his Nephew Moubray, the Isle of Wight, Earldome of Devon, and Honour of Plimpton given by Henry the first to Richard de Ripariis or Rivers, Earl∣dome of Gloucester to Robert Fitz Henry; great posses∣sions given away by King Stephen to purchase love and fidelity, the great Estates in Land which Maud the Em∣press was inforced to grant, and her Son King Henry the second afterwards to confirme to divers of the great men and Nobility, as the Earldom of Oxford to Awbrey de vere, Earldome of Arundel to William de Albeney, Earldome of Hereford to Miles of Gloucester, and of Essex to Jeofrey Magnauile to forsake the usurping King Stephen, and the great charge which those twenty years warres expended; the wars of King H. 2. in France, and with his own Sons there and at home, and of seven and forty thousand three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings & eight pence expended and given towards the warres of the Holy land, great somes of gold and silver sent to the Pope, charges of the voyage or expedition which King Richard the first made in person into Asia and the Holy Land and his ransome; the Earldomes of Mortaigne, Cornwall, Dorses, Somerset, Nottingham, Der∣by and Lancaster with all their great possessions being a great part of the Crown Revenues given to his bro∣ther John, and a great part of the remainder sold: The troubles of King John with his boisterous Barons, the
Stanneries Castles and Honor of Barkhamstead and County of Cornwall granted by King Hen. 3. to his Bro∣ther Richard his great warres and turmoils in the Barons warres, which drove him to such wants and perplexities as he and his Queen (as Matthew Paris tells us were som∣times enforced to seek their daily and necessary suste∣nance from Monasteries, charge of endeavoring at a great rate and price, though unsuccesfully to make his Son Edmond King of Sicily, and furnishing his Son Ed∣ward afterwards King. E. 1. with an Army to Jerusa∣lem, that of King Ed. 1. in his wars against the Scots, and subduing that Kingdom, the raising and advancing the unhappy Favorites, Gaveston and the two Spencers, Fa∣ther and Son, by King Edward the Second, and his trou∣bles, great expences of Edward the Third, in his Con∣quering of France, the Dukedom of Cornwal, and Earl∣doms of Chester and Flint, setled upon the Black Prince his Son, and the eldest Sons and Heirs of the Kings of England successively, preferring of Lionel Duke of Cla∣rence, and his many other Sons, restoring of Don Pedro to the Kingdom of Castile, by the aid of the Black Prince, the Earldom of Salisbury, Isle of Man, Castle and Ba∣rony of Denbigh, given to Mountacute, and one Thou∣sand Marks Lands per annum besides, to him and his Heirs for taking Roger Mortimer Prisoner at Nottingham Castle, one thousand pounds per annum with the Town and Castle of Cambridge, to William Marquess of Ju∣liers and the Heirs of his body, Honor of Wallingford and Earldome of Cornwall escheated, given to John of Eltham his Brother, the penalties and fines of La∣bourers, Artificers and Servants in anno 36. of his reign given to the Commons for three years to be di∣stributed
amongst them the maintaining and humoring of severall Factions of the great Nobility by King. Ri∣chard the second his voyage into Ireland, and after mis∣fortunes, raising of John Beaufort Earl of Somerset and John Holland, his half-Brother, to be Earl of Kent and Duke of Exeter; dissentions and troubles in the Reign of King Henry the fourth, preferring another of the Beauforts to be Earl of Dorset, and his establishment as well as he could in his own usurpations, Chirk and Chirk Lands in Wales given by King Henry the fifth to Ed∣mond Beaufort second Son of John Beaufort Earl of So∣merset, the charge of his Conquest of France, the seek∣ing to preserve and keep it by Henry the sixth, long and bloody Factions and Warres of York and Lancaster, Kendal, and other great possessions given to John de Foix, a Frenchman, in marriage with Margaret the Si∣ster to William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, the Earl∣dome of Shrowsbury to the high deserving Talbot, the Isles of Guarnsay and Jersey, and the Castle of Bristol to Henry Beauchamp Duke of Warwick, the charge of King Edward the fourth in his get∣ting the Crown, the Earldome of Pembroke given by him to William Lord Herbert, the making of friends and parties by King R. 3. pacifying of Interests by King. Hen. 7. his gifts and grants to Stanley. Earl of Derby, and the dying the white Rose into the Red, or uniting of them, the voyages and warres of King H. 8. in France, preferring of Charles Brandon to be Duke of Suffolk, Seymour to be Earl of Hertford, Rat∣cliffe Earl of Sussex, Thomas Manors Earl of Rutland, Sir Thomas Bolein to be Viscount Rochford and Earl of Wiltshire; his contest with the Pope and other great
Princes, large and great quantities of Religious and Ecclesiasticall Lands given away to divers of his No∣bility many of whom had been the former Donors thereof, and to divers of the Gentry to corroborate what he had done, bring them into a better liking of that action, and to be the more unwilling to leave those Lands which he had given them, a remission of all debts without schedule or limitation in anno 21. of his Reign, endowing six Bishopricks and Cathedrall Churches, Pensions for life to many which were turned out of their Cloisters, a perpetuall maintenance to the Pro∣fessors of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, Civill Law, Divinity and Physick in both the Universities, and to twelve poor Knights at Windsor; the warres of King Edward the sixth in Scotland, creating of John Dudley Earl of Warwick Duke of Northumberland, Seymour Duke of Somerset, Russell Earl of Bedford, St. John Earl of Wiltshire, Rich, Willoughby, Paget, Sheffeild, Barons; his giving away great quantities of Ecclesia∣sticall and Chantry Lands, Viscount Mountague, Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord North advanced by Queen Mary, the Subsidie of four shillings in the pound for Lands, and two shillings for Goods granted to King Edward the sixth in the last year of his Reign, remit∣ted by her, and nine thousand two hundred pounds land per annum of the Crown given away, paying at the same time twelve pound per cent. Interest for twenty thousand pounds borrowed of the City of London, and the greater charges and Expences of Queen Elizabeth, in protecting the Neatherlands and United Provinces, which cost her five hundred thirty four thousand pounds, and four hundred thousand pounds in succouring King H.
4. of France, besides what was disbursed for other Prote∣stant Allies, guarding the Back-door of Scotland, reliev∣ing & guarding the young King, who was afterwards her Successor, endeavouring to reduce Ireland to its for∣mer obedience, which in a few years cost her, as the Lord Treasurer Cecill Earl of Salisbury in the Reign of King James informed the Parliament, nineteen hundred twenty and four thousand pounds, and defending her self from the Assaults and machinations of the Pope, King of Spain, and other Catholick Princes, advancing and enriching Cecil L. Burghley, Sackvile L. Buckhurst, Charles Blount Lord Mountjoy, Knowles, Wotton, Sidney, Carew, Petre, Compton, Cheney, Norris, and Stanhop, to be Barons; and creating of the Earls of Essex, Leicester, Lincoln and Warwick: Remission of a Subsidie granted to Q. Mary, Farming of her Customs to Smyth but for thirteen thou∣sand pounds per annum, afterwards to forty two thousand pounds, and raising them after that only to no more then fifty thousand pounds per annum, five hundred thousand pounds spent by King James in a totall subduing of Ire∣land, three hundred and fifty thousand pounds paid for Queen Elizabeth's debts to the City of London, for which some of the Crown Lands were mortgaged, and for debts to the Army, Admiralty and Wardrobe, and discharging the reckoning of brass money in Ireland with the same sums in silver; his vast expences by Trea∣ties and Ambassadours, amounting in the seventh year of his Reign unto five hundred thousand pounds, to keep us in our envied peace and plenty; four hundred thou∣sand pounds disbursed in relieving the Dutch, besides what was spent in satisfying the greedy cravings of the Scottish Nation, preferring and raising of the Duke of
Richmond, Ramsey, Earl of Holderness, Earls of Car∣lisle, Kelley, Morton and Dunbarre, Howard Earl of Nor∣thampton, Carr Earl of Somerset, Herbert Earl of Montgo∣mery, Villers Duke of Buckingham, Cranfeild Earl of Middlesex, Cecill Earl of Salisbury, Howard Earl of Suf∣folke, Mountague Earl of Manchester, Ley Earl of Marle∣borough, and Digby Earl of Bristol. All which and many more which might be here enumerated, did not only as was usuall in the Reigns of our former Kings, by necessary bounties encouraging of virtue and valour, rewarding of merits and high de∣servings of Ministers of State, and great Atchievements of men of warre through a successiion of ages, accidents, occasions, and reasons of State, draw and derive their honours from those fountains of Honour, but large Revenues and Lands many times likewise, to support and maintain their Dignities, and sometimes upon the Petitions of the Commons in Parliament, as to conferre upon John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the Dukedome of Acquitaine in the reign of King Edward the third, to make John Holland the Kings half-Brother Earl of Huntington in the reign of King Richard the second, and to preferre and advance the Lords John and Hum∣phrey, Sons of King Henry the fourth: and sometimes great Pensions and Annuities were given for life untill Lands could be provided to support them, in reward of virtue and their services done or to be done for the good of the Nation, and to continue them and their posterities as props and pillars of the Royall Throne in a gratefull acknowledgment of the favours received from it; And besides those former rewards and Enno∣blishments, puts it at this day for Creation money, paid
to the Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, to no less a charge then one thousand pounds per annum, by which the people were in all ages no loosers, when the Honour strength and defence of the Kingdome was maintained and increased by them, and themselves kept in peace and plenty, the manner of living in ancient and better times, being with little money and small rents, great services, by the thankfull and ready duty and affections of Tenants to their Benefactors and mesne Lords, not only made them great in power, but enabled them to imitate their Princes, as much as they could in great hospitalities, deeds of charity and almes, build∣ing and endowing of Churches, Abbies, Priories and Religious Houses, and giving large Inheritances to their Servants, Friends and Followers pro homagio & servitio, and other dependances, Common of Estovers and of great quantities of Lands to severall Cities, Towns and Villages and in such a plentifull manner di∣stributed and gave their Lands, as if the Lands in Capite & by Knight Service, Coppyhold Lands & Commons, which our King's Nobility and Gentry bestowed here∣tofore upon the inferiour sort of people, and what they dedicated to God by giving to Churches, Religious Houses, Colleges, Churches and Chappels, should be surveyed and measured, they would amount to no less then two parts in four of the Lands of the Kingdome. The quondam lethargie, sleepiness and unactivity of many of the Officers of the Exchequer who should be as the Argus eyes to guard the Royall Reve∣nue; the indulgence heretofore,§. 1. or neglect of some of her Officers, and their not remembring that they were to be the Kings and his Treasurers Re∣membrancers,
respiting or nichiling of his debts upon feigned Petitions, which can tell how to deceive the most carefull Barons or Judges of that Court, when their Soveraign suffered in the mean time very great damage for want of the money, the not duly estrea∣ting of all Fines and Amerciaments, corrupt com∣pounding for such as were estreated by under Officers at easie rates, granting to the City of London their Fines and Amerciaments, want of looking after, as they doe in other Nations, the execution of those mul∣titudes of penall Lawes (which otherwise will be to little purpose) and assisting the collection of the Kings legall profits arising thereby, the heretofore carelesness or corruption of some of our former Kings Officers, who for fees of favour enlarged their Charters and Grants to bodies politique, Cities, Towns and Corpo∣rations, and to as many private persons as would peti∣tion for them, and decked them with the flowers of the Kings Crown which were not to be parted with so easily. So as what by Grants or Prescription which in many cases is but the incroachment or filchings of liberties and priviledges, concealed or not well looked after, co∣vered and drawn into a property by a time beyond the memory of man upon a meer supposition, that there might possibly have been a loyal or good grant or com∣mencement for them, every little Manor of those mul∣titudes of Manors and Franchises (which the Commons in a Parliament of King Edward the third complained off) and proportions of Lands in England (many of which are called Manors by supposed Titles or re∣putation only) as so many little Seigniories, Ju∣risdictions
or Royalities as they are improperly called, have Courts, Leet and Baron and free warren, some of whom enjoy the honor and profit of the King in trying and executing Felons, and many using all manner of inferiour justice upon the Tenants, correction of the Affize of Bread and Beer, have Tolles, Fairs, Markets, Fishings, Waives, Estraies, Felons goods, and of persons outlawed, and waived, Issues, Fines and Amerciaments, Wrecks of Sea, Deodands, Mortuaries, Treasure, Trove, and punishment of breach of the peace, &c. granted or claimed as belonged to them. The not having a Clerk for the King besides the Clerks of the Assizes,§. 2. to keep a Roll of all Fines Amer∣ciaments and Profits due to the King in the Iters or Cir∣cuits, to estreat and certifie them into the Exchequer, as was usual in the Reigns of Henry the third, Edward the first, and the elder Kings, and many of the Justices of peace not duly certifying their Recognizances. The letting the Greenwax to Farm with defalcati∣ons of such as the King shall grant away,§. 3. which breeds no smal neglect in the payment or gathering of it, the not duly making or sending the originall Roll of the Chancery into the Exchequer, the posting off ma∣ny of the Kings Farms, and debts de anno in annum by some of the former Clerks of the Pipe, not holding the Sheriff to a strict opposal, nor inforcing them to pay the monies levied of the Kings before their discharge or departure out of the Court, not drawing of debts down into the Cedule Pipae, being a more forcible pro∣cess; the heretofore Stewards and Bayliffs of Manors belonging to the Crown, not justly accompting in the Exchequer as they ought, the not awarding (as there
shall be occasion) Commissions to worthy Gentlemen of every County to enquire of the Kings debts not levi∣ed, and of the Sheriffs and other his Officers; false Ac∣comps, ordained by the Statutes of 3 E. 1. c. 19. and 6 H. 4. cap. 3. neglect of the former Clerks of the Estreats, and many other abuses crept into evil customes by some Officers or Clerks of that Court: and in anno 1641. discovered and published by Mr. Vernon; the superflu∣ous number and charge of many Stewards, Bayliffs and other Officers imployed, which besides the many de∣ceits used by some of them to the King, and exaction upon the people, did, as was informed, in their annuall Fees paid and allowed by the King, yearly exceed three thousand pounds more then what they ac∣compted for, the selling or granting away and dismem∣bring many Hundreds, Wapentakes and liberties from the Crown, and bodies of the Counties, which the Sta∣tutes of 2 and 14 Ed. 3. doe prohibit to be aliened. The falshood of such as did formerly make kind and easie particulars to such as were to buy or have any of the Kings Lands given them;§. 4. knavery and abuse of Under Sheriffs, carelesnes and covetousness of the High Sheriffs in appointing them, and not looking better to the performance of their own oathes as well as theirs. The not duly accompting for prizes taken at sea,§. 5. and other maritime profits: the heretofore sleepiness or slugishness of Justices of Peace in all or most Coun∣ties and Cities, who being intrusted by the Law to take care of the observation of some scores of Sta∣tutes and Acts of Parliament would, though their eyes and ears might almost every day perswade them to a greater care of their oathes and the good of their
Country, too often suffer grosse and numberless offen∣ces to increase and multiply, and neither punish, molest or trouble them, or so much as give any information of them, and too many of the Clerks of the peace, Clerks of the Market, and others, not duly recording or cer∣tifying their Estreates. The customes which in all civilized Nations, and even amongst the Heathen are de jure Gentium,§. 6. to be paid to Kings and Princes, and by the Laws of England and Parliament assent, are due to the King who is the Soveraign of the Sea, keeps the keyes of his Ports, gives safe conduct to forrein Merchants to come hither, and by his power, friendship and treaties with his Allies, neighbour, and other Princes, obtains the like with ma∣ny priviledges for his own Merchants to goe and trade thither, prevents, with no small charges by his Ambassa∣dours, kept in their Dominions all injuries, procures them right and justice, and in case of deniall forceth it, are now so daily cosened, and put up into other Pockets, as notwithstanding all the care taken in the farming or collecting of them, though the people upon the retaile are sure to pay them to the full, the King as it is believed doth not receive above a third part thereof, by reason of the treachery and connivance of the former Searchers or Waiters, and the Merchants defraying (as they can sometimes confess) the pompous charge of their City and Country Houses, Wives and Coaches, with their purloined Customes; and that the cosenning of the King in his Excise yeilds them many times more then their Merchandise, and their Ap∣prentices now not taken under three or four hun∣dred pounds a peice, can live more like Gentlemen then
Servants and purchase all kind of vanities, vice and pride with what they likewise filch and take from him and when the Customes are let to farm though the Farmers take them as they are capable of such kind of losses, can abuse their consciences, and perswade themselves that they do no wrong to the King, who is to have onely his Farm or Rent: And that howsoe∣ver the more they cozen him, the better they may be enabled to trade, and the more they trade the more may be his Customes. The not improving of their Lands & other Revenues by raising of their Rents and rates according to the rise of money and provisions which the Subjects have ex∣ceedingly,§. 7. and to their great advantage done in their own Estates and Revenues, and ten to one more then what was formerly. The heretofore demising and letting to farm very ma∣ny of the Kings Manors and Lands at the old;§. 8. and small Rents for three lives, 21. 31. or 40. years in Reversion, bespeaking a continuall wasting and weakening of his Revenues before hand. Discoveries of information of deceipts or wrong done to his Revenues seldome made,§. 9. and then not with∣out an allowance or gratification; craved of three parts in four or a great share to begiven to the discoverers or prosecutors. Many mens pretending service to the King,§. 10. but do∣ing all they can to enrich themselves, and deceive and lessen him, and having by indulgence or cunning escapes from punishment, made vice look like virtue; and their wickedness to be successfull; or been brought off when not often catched by a gentle composition or
some money or recompence given to a friend at Court or Conniver, are so habituated and used to cosen the King; as notwithstanding the severity of our Lawes if they were let loose, and not too many of them laid, as they are, to sleep, they doe as frequently continue their practise in it, as they dress themselves and put on their cloathes, and can as little forbear or live without them, insomuch as some having been known to have been men of an otherwise strict morality, life and conversa∣tion, and dealing very punctually and honestly with all men but the King, can no more resist an opportunity or temptation of cozening of him, then a Child at a Basket of Cherries can forbear eating of them, or a Cut∣purse not to be nimble in a crowd. Disuse of the duties of Sheriffs and Escheators,§. 11. which by their then few conduit Pipes, did better look after the collecting the Kings Revenues, and with less trouble and charge to the King and people, bring it in∣to his Cisterns, then those, who being under no oath or controll, are, as it is to be feared, by a too often re∣spiting of the Kings debts, or laying them to sleep for some years, untill they be grown antient, many times the occasion of their being drowned in a Generall Pardon, begged by Courtiers, or made to be a new discovery, de∣sperate or insolvent; and by undertaking, more then they should doe, have to the greater charge of the King and his people disheartned and caused the more antient, more diligent, and powerfull Officers of the Exchequer for a great part of what belongs unto their Offices to be ineffectuall. Discontinuance of the Lawes and Customes for the collecting of the Regall Revenues,§. 12. and the many excel∣lent
cares and orders of the Exchequer, as good as any Prince in the world can have or devise for the speedy and orderly getting in, issuing out, and accounting for the Revenue. A succession and improvement of knavery in some whom our former Kings trusted,§. 13. occasioned or en∣couraged, by our warres abroad in France, after 4 Edward the first, for then there was an endevour of an Extenta Maneriorum, and an enquiry after many of the Rights and Regalities (which are not retorned or certified in Chancery, nor any where else to be found, but by time and the troubles thereof are lost or carried away: And after the Statute of Quo war∣ranto in 12 Ed. 1. for then also the great care and good husbandry of our Kings in preserving or improving their Revenues was not laid aside, or by the troubles of King Edward the second, and the irregularities of his Favourites; for much about that time there began to be a quitting of the former cares of the Revenue, or by our successfull warres abroad in France by Edward the third and Henry the fifth, the unhappy Quarrels of the York and Lancastrian Families for almost sixty years together, and the hatching or breeding of them in the unquiet and unfortunate reign of Richard the se∣cond, or the short reign of Hen. 7. who had not time enough to reduce things into their former Channel, but was busie in gathering the treasure which he left to his Son Henry the eighth or being newly settled in his Throne, did not think it safe or seasonable to make al∣terations or put them into their former or better or∣der; or the great increase of Revenue as well as trea∣sure in Money, Plate and Jewels to Henry the eight by
the dissolution of the Abbies and religious Houses, or that the fragments not given away or disposed by him, employed the bounty and munificence of his Successors Edward the sixth and Queen Elizabeth during their se∣verall reigns, and her many great cares and affairs of State otherwise busying her, or our Halcion dayes, peace and plenty in the reign of King James, and a great part of the reign of King Charles the Martyr, and the hearkening to pretences, and erecting more Offices to hinder the cheating and knavery of others, when as the proposers either by intending it at first, or easily learning to imitate or exceed them, did afterwards draw from the King and People more money then what their underta∣kings ever amounted unto, and proved to be as little for the Kings good as Sir Simon Harvey's design of Refor∣mation in the Reign of King James, for the better orde∣ring of the Expences of his House, where after many dishonorable essayes and retrenchments, casting many of the Kings Servants into ruine and discontents, and serving some of the Tables with half a Goose instead of a whole one, he could at last, when he had gained a pension of five hundred pounds per annum for his own life and his wives, put up all his Engines, and conclude with making every thing worse then it was before. And no better a husbandry then those that will feed and give wages to half a dozen Shepheards to keep a score of sheep,§. 14. and allow them the keeping of some of their own into the bargain, and make no better a to∣tall at the years end, then the Gardner which gives en∣tertainment to a multitude of Catterpillers in his Gar∣den, and thinks it is preserved by them, the waters be∣ing ever likely to come short, or but faintly when in∣stead
of fewer or greater Pipes, which brought it better, there, shall be so many to divert or wast it in the way or passage to the Royall uses. The necessity of Intelligence,§, 15. Leagues and Corre∣spondency with neighbour and forraign Princes and States, and the charges incident thereunto (which can∣not be thought to be small, when as that with the house of Burgundy within the space of sixty years, betwixt the reign of King Henry the sixth, and the later end of the reign of Henry the eighth amounted to no less then six millions) the more then formerly greater charges of sending and entertainment of Ambassadours, Princely Gifts and Presents to such as come hither, and the Generall Pardons at the end of severall Parliaments granted by our Kings and Princes, and to the great advantage of the People of late petitioned for as a kind of custome and renumeration for some Ayds or Subsidies, which came not up most commonly to a moiety of what was in every Parliament quitted and released to them. The granting away in all ages many of the Royall Rights and Prerogatives to the people.§. 16. And in a long course and series of time,§. 17. like some aged parents in love to some of their children, or by the importunites, or designes, of others, giving away too much of their own Revenues and Estate, and berea∣ving themselves of that which is now thought too little for those who have gained it from them. Restorations (and many times by petitions of one or both Houses of Parliament) of the Lands and Estates which came to the Crown by Attainders and Forfei∣tures for Treason (their confiscations never amoun∣ting§. 18.
to the damage done by such attempts and Rebel∣lions, and the charge of suppressing them, and defend∣ing themselves and their people) to reconcile the Heirs, Posteritie and Allies of such as had been attainted and induce them to a better obedience and love of their Country. The no small charges susteined heretofore,§. 19. by gran∣ting yearly Pensions or Annuities to severall of the No∣bility to serve extraordinary, besides the ordinary duty of their Tenures, with certain numbers of gens d' armes, and Bowmen in times of warre, or upon necessity, the building and endowing of many Colleges and Halls in the Universities, Eaton and Winchester Schools, and endowing with great yearly Revenues the Famous Hos∣pitalls of Bridewell and Christ-Church in London, and St. Thomas in Southwark, building and endowing a great part of the Cathedrals in England, the Castle and Chappel of Windsor, and Palaces of Sheene, Woodstock, Richmond; repair of the Tower of London, Castle of Dover, &c. Charges for the honour of the King and Kingdome in making and installment of Knights of the Garter,§. 20. and the costly ceremonies thereof, and not seldome sending Ambassadours with it to forraign Princes, expences in making of Knights of the Bath; and in the reign of our more antient Kings for Furres and rich Vestments, in making Knights Bachelors. Charge of the Courts of Justice and Circuits,§. 21. to preserve the peoples Rights, Properties and Liberties, protect them from injuries, and punish the transgressors, now taking away yearly from the regal Revenue fifteen or sixteen thousand pounds per ann. (which in honester
and cheaper times, was in the Reign of Henry the sixth as much as worshipfully defrayed, as the Record saith, the expences of his then no small retinue and houshold) with the greater charges now more then formerly in all other the necessaries and affairs belonging to the Kingly Office. A daily and almost hourly distribution and giving of Royall favours and munificence,§. 22. and necessity of much of it, when as that which amongst private men is ac∣counted providence, thrift and good husbandry would be an unbecoming sparing in Princes, and an a∣varice and temptation to oppress the people, and that which in others would be prodigality, or a wast and con∣sumptions of their Estates, and reckoned as a folly is in Kings and Princes, most necessary in their bounties and favours wherewith to satisfie and keep in quiet as well as they can multitudes of people, whose numberless passi∣ons, iniquities, ill humors, designs, necessities and in∣terests are by the Sword of Justice in one hand: and the Royal Scepter of grace and Benevolence in the other, to be kept in order by love, honor, obedience and loy∣alty, the best increasers, maintainers and preservers of publick peace and tranquility, which those who have suffered in the want of it but some daies, or moneths, or a year, or few years, or our last twen∣ty years folly and miseries, may know how to esteem and value. A dayly or very often craving and petitioning of some or many of his Subjects,§. 23. and the largeness of a royal heart and hand like an over indulgent Parent, ta∣king a pleasure and content to divest himself to enrich and give them content.
The vast difference betwixt the charges of Navies and Armies now more then formerly, when a Hobler or Dragoon Horseman which was wont to be hereto∣fore hired at three pence per diem, now hath no less then two shillings six pence, a Footman eight pence, the pay of a Troop of horse cannot be under four thou∣sand pounds per annum, and of one hundred and eighty men in a Garrison three thousand six hundred pounds per annum. The course of warre i the later ages growing more and more tedious and chargeable,§. 25. and so immense, as the Dutch notwithstanding their sout gelt, or Tax up∣on salt, their vectigal frumenti for corn grinded at their Mills, the eighth part of the price of Pears and Apples, a seventh of all Cattel sold to the Butchers, an eighth for wood, a Tax upon Candles, and an Ezcise upon all things eaten, drunk or worn; upon Law Suits, Servants Wages, Ships, Coaches and Carts; a sixth penny upon all lease Lands, Assessments upon demeasne Lands, Gardens and planted Grounds; an eighth upon Houses demised or let, hooft, gelt, being a Dutch Floren for every poll or head scoorsengelt, a like pay∣ment for Chimney money, with many other great Taxes; besides their many profitable and succesfull de∣predations in the East and West Indies, &c. great aides from France and England of men and money for many years during their warres; great riches got by the grea∣test commerce of Christendom, and ransacking Sea and Land for it, have been in sixty years warres with Spain left very much in debt at the end of the warres. And are yet notwithstanding since the warres ended some millions of money in debt, and so much as they
were for many years after, and are yet enforced to con∣tinue their Excise, and most of their Assessments and Taxes upon the people, When the King of Spain notwithstanding his vast Do∣minions, twenty millions of Duckets, which is above six millions of our sterling money, yearly Revenues; great exactions and impoverishing of his people by yearly Taxes and Assessments; the golden Mines of Peru, Mexico and Potozi, and other inestimable treasures of the West Indies, which Phero a Spanish Ambas∣sadour in a brag or vie with the treasurie of Venice, could say, had no bottom; and having the Sun for its Lord Treasurer, daily to generate and increase its gold; hath yearly for many years yeilded the Crown of Spain by and out of the Fifths, sometimes ten, and sometimes fifteen millions of gold, and so much as in the year 1638. two hundred and sixty millions of gold did by the Records of the Custome-house of Sivill ap∣pear to have been in seventy four years then last past brought from the West Indies into Spain, and from Po∣tozi in nine years inclusivè from 1574. to 1585. one hundred and eleven millions of silver, hath notwith∣standing with his wars with the Dutch, and a warr of late years with France, chargeable bribes and intelligences, and a thirst after an universal Monarchy, consumed that, and all that he could borrow besides from the Bankers of Genoa. And France with all her Taxes and Gabells, beggering and very much enslaving of her common people, hath in a warre of thirty years last past with the Spaniards, fought it self almost off its legs, and into a consump∣tion.
Which a long and late experience may forbid our wondring at, when as the late long pretending but no performing Parliament could with the spoils of the Kings and Churches Revenues, the Estates of the Nobility, Gentry, and good people in England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, and more Taxes and burdens imposed by them and Oliver, their man of sin in twenty years, then our Kings of England in five hundred years last past, all put together, had before laid upon them, could not leave their Oliver when their sins, and his tricks, had made him to be their Master, any more then three hundred thousand pounds sterling in Cash and ready money: and that with that and such of the Royall Revenues as they left him, and those vast Spoils, Rapines, Taxes, Assessments, and pillage of all that were not as bad as himself and his Predeces∣sor Common-wealth Contrivers in the three Kingdomes of England, Ireland and Scotland, which amounted unto above forty millions, he was not able in a few years wars with the Dutch and Spaniards to bring about his expen∣ces, & support the Protection, as he called it, of the peo∣ple with it, but died above three millions in debt, which the debts of our famous King Edward the third, and Henry the fifth, who conquered France, and the most of our indebted Kings never amounted unto. When our English Kings and Princes having never received of the people by their Aides and Subsidies the twentieth penny towards their expences in the preservati∣on, of them and the honor, peace, & plenty of the King∣dom, could never do as the Field Marshals, Stadt Holders or Generals in Commonwealths have done, or as the late Princes of Orange, did for severall successions in Hol∣land and the united Provinces receive great allowances
and Sallaries, keep and greatly improve and increase their own Revenues, and make the Publick bear and defray its vast charges, as well in warres, as the cares and defence of peace in the absence of it, but did bear and sustein the brunt of all that was not extraordinary, and the charge of many a warre abroad, and suppressing of insurrections and rebellions at home, out of their own Estates and Revenues, and made many a hard shift even to the pawning of their Jewels, and mortgaging of their Lands without an often calling to the People for Sub∣sidies or other Aids or Assistance to preserve them and their Estates and Posterities. Nor took to themselves the liberty which many Subjects doe to put into their Accounts and Bills of charges to their Princes their Damnum emergens, da∣mage happening by any service done for him or their Country, and many times their Lucrum cessans, gain or improvement lost, though every mans particular in the defence of their King and Country, is involved in the generall, & that the service was not altogether or imme∣diately done or tendred to him, or for the preservation of him or his Estate only and Posterity, but as much if not more for their own concernments, and think them∣selves to be ill dealt with if they be not speedily and a∣bundantly rewarded. To help on which consumption of the Royal Re∣venues,§. 26. came also the great charges which King Charles the first (upon whom the decay of the Royal Revenues occasioned by the necessities and indulgences of his Pre∣decessors, at once falling might have made him crie out with King Henry the third, as the Monk of St. Al∣bans relates it, seducor undique mutilatus sum Rex et ab∣breviatus)
was at in leagues and confederacies with for∣reign Princes, maintaining Armies in the Palatinate and Germany, aiding the Kings of Bohemia, Denmark and Sweden, engaging in a warre against Spain, and sending a great Fleet and Army to invade him; great expences in sending a Navy and Army to the Isle of Rhe, and two others to aid the Rochellers, to furnish part of which (for it amounted to a great deal more) he sold at once at too easie rates to the Ci∣ty of London above twelve thousand pounds Land per annum rent of Assize, the payment of fifty thousand pounds per annum Pensions aud Annuities out of the Exchequer, (as it was industriously computed by that factious party of Common woe contrivers) to diverse of the Scottish Nation, many of whom did afterwards joyn with his enemies to ruine him; the great and necessary yearly Pensions and Annuities paid to the King and Queen of Bohemia and their children; charges of going with a great Army to the Borders of Scotland against the Covenanting Scots, and maintaining another in Eng∣land, with the payment of 120000l. principall money borrowed by his Father of divers Citizens of London with interest at 8. per cent. Which with the many great cares,§, 27. troubles, wants and necessities which compassed him in on every side, whilst his great virtues for want of necessary supplies of money and treasure were not able to support or bear him up against the storms of an hideous Re∣bellion, escape the snares and pursuit of a rebellious party, or scour and cleanse that Augaean Stable which had ruined and weakned his Revenues, made him a glorious Martyr for the Laws and Liberties of
England, and those that were the causers of it, the great Examples of a Divine Justice overtaking them. And enforced him to leave his troubles to descend upon his Son our most gratious Soveraign Charls the Se∣cond; with a small and despoyled Revenue,§, 28. which by its fluidness, and the gnawing and deflux of time was as to his Crown Lands brought almost to an Exinanition, and his casuall and other receipts, bearing no more pro∣portion to his expences and disbursements then a Dwarfe or Pigmey doth to a Giant or Poliphemus, could doe no less then bring the remainder, of that little which was left into a Tabes and almost incurable consumption, when there is so great a difference betwixt the rates of provisions and livelyhood, and all manner of things bought or used in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and what is now paid for them, when he is at greater expences then any of his Progenitors, and a less receiver, receives at the old rate, and buyes at the new, his demeasn Lands (besides his Pastures at Creslw in Buckinghamshire, which were hertofore imployed for the keeping of some Oxen for his household provisions, and his parks, and some adjacent Grounds to his Houses of residence) and all his Land and certain Revenues are not above reprizes one hundred thousand pounds per annum, and two parts of three of that consisting in Fee Farm Rents, which admit of no improvement, when his Cu∣stomes which should now amount to as much, or more then what they were in his late Majesties Reign, by the addition of an Excise amounting to one hundred and forty thousand pounds per an. now yeilds not near so much as it did formerly; the Excise of Ale and Beer, ill collected, o so chargeable in the gathering of it, as it yeilds little
more then the half of what the Parliament estimated and intended it to be▪ great yearly Revenues & Inheritances in Lands given to men of high deservings, both of him and the Kingdom, all the Confiscations of the late Trai∣tors of a great yearly value, with the benefit of the Post-Office, Wine Lycences, and many discoveries of perso∣nall Estates due to the King given to his Brother the Duke of York to make him a Princely Revenue. When his ordinary expences doe so much exceed his ordinary receipts, and his extraordinaries are six or seven to one of his ordinaries, is sixteen hundred thou∣sand pounds in debt, spends more then as much a∣gain in his houshold expences, as formerly now that his Pourveyance is taken away, looseth two hundred and fifty thousand pounds per annum by the loss of his Tenures and Pourveyance, is at eighty thousand pounds per annum charge for the maintenance of the Garrison of Dunkirk, above five hundred thousand pounds per an∣num for the Navy and Land forces, hath to procure a publick quiet, paid many hundred thousand pounds of the Arrears of the Navy and Army employed a∣gainst himself, and left in Arrears by his Enemies must be ten times a giver, if he should grant every ones Petition, to one that he shall be a gainer or receiver, dis∣contents himself to content others, and forgetting that old rule and practice of the world, sibi proximus is en∣forced to provide for others and not for himself, and in the midst of his own necessities is to be the rewarder of virtue, and still, as well as he can, the raging waves of the multitude, is the Asylum or refuge of all that are distressed, and bears or lessens their burdens out of his own Revenues.
And when Neighbour Princes are not usually without ambitions, and taking all opportunities to enlarge their power and Dominions by the weak∣nesse of others, or to weaken and oppress any of their Neighbours, and make advantages of their trou∣bles and necessities, doe seldome want pretences of titles or revenging Injuries done to them or their peo∣ple by Kings or their people, and can lay aside their sworn Leagues and Confederacies, as soon as their In∣terest or Designs shall invite them thereunto, when the French King hath by computation an ordinary yearly Revenue of above twenty millions of Crowns which makes above five millions sterling per annum, besides his extraordinaries, which by Taxes and Tallages in the late warres, being now by a habit and custome grown something easie and familiar to them, may be raised to vast yearly sums of money, and more then treble the ordinary, when the King of Spain aboundeth in his Revenues in his Dominions in Christendom, besides his extraordinary Aids & Assesments, and vast treasures and supplies from the West Indies, which is a ready or rich pawn or credit for borrowing of monies upon all extraordinary emergencies, occasions, or necessities of State affairs. The City of Venice with her Territo∣ries hath above a million sterling per annum in her yearly Income, besides extraordinaries, and a treasure of money enough to pay six Kings ransomes, with Jewels and Plate unvaluable. And the Dutch have one million and two hundred thousand pounds sterling per annum year∣ly, & ordinary Revenue out of Amsterdam, besides what they have yearly out of all other Cities, Towns and Places, by their huge Excises and Assessments
upon all the seven United Provinces. And the King of England, who was wont to be Ar∣biter totius Europae, hold and keep the Ballance of Chri∣stendom even; and if he do not, it cannot be either safe or well for his own Kingdomes and People, and their Trade and Commerce, must pine and wither away, languish and groan under so great expences and necessi∣ties, whilest he is to preserve himself and people in peace, plenty and safety, and hath so little to doe it withall, when at home all men do seem to love and serve him, very many doe ask and get what they can from him, and too many deceive him. And as that prudent and great Statesman, Cecil Earl of Salisbury Lord Trea∣surer of England, observed to the Parliament in the Reign of King James, it is a certain rule, that all Princes are poor and unsafe who are not rich and so potent as to defend themselves upon any sodain offence and inva∣sion, or help their Allies and Neighbours. Hath a small Revenue to govern an unruly People, one part of them ready to runne mad with mistaken opinions in Re∣ligion, and too many of the residue overgrown with vice and luxury; a burden of burdens laid upon him, the burdens of his people, and the burdens of his Ancestors by their bounties, expence and necessities, and are by so much greater or heavier then theirs, as his Revenues are consideratis considerandis a great deal lesser.
CHAP. I. The Remedies. WHich a small or ordinary repair will not help, but requires new and more sollid and lasting foundations, endeavoured seriously, and attempted by King James about the seventh year of his Reign by the advice of his Parliament and Privy Council, but not then or any time since brought to perfection. And may in a legall and well pleasing way to the people without the unwelcome raising of the Tenths of the Abbie and religions Lands to the present yearly va∣lue, which may be of dangerous consequence, and the Tenths and First-fruits of the Bishops and Clergy of England, who have been over much pared already, or a Resumption of the Crown Lands which unless it be of such wherein the King or his Father have been grossely deceived: and the first money paid for the purchase upon an account of the mesne profits, and interest satis∣fied, will hugely disturb the Interest and House-gods of too many of the Nobility, Gentry and rich men of the Kingdome, and without any new or forreign devices or Talliages, to raise monies, and Fricasser, or tear in pieces the already too much impaired estates of a Tax-bearing tired people, which that Monarch of virtues and blessed Martyr King Charles the first did so abhorre, as he caused Mr. Selden & Mr. Oliver St. John to be imprisoned in the Tower of London, & a bill to be exhibted in Star-cham∣ber against them and the Earl of Clare, and others, for having only in their custody, and divulging a Manu∣script,
or writing of certain Italian projects proposed to him by Sir Robert Dudley a Titulado Duke in Tus∣canie, and with out the gawling, grating, and most com∣monly unsuccesfull way of Projects, which if set up will be thrown down again by the after Complaints and dis∣contents of the people, or hunting and vexing them with informations or calling their Lands and Estates in question to the ruine of them and their Families upon defective Titles, or by Monopolies or a trebling abuses by pretending to reform them; or Essayes of new wayes of profit framed or found out by such as designe more to themselves then for the good either of King or People, and either know not, or cannot, or will not, foresee the many evills and sad consequences which may as effects from causes, fatally and unavoidably follow such or the like attempts, which the necessities of Kings, or want of competent revenues, may either put them or their ser∣vants and followers upon. Be, as is humbly conceived, prevented by severall Acts of Parliament to be made upon the propositions, following which will not only encrease the Kings Reven∣ues, but encourage and make the People very willing and well contented therewith, when as what they shall for the present loose thereby, shall at the same time by enacting of some good Laws for them be abundantly re∣penced. By a generall inclosure of all wast Lands & Commons belonging to the Kings,§. 1. Queens and Princes revenues in England and Wales, allotting equall and reasonable pro∣portions for satisfaction of Commoners, and by disaffor∣restation of some Forrests and Chases remote from Lon∣don, or the Kings ordinary Residences, the imbanking
and taking in of all Lands, infra fluxum & refluxum Maris high and low watermarks derelicted and forsaken by the Sea, or brought thither by Alluvion, and added to the firme Land, and together with the Lands and Re∣venues now belonging to the Crown of England never to be aliend, rent-charged, or leased more then for 21 years or three lives, which besides the addition of reven∣ues and profit to the King, will very much adde to the livelyhood and industry of many of the people who will be maintained thereby, better the Lands, and in∣crease subsidies when there shall be occasion. And causing the like to be done by a generall inclo∣sure of all that now lies wast, and in common, in parti∣cular, and private mens Revenues in England, and Wales, amounting to some millions of Acres, will produce the like benefits to the owners and Common∣ers, who in a gratefull acknowledgement thereof may out of their severall allotments, as freewill-offerings to their King, pay yearly three pence per Acre to him and his Heirs and Successors. That Banks or Mount Piete's be erected in several pla∣ces of England and Wales,§. 2. as at London, York, Durham, Golchester, Norwich Ludlow, & Denbigh, where mony may be lent, and Pawns or Securities taken, not exceeding the Interest of twelve per cent. for a year, or proportio∣nably for greater or lesser times, and that Commissio∣ners in the manner of a Corporation or otherwise, may in every of those places be from time to time appoin∣ted by his Majesty his Heires and Successors, to order and supervise the management thereof, for which his Majesty his Heires and Successors, may out of the in∣crease and profit of the said Interest, receive and take
forty shillings per cent, no one particular person being permitted to imploy or put into the said Bank at inte∣rest above the sum of five hundred pounds; and that no private or particular person, putting their monies into the said Bank, shall have and receive above the sum of the current or usual Interest in the Kingdom, or any o∣ther gift or reward whatsoever, whereby the intolle∣rable oppression of publick and private Brokers those Baptizati Judaei and Pawn-takers, which like Wolves gnaw and devour the poor as sheep, when as driven to them by their necessities, they are inforced to come to them for succour, and give after the rate of fifty or sixty per cent, which the hate of Jews to Christians never ar∣rived to, and a Christian and Protestant Kingdome ought not to countenance. That by sumptuary Lawes concerning Apparrel to be worn by all degrees and orders of people,§. 3. the excess thereof may be regulated and abated, with great penal∣ties to the infringers thereof, which Athens, Sparta and Rome being heathen Common-wealths, and England heretofore by sundry good Laws and Statutes, unhappily repealed in anno 21 Jac. Spain by Prag∣matico's; and France by a late Reiglement have found to be an universall good: and the Common∣wealth of Venice held it to be necessary, Nè civium patrimonia nimia intemperantia abliguriantur; to keep their Citizens from wasting and spending their Estates, being Laws now more then ever wanting in England, when as that which wil quickly undo private or particular Families, which by their universality do make a Kingdome, is so frequent and every where almost to be found in a daily practise and pursuit of pride, and
that cheating one another to maintain it, is the most of the peoples cares and consciences, every house almost as to the excess of their vanities, and expences be∣yond their Estates, hath a Mark Anthony and Cleo∣patra in it; and too many men and women, though not so good or well able to bear it as King William Rufus, doe think their clothes not costly enough; many of the Nobility and Gentry have wasted and spent themselves almost quite out of themselves, and left themselves little more then their Titles and Pedi∣grees. The Citizens doe all they can to our-doe them infolly; the Farmers, Yeomanry and Countrymen all they can to overtake them, and the Servants to come as near as they can to their Masters, Ladies or Mi∣stresses: And they that first spend themselves to no∣thing, or very near it, are like to quit the race to those that come after; and they which come last to the brink of ruining their fortunes, which will be probably the common and lower ranks of the people, are likely to learn by those that ruined themselves before them, to stay where they left, & be Masters of the others Estates. And that such as shall wear any habits or kinds of Apparrel forbidden; be rated in all publick Assess∣ments according to the estate and quality of such persons as are allowed to wear the like, that whosoever shall not be of the degree and quality to keep a Coach, or live in the Country not farre distant from the Parish Church and keepeth one, shall forfeit and pay 5. l. for every year in which he shall so keep it; that the Justices of Peace in every Country be the Collectors of all the penalties concerning Apparel, Habits and keeping of Coaches, and to have a ourth part of the forfeitures
upon the receipt, conviction or recovery thereof: that the Masters and Mistresses of Servants trangressing that Act, shall out of the wages due to such Servants pay and answer every of the penalties forfeited by the Servants, not exceeding their said wages, and stop and detain the same, and for their care therein have and re∣ceive to their own use one third part in four to be divi∣ded of the said penalties; and that the residue of all the said penalties ordained and forfeited by the said Act, shall be collected and answered to the use of the King and his Heirs and Successors. Whereby that grand improvement of all Sins and Wickedness, which hath now overspread the King∣dome, that consumption of Estates, and destruction of good Manners; And that high unparralleld and inor∣dinate excess of Apparel and pride, which being the canker of all honesty and virtue, ruined Rome the Con∣queror and Mistress of all the World, and, as Histories have told us, never failed to undo many other Kingdoms permitting or allowing it, which our Ancestors and former inhabitants of England would have abhorred and blushed at, may be restrained, and those sinfull necessities and plenty of all manner of knaveries, dis∣honesties, Cheatings, and villanies, to maintayne it, de∣pressed and extinguished, which the book of God, dan∣ger of Sinne, Hell, and Damnation, and all that can be said and done by the Bishopps, Ministers, Preachers, and men of holy Church, without the assistance of such sumptuary Lawes, can never, as experience hath suffici∣ently told us, be able to beat downe, extirpate, or lessen. Which the pretended loss of the Kings Customes by
Silkes, and other vanities imported, should not deterre him and his great Councel from attempting, when the prevention of the great wast of gold and sil∣ver in making lace and habiliments for such as ought not to wear them, the vent of our Cloth and other En∣glish Manufactures in stead of them, suppressing of an universall pride and Sinne, which the land groaning un∣der, is not able to bear, the causing of a greater duty and obedience to superiors, which is now too much want∣ing, and the pacifying of Gods wrath and Judgments which are ready to fall upon the Nation, for it will a∣bundantly recompence. That seeing the Excise of Beer,§. 4. Ale, Perry and Sider greatly discontents and lies heavy upon the People and the management and way of gathering it, adds to their affliction, and makes them repine at the Nobility and Gentry upon a supposition, that to ease themselves of that which was surmised to be a burden by Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, with the wardships and in∣cidents thereof, they have contrived and raised the bur∣den of more then one hundred thousand pounds per an∣num Excise to be laid upon them, whereas the losses and damages of the Nobility and Gentry of England, (besides what they may sometimes save in their own wardships, and by reason of Lands holden of the King in Capite and by Knight Service) in the profit and honor of Tenures holden of them by Knight service, and of Wardships and other Incidents, and their just and legal superiorities and commands over their Tenants, which will now be wanting: will if rightly estimated, amount to as much yearly dammage and inconveniencies as that one hundred thousand pounds per annum, or more,
will come to by that Excise, in which their expen∣ces may tell them they bear a share likewise with the common people, some of the Knights and Gentry loosing as much by the taking away of Tenures in Ca∣pite and by Knight service, as two hundred pounds per annum communibus annis, and some of the Nobility four or five hundred pounds per annum, and the least of what every of the Nobility and Gentry doe yearly loose thereby, will be more then any particular Brewer or Aleseller can be damnified, when as the Beer and Ale, and next buyer or expender, are sure enough to pay for that and many times more. That for the remedying of the great Deceipts, and Sophistications used by BrewersBrewers. of Ale and Beer, as their false gaugings and measures, not half or not enough boyling it, to spare fewel and fire, putting in Broom, Coriander-seed, Wormwood, and many other newly devised and noxious ingredients instead of Hops, or to make it taste the stronger, which may much endanger the lives and health of the people. And the abuses of Merchants, Wine-Coopers and VintnersMerchants, Wine-Coopers and Vintners. in conjuring their Wines as they call it, mingling it with Stum, Molosse or scum of Sugar, Perry, Sider, Lime, Milk, Whites of Eggs, Elder-ber∣ries, putting in raw flesh, and using so many Adul∣terations and mixtures, as the Taverns and places of retail doe too commonly, vent intoxicating and un∣wholsome drink by the name of wine, whereby the Wine-coopers, whose Trade was originally and pro∣perly only to make and amend vessels for wines, are now by a knowledge and taste of wines, pertaking of the Merchants evil secrets and doings, and bringing some
ease and conveniences to them by uttering and taking off their hands great quantities of wines upon long dayes and many moneths of payment given them, become as it were the Merchants Masters, and the only Merchants and Sellers of wine to the Vintners and Retailers (which was formerly forbidden them) after they have adulterated, unwholsomed, and almost poysoned them, to the distemper and breeding of sickness in the bodies of men, who for a little wine to warm and chear their hearts or stomachs, or entertain one another with mutuall refreshments, are by such ungodly tricks and devices to purchase to the Merchants, Wine-Coopers and Vintners filthy and wicked gain and lucre, many times enticed into the confines of death and their own destruction. And the many deceipts and abuses of Bakers,Bakers, whose weights of bread and honest gains of their Trade is by the Statutes of Assisa, Panis & Cervisiae, in Anno 51 of King Henry the third, to be yearly regulated by the Kings Baker of his Houshold, and the bread of his Court, according to the several yearly rates and prices of corn, and their transgressions contrary thereunto by many other Lawes to be severely punished, and the of∣fendors put upon the Pillory. Which this last Century or Age by a Non-execution of Lawes have not been so happy to see. But the Ba∣kers are now so disused to these antient good Laws and Regulations, and so used to a custome and cunning of blinding the Magistrates, or such Officers as they en∣trust therewith or by evading, or diminishing their pu∣nishments, as they can by a custome or necessity of sin∣ning, which their deluded consciences do perswade them
to be lawfull and warrantable enough, make their bread 5 or 6 ounces too light, or short of the legal proportions nor assize, when corn is very dear, and a great deal to light when it is cheaper: And to add to their wicked∣ness as if otherwise it would not be enough, are suspe∣cted to mingle chalk and lime amongst their meal, which makes the white bread, and do by combination with the Vintners, Inn-keepers and Chandlers (who are the Belly-Brokers to the poor) make their white bread so little as to afford them 16. or 18. to the dozen: and if the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, or the Magistrates of other Cities or great Towns doe sometimes goe about to trie and weigh their bread, and find any Basket or small parcel of bread to be faulty (which by the Serje∣ants and under Officers too often giving notice over night or before hand what day or way the scrutiny goes makes their care and diligence to be most commonly ineffectuall, or to little purpose, or may be easily preven∣ted by some bread honestly made when all the rest doe want waight laid in their passage) and seised and sent to prisons, the next dayes or weeks bread shall be sure to be made the lighter, to recompence the loss of the former. And lesser Corporations being most commonly go∣verned by retailing Tradesmen, and such as have a fel∣low feeling of one anothers mysteries, or that which they suppose to be their Callings, but are usually atten∣ded with fraud and cheatings, doe take no care at all to obstruct, discover, or punish one anothers knaveries; by which the poor and their wives and children, whose daily hard labours can scarcely bring them to o∣ther diet then brown bread, and skummed cheese, and a cup of good beer when they can get it, are daily and
very much oppressed, and their poverties made to en∣crease the riches of those who are so farre from relieving their miseries & hardships, as they are a great part of the cause and increase of it; by which great and not to be endured villanies and knaveries, not seldome, but daily and very often practised in a Kingdom, professing Christ and Christianity, by Vintners, Brew∣ers, and Bakers, in Wine, Beer and Bread, the main sup∣ports of life and nourishment, (which might have been suppressed if the Stewards of Courts Leet, Sheriffs in their Turnes, and the grand Jury men of every County twice a year impannelled and solemnly charged by the Judges to look better to these & other generall abuses, not by a strange custom neglected & slept over their had oathes and duties) those grand principles and funda∣mentall necessaries for food and sustenance are corrup∣ted, abused, and unwholsomed, diseases and evils, and oftentimes death arising thereby secretly instilled and conveyed, and as it were forced into the bodies of the people, which may well call and crie for a Reforma∣tion. As well as the great abuse of Leather, which under colour of transporting Calve skins, and obtaining li∣cence to send thither a certain number of hides or skins of Leather, doe ten times exceed the number; and by multitudes of Coaches more then formerly, false Coc∣quets and connivance of Searchers and Officers in the Ports, which should look better to it, there is (notwith∣standing great quantities of Russia and other Leather, & Hides imported from forreign parts) so great a scarcity and dearth of Leather, as that which the Shoemakers, not long agoe, were wont to pay but fifteen shillings, for
they must now pay double as much, and that which they buy is (by the knavery of the Tanner, who to save the charge of Bark, doth not permit it to lie in the Tannepit half the time appointed by the Law, and of the Currier and the carelesness and worse of the Lord Mayor of London's Officer who keeps the knife, as they call it, at Leaden Hall, and should seise all bad Leather) neither well tanned, good, or cheap; by which villanies, deceipts, careless looking to the execution of good Lawes, evils of transportation, and some of the Nobilities and Gentries profuse rates and prices given to their Shoemakers the shoes which they wear, are come to the price of five shillings and six pence, and six shillings a pair; and sober and more carefull men in the laying out of their money must now doe what they can, pay four shillings six pence or five shillings for a pair of Neats Leather shoes, for which within this twenty years was paid but two shillings eight pence; and when they have come up to those strange prices, have their inner soles many times made with chill and soaking Seal skins or Horse hides▪ and all the upper Leather and un∣der of their Shoes so ill tanned, as it being scarcely se∣parated or to be known from a raw hide, it lets in water like brown paper or bayes, and with a showre of rain, or a little wet shrivels and runs into wrinckles and an unhan∣someness, and scarcely keeps out a little rain or dirt which breeds Rheums, Colds and Diseases in the people who being Islanders, and living in a Coun∣try of so much rain and wet, which by some other Na∣tions living in drier Countries, called the Matella Planetarum, Piss-pot of the Planets, cannot walk or live so healthfully as they doe in warmer Countries,
with wooden Shoes or Sandalls, which may be remedi∣ed as to the peoples better usage in their Bread, Beer, Wine and Shoes, the grand necessaries of life. 1. By a better execution of the Laws already ena∣cted, 2. By not altogether trusting Tradesmen with the care thereof in Corporations, who being either of the same Trades, or others furnished with as evil Artifices, are but bad Overseers or Suppressors of deceits in Trade, by which they all now more then ever enrich themselves. 3. If the Justices of Peace in every County by as Oath particularly to be framed for that purpose, which in a time of heeding no Oathes, or an age of equivoca∣tion or putting false constructions or interpretations up∣on them, may be more then formerly needfull, were en∣joyned better to look to Lawes already made, or to be enacted for that end, and allowed upon the discovery or prosecution a fourth part of the forfeitures and pe∣nalties, which will help to put them in mind of their duty; and to be like the Athenian Nomophylaces, more vigilant in the finding out, prosecution and con∣viction of any such transgressors. 4. That there be yearly appointed by the King, or the Lord Chancellor or the Lord Treasurer in his be∣half, Assayers or Surveyors of the Bread, Beer, Wine and Leather made, or to be made or vented in every County and City, which as concerning Ale and Beer will be but the same with the Ale-conners and Tasters, which our antient Lawes and Customes thought neces∣sary, and to have for his pains, discovery, prosecution, and conviction of offenders contrary to the Laws made
or to be provided, one part in four of the penalties, and to attend therein also, and observe the directions of the Justices of Peace therein. 5. That the Wines according to the Statutes be, as formerly, rated at a reasonable price set as well for the Merchants as the Vintners or Retailers. 6. That no Wine-Cooper be upon a great penalty suffered to buy or sell wines, which can never be for the good of the people, when the Devil or the Conju∣rer having mingled and sophisticated what he bought pure from the Merchant, shall have power to make it as bad as he will, and put it to sale when he hath done. 7. That every Merchant and Vintner doe as the Vi∣ctuallers and Cooks are by Statutes appointed for the keeping of Lent, yearly enter into Recognizances to the King not to corrupt or alter their wines, nor willing∣ly or wittingly permit them to be adulterated or alte∣red by the Wine-Coopers, but to sell them according to the lawfull measures, and observe and keep the rates and prices yearly to be set. 8. That every Brewer and Baker doe yearly enter into Recognizances to make wholsome Bread and Beer and keep the Assize. 9. That every Tanner and Currier doe the like as touching the well tanning and dressing of their Lea∣ther: And that the Officer which shall keep the knife at Leaden Hall in London do the like well and truly to execute the duty of his place. 10. That the Vintners who by a late invention and ill use of glass bottles doe evade the rates of wines li∣mited by a late Act of Parliament, and recompence the abatement of price by the falseness of their measures,
may be ordered to use as formerly; Pint, Quart, Pottle and Gallon, Pots marked and allowed according to Law. 11. That for the first offence every of the said Tradesmen shall forfeit one hundred pounds, for the se∣cond two hundred pounds, and for the third be disfran∣chised and never more permitted to use that Trade. 12. And that a conviction of any such offences may be pleaded in barre unto them in any Action to be brought, commenced and prosecuted. To be delivered from which great and many deceipts and frauds, and every dayes often committed oppression, by a tyranny of the rich over the poor and needy, and to keep the Wolves from their morning and evening preys, and rejoycing in the spoil of the widdows and fatherless, the hungry and necessitous, which by a cheating and blinding of their consciences, they will whether the Laws of God and man will or no, suppose to be lawfull, be∣cause it is their Trade, and the misteries of it, or be∣cause their Fathers or their Masters did it before them; every one else doth it, and every man must live and make use of their time, labour, calling or opportu∣nities. The people of this Kingdom being so universally en∣damaged by the evils happening by them, and concern∣ed, and like to be benefitted by the remedies, may (as those of Spain, Florence, and other forreign Countries, who in bearing some burdens and Taxes laid upon them are many times rather gainers then losers by the benefit of a Bands, or rule of rating Butchers, and many other Commodities to be bought or sold, so as children can∣not be cozened.
Be very willing that their representatives in Parlia∣ment shall consent. That upon every Tun of wine, French, Spanish and Rhenish to be vented in England there be by the first buyer forty shillings per Tunne paid to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and accounted for half yearly in the Court of Exchequer. That instead of an Excise upon Ale, Beer, Perry and Sider, every one that shall in a publick Alehouse sell Ale, Beer, Perry or Sider, shall yearly pay to the King, his Heirs and Successors forty shillings per annum; and every publick Brewer twenty pounds per annum, and a further rate proportionable to the quantities of their Brewings. And that to restore this antient Monarchy,§. 5. and here∣tofore famous and flourishing Kingdome to its former honour, safety and defence, and an ease from the charge of mercenary Armies and Guards, and to prevent the great and many dangers and inconveniencies which may happen thereby, as also to fatherless Children by Guardianships and breaches of trust, his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors, may have and enjoy his and their antient rights of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, and all mesne Lords & their Heirs their Tenures by Knight Service, with all incidents there∣unto belonging, allowing unto every one holding of the King by those Tenures the liberty of being freed from the marriage of his Heir, to be compounded for by year∣ly paying unto the King into the Exchequer, or into the Court of Wards, next after his age of one and twenty years and livery sued forth, the sum of twenty pounds per annum rent for every Knights Fee which he shall
hold, or proportionably according to the partes thereof. 1. That in the granting of Wardships to the Mother or next friends, according to the Instructions of King James, with those reasonable cares and considerations of debts and younger children used by the Court of Wards and Liveries, the marriages of the Wards and Rents of their Lands during all the time of their mino∣rities computed together, be never above one years im∣proved value, which will be but the half of that which is now accompted to be a reasonable Fine, and is fre∣quently paid by many Copihold Tenants whose Fines are certain. 2. That the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Durham, who by antient exemptions and priviledge are to have the wardships of Tenants, holding of them by Knight service in their minorities, though they hold other Lands in Capite and by Knight service of the King may be ordained to doe the like favours. 3. That all that hold in Capite and by Knight service be according to their antient liberties and rights granted by the Charter of King Henry the first, freed (as in rea∣son they ought) from all Assessments of their demeasn Lands touching warre. 4. That Primer Seisins be taken away of such kind of Tenures, and no more paid. 5. That the Lands holden in Socage, or of any other mesne Lords in case of minority of any in ward to the King, by reason of Tenure in Capite, or pour cause de gard, being taken into consideration only as to the Fine, for the marriage may not be put under any Rent or Lease to be made by the Court of Wards, but freed,
as they were frequently and antiently by Writs sent to the Escheators. 6. That the King in recompence thereof may have and receive of every Duke or Earl dying seized of any Lands or Hereditaments in Capite and by Knight ser∣vice two hundred pounds, of every Marquess, Viscount and Baron two hundred marks, and of every one that holdeth by a Knights Fee twenty pounds for a Relief, or proportionably according to the quantity of the Fee which he holdeth. 7. That incroachments and wast grounds holden in Capite and by Knight Service, may be no cause of wardship, or paying any other duties incident to that Tenure, if it shall upon the first proof and notice be relinquished. 8. That only Escuage and Service of warre (except in the aforesaid cases of the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Durham) and all other incidents (except Wardships) due by their Tenants which hold of them by Knight service, be restored to mesne Lords, and that the Reliefs of five pounds for a whole Knights Fee, or proportionably according to the quantity of Lands of that kind of Fee holden, shall be after the death of eve∣ry such Tenant twenty pounds. 9. That to lessen the charges of Escheators and Ju∣ries for every single Office or Inquisition to be found or taken, after the death of every tenant in Capite and by Knight Service, the time of petitioning within a moneth after the death of the Ancestor, may be enlar∣ged to three moneths, and the Shire, Town, City, or principall place of every County be appointed with certain dayes or times for the finding of Offices, to the
end that one and the same Meeting, and one and the same Jury, with one and the same charge, or by a con∣tribution of all parties concerned, may give a dispatch thereunto. 10. That in case of neglecting to petition within three moneths after the death of the Tenant in Capite and by Knight Service, or otherwise concealing any Wardships, or not suing out of Livery, if upon informa∣tion brought, issue joyned, and witnesses examined, or any time before Hearing or Tryall of the Cause, the party offending or concerned shall pay the Prosecutor his double costs, and satisfie the King the mesne rates, he shall be admitted to compound. 11. That the unnecessary Bonds formerly taken in the Court of Wards at two shillings six pence, or three shil∣lings charge upon suing out of every Diem clausit extre∣mum, or Writ to find an Office, obliging the Prosecu∣tor thereunto, may be no more taken, when as the time limited for petitioning to compound for Wardships, and the danger of not doing of it will be engagement suf∣ficient. 12. That Grants Leases and Decrees of the Court of Wards may not (to the great charge of the Wards or others concerned therein) be unnecessarily, as they have been, inrolled at length or otherwise, with the Au∣ditors of that Court, when as the same was recorded be∣fore by other Officers of that Court to which the Audi∣tors may have a free access, and at any time take ex∣tracts out of them. 13. That a severe Act of Parliament be made a∣gainst such as shall misuse or wast any Wards Estate, Lands, Woods and Timber committed or granted to
them, or any personal Estate which belongeth unto them or shall not give the Wards fit education, or shall dis∣parage them in their Marriages, or marry them without any competent Portion, or shall not within a moneth after the death of such Ward, or coming to his or her age of one and twenty years make a true accompt and pay∣ment unto the said Ward or his or her Heirs or Execu∣tors, of all that shall be by them due and payable to him or them by reason of the said Wardship, upon pain to pay to the use of the said Ward, his or her Heirs, Exe∣cutors or Administrators, besides the said moneys due and payable to the use of the said Ward double costs and damages expended or sustained therein. That all Lands hereafter escheated and forfeited to his Majesty (in cases where there shall be no restoration to the next in discent or remainder) be inseparable,§. 6. and as a Sacrum patrimonium annexed to the Crown, never to be aliened, leased, or charged with any Rent-charge or Annuity further then for life or one and twenty years. That all Corporations of Trade,§. 7. may besides Fines and Amerciaments to be imposed and taken to their own use, have also power to impose Fines and Amer∣ciaments to the use of his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors, and have no power to release or discharge any Penalties, and Issues forfeited to the King: And that the Town Clerks of Cities and Towns Corpo∣rate, and Clerks of every Corporation or Compa∣ny of Trade shall be bound by Oath and Recognizance to the King to certifie and estreat into the Exchequer all Fines, Issues and Amerciaments forfeited and lost, at two usuall Terms in every year, that is to say, Easter and Michaelmas.
That the By-lawes of every Corporation and Com∣pany of Trade,§. 8. and every City and Town Corporate which ought to be perused and approved by the Lord Chancellor of England and Lord, Chief Justices of ei∣ther Benches, or Justices of Assize, or any three of them, and are not to be contrary to the Lawes, may be ac∣cording to the Statute of 19 Hen. 7. cap. 7. perused and allowed by them. That upon every bloodshed or breach of the peace,§. 9. as by the Civil Law in forreign parts, and heretofore was anciently used in England by the Common Law thereof, a reasonable mulct or penalty be imposed to be gathered by the Magistrates, as the Drossaerts do in many places in Holland, and be answered to the King, though the parties do agree or release and discharge one another. That all Misericordia's which are now the only Vestigia's, left of that antient Custome and Prerogative in Cases of Nonsuits, and Pleas of Non est factums not verified, may be put into certain reasonable penal sums, duly collected and answered to the King, his Heirs and Successors, which besides an annual and casual profit to his Majesty, will quiet and lessen contentions, and bring a great ease to the people. That in cases of Manslaughter there be before any pardon granted a reasonable satisfaction made according as it was heretofore practised in our Lawes of England,§. 10. both before and since the Conquest, made to the wives and children of the Deceased, or if none to the next of kindred, unless the par∣ties concerned shall otherwise agree their recompence or satisfaction, and an Estimatio capitis, or value of the party offending also paid to the King. That upon convictions
of Adulteries & Fornication, as was antiently used, there be paid to the King a penalty proportionable to the of∣fence; and that in all Tryals for Manslaughter, Mur∣der or other crimes, that hard and unreasonable custom now and heretofore used in England, that witnesses may not be brought, heard, or examined against the King be abolished, and that all good and lawfull testimonies which may tend to the discovery of the fact, may be, as in other Cases and Tryals, heard and received. That there be in every Circuit,§, 11. as antiently, a Clerk, besides the Clerk of the Assize, appointed to enter in a Roll the Fines imposed by the Justices, and to make Estreats thereof duly into the Exchequer. That in all Actions of Trespass,§. 12. or any other Acti∣on, to be brought in the Court of the Kings Bench at Westminster, or by Quo minus in the Office of Pleas in the Court of the Kings Exchequer at Westminster, or in the Court of the Marshalsea, or Court of the Virge of the Kings Palace at Westminster, whereupon any decla∣ration shall be in debt, there be upon the first Process or Writ such Fines paid to the King, and in such manner as have been antiently and are now paid to the King upon actions of debt retornable in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster: And that upon every such first Writ the Plaintiffs Attorney doe in order thereunto in∣dorse the just sum in debt, which he intendeth to de∣clare upon. That every Merchant or Trader that shippeth any goods to be exported,§. 13. or unlades any imported, shall under his hand attested, or if need be, upon his oath deliver unto his Majesties Farmers or Customers a true note or Cocquet of all such goods exported and
imported, and the true contents and value thereof. And that whosoever shall wittingly or knowingly de∣ceive his Majesty,▪§. 14. his Heirs or Successors therein, shall for the first offence forfeit five times the value, and for the second ten times the value, and for the third to be disfranchised, and never more permitted to trade: And that every conviction of any such offence shall if pleaded be a bar to them in any Action to be brought, commen∣ced and prosecuted by them. That once in every three years Commissions be is∣sued to carefull and worthy men in every County and City uninterressed,▪§, 15. to enquire of all charitable uses, and the imployments and abuses thereof, and if need be to put a better order therein for the future: and that the Arrears be also collected and paid, the one moity to his Majesty, and the other to be imployed to the charita∣ble uses. That Commissions be likewise issued now (more then formerly necessary by the dissolution of Monasteries and Religious Houses,§. 16. and the great disuse of Hospitalities and Almes deeds) to enquire and certifie the num∣ber of Poor requiring almes in every Parish in every County and City, that all vagabond and wandring Beggars be returned to the several Parishes where they were born, and where it cannot may be reduced to some Parishes in every County or City less troubled then others with poor, and more able to maintain them, that the Church-wardens or Governours of every Parish (as is usually done in Holland, where by their excellent orders and care of their Poor, very few are to be seen either wandring or miserable) may upon poverty happening to any Family, or the death
of a Father or Mother of children, goe or send to their houses as the Commissioners de aflictis at Amsterdam usually do, lift up the broken hearted, and enquire what are their necessities, or what there is to maintain them, and accordingly make provision for them, by relieving the aged, sick, or impotent, providing work for such as are able, and putting out of children at fitting ages to be Apprentices, or to service, or some other im∣ployments, wherein we may well hope for those good effects which the like courses in France▪ by the erecting of the Hospitals de dieu, or other Hospitals in or about Paris have lately assured, that the encrease and decrease of the poor in every Parish, and the Collections and Assessments for them, and Legacies and charitable uses given to the poor be yearly certified to the Clerk of the Peace of every City & County at the Quarter Sessions to be holden after Michaelmas, to be by him entred into fair Books with Calenders and Tables fitted thereunto, & publickly read before the Justices at the next Quarter Sessions after, to the end that the Justices there assem∣bled may duly consider thereof, and make such further orders and Provisions, as shall be fitting and requisite: And that when the English Captives at Algier shall be released, and no more likely to be in that condition, the one pound per cent. granted by Act of Parliament for that purpose, or the like allowance and proportion for seven years to be allowed out of the Custome-house may be imployed to relieve and make a stock for the Poor of England: And in regard that such as sue at Law in forma pauperis, notwithstanding all the cares which have been hitherto taken by the Courts of Justice in as∣signing them Counsel and Attornies, and ordering that
no Fees should be taken, they doe for want of money and those cares and diligences which are only purchased and procured by mony, many times, but tire themselves to no purpose, and after many years expence of time and labour in trudging to and fro, with their foul and tate∣red Bundles and Papers, wither away, & die in the hopes of that which for want of a due assistance and vigorous prosecution they could never bring to pass. That an Utter-Barrister or Councellor at Law, be once in every three years appointed by the Lord Chan∣cellor or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being, and to continue for that time, and no longer, in the high Courts of Chancery and the Courts of Kings Bench, Exchequer and Dutchy of Lancaster, and a Sergeant at Law in the Court of Common-pleas to be for the like time nominated and appointed by the Lord chief Justice of the Court of Common-pleas for the time being, to be of councell & assistant for all rights and duties of men and women suing in forma pauperis, and as Counsel to assist and help the poor of the respe∣ctive places in the prosecution and recovery of all Lega∣cies and charitable uses given to them or penalties given or ordained by any Statute to be had or levied for their use, or any Parish collections and assessements withheld from them, for which they shall take no Fees but in a reasonable manner upon the recovery thereof, or end of the said Suits: And for their better encouragement may in all the Courts of Justice of this kingdom, according to their said several nominations and appointments, as well Superior as Inferior, have a prae audience in those & other causes next to the Councel learned of the Kings and Queens of England, and the Prince or Heir apparent.
That in every County and City there be a publick Work-house to imploy the Poor in the manufacture of Woollen or Linnen cloth, making fishing Nets, or o∣ther Manufacture; and that for their better encourage∣ment they may as they doe in Holland, after a compe∣tent number of hours in every day imployed in the work of the Publick, be allowed two hours in a day to work for their own advantage, notwithstanding that their lodgings, diet, and fitting apparrel be defrayed out of the Publick; and that the Governours thereof may for their encouragement have the benefit and liberty of Exportation and Importation of any the said commo∣dities without any Custome to be paid for the same, upon the Certificate of the next Justice of Peace of such County or City, upon the oath of every such Go∣vernour, that the said quantities to be exported were made or wrought at the said publick Workhouse, and upon the oath of such Governour, that the commodi∣ties imported are to be imployed, and used only in the said publick Workhouse. And that the kindred of Poor living in any part of England and Wales not taking almes, or overburdned with poverty, may be sought out and enforced to a reasonable contribution according to their abilities to∣wards the maintenance, or providing for such Poor and decayed as within the eighth degree are of their own blood and lynage; and where it may be, put them in∣to such a way of living as may exempt them from the fate of common servants, or people taking almes, or from being placed in common Workhouses, that by such means and provisions to be made for the Poor, which our Acts of Parliament, and the careless and ma∣ny
times purloyning Collectors and Overseers of the Poor in severall Parishes, have not yet performed. And that all Nobility, Gentlemen and others, excepting such whose constant and necessary attendance upon the persons of the King, Queen or Prince shall not permit the same, having an Estate of Lands of Inheritance of the yearly value of one hundred pounds per annum, or more, above reprises and their houses of residence in any Parish of England or Wales not keeping their Christmas in the said house or Parish, shall at every of the said Feasts pay unto the Poor of the said parish the sum of forty shillings, or proportionably according to that rate of his or their Lands lying or being in the said Parish, besides their other payments to the Poor collected and assessed in the said Parish. That so the multitude of Beggars in England may no more be a Byword amongst other Nations, that there may be no complaining in our streets, nor such dismall and sad spectacles, as the leprous, blind, lame and aged people and young children crying out for bread, and ready to starve for want of food or clothing, nor so many counterfeits or tricks to make an ill use of charities to uphold their lazy and ugly condition of life. That the Clerks of the Peace and Assizes,§. 17. and every Justice of Peace shall take their oathes not to release or discharge, or respite any Fines, Issues, Recognizances and Amerciaments forfeited & due to the King, but carefully and duly estreat and certifie them every half year into the Exchequer in the Terms of Easter and St. Michael, which the example of Hengham a Judge in the Reign of King Edward the first, who for reducing an Amercia∣ment
or Fine of thirteen shillings four pence, to six shillings eight pence, in favour and pitty of a poor man, was grievously fined, and ordered to provide at his own charge the great Clock at Westminster, may perswade them not to violate. That the Ballance,§. 18. and In and Out of forraign Trade may be observed and reduced into Books, to be year∣ly brought into the Exchequer, but not with Blanks, fair Seals, Covers and Labels, as they have used to be to little purpose. That the more to encourage Merchants to an honest accompt and payment of their Customes to the King,§. 19. and to deal better with him, it may be enacted that where any Ships of any Merchants, and their goods and lading shall be taken in times of hostility with any other Prince, so as it be not by the carelesness and neglect of the Merchants in carrying prohibited goods, or the Captain or owner of the Ships in not making so good a defence, or not arming or providing themselves so well as they ought, the losses of such Merchants and ship∣owners duely estimated and proved before the Judges of the Admiralty shall be refunded out of the next Pri∣zes which shall be taken from that Nation, Prince or E∣nemy that took it, the accustomed allowances to the Lord high Admiral and others first deducted. That the wages of Servants now trebled more then what it was twenty years agone,§. 20. and of Labourers and Workmen very much increased by reason of the intol∣lerable and unbecomming pride of clothes now in fa∣shion amongst them by licence, and imitation of times of pride, disobedience, disorder and rebellion, and the folly of some of their Masters and Mistresses enjoyning
them to wear clothes too high for them, may be limited and ordered to be as they were before these last twenty years, that every Master or Mistress that giveth more shall forfeit double the value to the King; and that no Servant who hath formerly served in any other place be received or taken into service without a certificate or testimony of their good behaviour from their Maister or Mistress where they last served, if they shall not ap∣pear to be unreasonable, or for malice, or any sinister ends to deny the same. That the Tenths of all the Fishing in the British or English Seas by Barks or Busses,§. 21. now beginning to be instituted, and taken into consideration, which in part was intended to be had by King Edward the sixth upon the coasts of Wales, Ireland and Baltimore, by building a Fort or Castle upon the streight to command (as Cap∣tain John Smith relates in his discourse of the benefits of Fishing in our English Seas) a tribute for Fishing, and if industry fail not, is like (if we but imitate the Hollanders, who have hitherto enjoyed that which was none of their own, and enriched themselves by our carelesnes) to grow up to a great, and not to be estimated Natio∣nal profit be paid and accompted for to the King and his Heirs and Successors, who may well de∣serve it, when as besides his Soveraignty of the Sea, and the guard and protection of them by his Navie and Shipping, he hath of late in the midst of his own wants and necessities for the better encouragement of his peo∣ple to seek their own good, and that which our British Seas will plentifully afford them, given all his Customs inward and outward for any the returns to be made by the sale of Fish in the Baltick Seas, Denmark and France
for seven years for the first entrance into the Trade of Fishing. That the rivers in England and Wales not yet navi∣gable,§. 22. and fit to be made navigable, may by a publick purchase of the Mills or Wears standing upon them, and pulling down the Wears & Kiddels hindring it, attemp∣ted in the Reigns of King Henry the third and Edward the third, by several Statutes made for the taking of them away, be made navigable, and a reasonable Toll or Custome upon every Vessell and Fraight, paid to the King, his Heirs and Successors. That for the better support of our Nobility,§. 23. and the honours which they enjoy, and that as starres in our firmament, they may be able to attend the Sun their Soveraign, and not suffer such Eclypses in their Estates and Revenues, as too many have lately done, that the Lions which should guard the Thrones of our Kings, may not pine away or languish, and the stately columns and pillars thereof moulder into ruins and decay, and have small, or unbecoming Estates, to maintain them in the splendor of their Ancestors, and the Royal Revenue not to be troubled or lessened by suits or requests to supplie them, they may according to the intent and custome of the Fewdall Laws, and the locality which ought to be in Earldoms and Baronies, not be without some honorary pos∣sessions, which was so usual and frequent in England, as through the three first Centuries after the Conquest the Lands belonging to Earldomes and Baronies were accompted to be parcels and members thereof, and the word Honor so comprehensive as it conteined and com∣prised all the Lands belonging thereunto, as well as the
Earldomes, Baronies and Title which did in sundry of of our former Kings reigns grants pass and comprehend the Land as well as the Titles. And that according to that laudable and ever to be imitated example of Thomas late Earl of Arundel and Surrey, in obtaining an Act of Parliament in the third year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr for the annexing of divers Baronies and Lands to the Castle and Earldome of Arundel, inseparable and unalienable in contemplation of the poverty and small Estates of the then Lord Stafford, and some other of the antient Eng∣lish Nobility wetherbeaten and wasted by the injuries of time or the luxuries, and carelesness of their Ance∣stors. The Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, and Baronets of England, leaving some other Lands to their own disposing, for the preferring of younger chil∣dren, payment of debts, and supply of necessities, which accidents may cast upon them, may be ordered to settle & annex by like Acts of Parliament the Capita Baronia∣rum, and chief Castles, Manors and Lands belonging to their Earldomes, Baronies or Estates competent and sufficient to keep up and sustain the honour and dignity thereof from the gripes or defilements of poverty and Adversities not to be aliened or separated from their Earldomes, Baronies or Dignities as long as it shall please God to continue them. That the antient use of the Exchequer be restored,§. 24. and the Kings revenues carefully collected and answer∣ed, and that the Justices in Eyre of the Kings Forrests and Chases, on this side and beyond Trent, Clerkes of the Market, and Commissioners, and Clerks of the
Commissioners of Sewers do duely certifie into the Exchequer all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments imposed and forfeited. That upon all manufactures made beyond the Seas,§. 25. and all things to be imported tending to excess and luxury, as Tobacco, Silks, &c. there be an Imposition more then ordinary, which the wisdom of Neighbor Nations have ever thought expedient, and was in the Reign of King James the prudent advice in Parliament of the Lord Treasurer Salisbury. That in the deplorable Cases of wreck at Sea,§. 26. the Masters or Owners of such Ships, not being Pirates or Robbers (whether there be any living thing remaining or not in the Ship) all and every part of the lading, Tackle, and Ship which shall be saved from the fury of the Sea, or found on shore, notwithstanding any de∣testable custome to the contrary, may according to the Ancient Equitable Laws of Oleron be saved and preserv∣ed for the right Owners coming within a year and a day to claim the same, and tendring such just charges and re∣compence, as by two of the next Justices of Peace not interessed, shall be found to be reasonable, for those that were Instrumental in the preservation there∣of, that so the inhumane and unchristian customes of too many who live upon the Sea Coasts, being in a Shipwrack as pittiless and cruel as the Winds and Seas, taking away that which they left, and rejoycing in the disasters and miseries of those that are afflicted, may be abolished. That Champerty and maintenance being now crept through the care and severity of all our former good Laws and Statutes made to prevent it,§. 27. into such a gene∣ral
practice and profit, as in the confidence of dark con∣trivances, and the impossibility or difficulty of discovery of them. Some of our Gentlemen of the Gyges ring or invisible Estates, in a way which they have found out to live, aswell without a Revenue, or other lawful means and professions as with them, can like Nimrods, or mighty Hunters, by shares gained in the driving of Causes, support an idle Gallantry by the spoil and op∣pression of others; some women more wily then good can be Agitators or Retrivers of causes, not concerning them, for a part of the hoped for Booty; and many Citizens and Tradesmen do buy pretended Titles and Interests, and ingage and furnish money for no small parts to be had upon the success of Suites in Law; and too many Attornyes, Sollicitors, and others, can make it the best of their employments to deal in gross and by whole sale, and will not as the Law en∣joyns them, make Bills or Tickets to their Clyents of their just and allowed Fees and disbursments. Some good Laws and powerful restrictions may be made to prevent or punish those grand abuses, and that if either the Plaintiff or Defendant in any Action shall require it, an Oath or Oaths may be given at the Tryal or Hearing of such Suites or Causes, to any who may discover such Champerties or Maintenance; and if any shall be found offending therein, either by disbursing of money, to have any share or part of the thing inquesti∣on, on, or by any pre-contract, or other ingagement, the Verdict may not be taken, nor Judgement entered; or if it shall be discovered and proved after the Verdict taken and Judgement entred, before the end of the Term, wherein such Judgement shall be entred; the
said Judgement be by the Judges of that Court ar∣rested or made void, and whether it be discovered and proved before Judgement entred, or after the par∣ties offending, as well those that committed the Cham∣perty and Maintenance, as all their Abettors may every one of them forfeit and pay to the King and his Heirs and Successors, the sum of one hundred pounds, and be imprisoned without Bail or Maineprise, untill they shall have paid the same, and also forfeit and pay to the party greived, his double Costs and Damage, together with the moyety, or half of the matter in question. That there be no pardon or reversal of any Outlary,§. 28. in Civil aswell as Criminal Causes, or Actions, with∣out five Marks first paid to the King in discharge of his Contempt, and a Charter of Pardon, as was ancient∣ly used, first sued out under the Great Seal of Eng∣land. That all Sheriffs,§. 29. under-Sheriffs, and their Deputies, do at the entrance or admission into their Offices, take an Oath not to imbrace any Juror or Juries, or for any Fee or Reward, or otherwise to nominate any, at the request either of the Plaintiffs or Defendants, or of any on their behalf; and that they shall not make out, or deliver, or willingly or wittingly permit to be made in their names, any Blanck Warrant or Precept to Arrest any person without a Writ under the Seal of the Court, wherein such Action is laid or to be tryed, first had and delivered unto them; and that no Sheriff or under-Sheriff, do crave allowance or respit for any debts of the Kings, but upon just cause, That e∣very Juror, if the Plaintiff or Defendant, or their At∣torneys
shall before they besworn require it, do also take an Oath that he hath not received any Instructions or Evidence before hand from the Plantiff or Defen∣dant, or their Attornyes, or any on their behalf. That all English Merchants trading into Foreign parts,§, 30. may be ordained to bring into England, at or in their re∣turn, a certain and reasonable quantity of Bullion or coin of Gold or Silver, to be yearly certified and Registred in the Exchequer, and that such as shall be brought in, may not as it is now, be bought and Registred in the name and for the use of the East Indian Company; and that the East Indian Company to prevent any disguise, which may be made use of betwixt them and the Mer∣chants, may also be ordered yearly to Register and Certifie into the Exchequer, all such Gold and Silver Bullion or coin thereof as shall be imported by the said East Indian Company. That all Foreign Merchants,§, 31. Trading into England, or any the Dominions thereof, be ordained to export at their returns English Manufactures and Commo∣dities, to the value of what they imported, and not to make their returns in money, or by Bills of Exchange, as the Jews in great numbers trading hither, are known now to do. And that all Merchants Alien, if they be not such as have houses and habitations here, or if they have, do at their first beginning to Trade, enter into Recognizances of great penalties in Chan∣cery, not to Transport, or cause to be Transported out of England, as was in part provided for by the Statute of 2 H. 6. chap. 6. Or returned by Bills of Exchange any more then the sum of five pounds for their necessary charges, upon pain of forseiting treble the value there∣of.
That the many more then formerly used deceipts,§. 32. in the Shearing, Tentering, hot Pressing, and false Dying of our English Clothes, which do much or more en∣damage our Trade of Cloathing, then the Transpor∣tation of Fullers Earth, Sheeps Pelts with the Wool upon them, or the Clothes in the Whites, may be by some good Laws, restrained and suppressed; and that the Aulnage aswell of Cloth as Stuffs, may according to sundry Acts of Parliament and other provisions be better looked unto and put in execution. That the great and many Deceipts,§. 33. Abuses, and A∣dulterations now used in most or too many Trades and Manufactures, surpassing all the Cheats and Tricks of Hocus Pocus, or which the Pillories, & the Court of Star Chamber heretofore punished, ingrossings of Commo∣dities, or carrying them beyond the Seas, on purpose to make a scarcity, and bring them in again at double or greater Rates, unlawful confederacies to make the Manufactures so slight or evil wrought, as they may the sooner be worn out; or by a small price paid to the Workmen, get the greater Rate in the Retail, Bonds or Securities enforced from Workmen not to make or sell at that rate to any other; Combinations to in∣haunce Prices, and so many more ungodly Artifices imployed, as Tricks and Trades, are now grown to be Termes convertible, and the Divels Registers have not precedents enough for them, whereby not onely num∣berless & great oppressions are daily exercised upon the people, to the impoverishing of many of them, by those that like Pikes in the Fish Ponds, do live only better then others, by devouring and undoing the smaller Frye, and industriously imploy themselves therein, and at the
same time cry out of injustice and oppression where it was not, and busied themselves about Religion and Gospel Purity, when they never intended nor could not afford to practice it, whereby all our English Trade and Manufactures are disparaged and brought into a slight esteem, and made to be unsaleable, or at very low rates in the parts beyond the Seas, and to give place to the Commodities and Manufactures of other Nations more honestly made, and if not speedily remedied, will ren∣der all his Majesties cares of reviving and promoting the English Trade and Merchandise of no avail, as long as that Canker, or a principal cause of the decay and ruine of it shall be permitted, may by some good Laws be restrained and suppressed. That the many good propositions heretofore made by Mr. Henry Robinson and some others,§. 34. concern∣ing the Regulation or bettering of the ways of Trade and Merchandise, may now after a Committee of Trade in the times of Usurpation and Confusion, sleeping too much over it, and doing nothing, whilst Trade it self came to be almost ruined, be taken into a more serious consideration, and some good Laws enacted in pursuance of them. That the Manufacture of Linnen Cloth, the importa∣tion whereof from Flanders and other Foreign parts,§. 35. ex∣pends the Nation, little less then 100000 l, per annum, by reason that too many of our Wives in England have exchanged their good Housewisfery for Gallantry, and Spinning for spending, may be more incouraged in England by Injoyning six Acres in every hundred Acres of errable Land in England and Wales, to be yearly sowed with Hemp & Flex, and that there be an Aulnage
of Linnen Cloth, as well as of Stuffs and Woollen Cloth. That our Laws be not (as too many of them use to be) Still Born,§. 36. or expiring by that time they can be read or recorded, or Starved at Nurse; but that some good Laws may be made to prevent or cure their Swouning or Convulsion fits, and bring them up to the good ends or purposes, for which they were ordained, and put them in execution. That our Paths being restored, we may rejoyce in our Laws and Constitutions, and ab∣hor those wandring after Dark Lanthorns, or the ignis fatuus of newlights, which have lead us into many great miseries and confusions. That the Excise of Ale,§. 37. Beer, Perry, and Syder, and the charges affliction, and troubles, which it brings upon the people, which before our times of misery, would have brought death and ruine any private contriver; and was at the first created by Oliver and his Impes to maintain a cursed Rebellion, and set up a destroying and detestable Anarchy, may be abolished, and taken away, and the Nation restored to the freedom and quiet which they formerly enjoyed under this our anci∣cent and excellently composed Monarchy. That his Majesties Ancient and just Rights of Royal Pourveyances upon a due Regulation of any evils or oppressions which may be proved to have been com∣mitted in the manner of taking of them,§. 38. may be resto∣red to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and that very great Consumption of his Estate, occasioned by an enhaunce, and trebling of the Rates and prices of Provision for his Houshould, which hath laid heavy burdens upon his too small and overmuch
impoverished Revenues, multiplyed his wants and ne∣cessities, disturbed and disparaged the order and honor of his house, and produced very many great Inconve∣niences worthy to be remedied by the Parliament, and the care which they usnally take for the support of his Imperial Crown and Dignity, may be cured. And when a long and generall observation and experi∣ence can tell every man, who is not a stranger to his own affairs, or of other men, how hard a thing it is for one that is behind hand to over∣come his Povertie and get before hand; how im∣possible it will be for a private man to live out of Debt, when his yearly and necessary expences and disburse∣ments shall far surmount his Receipts and Revenues; how necessary a Treasury, Banke, or overplus of money which is Robur belli & fundamentum ac firmamentum pa∣cis, is for a King in times of War, and its many chargea∣ble occasions, and the power and reputation of it in times of Peace to preserve it; and that all Kingdoms and peo∣ple never were or could think themselves safe without it. That in order to publick good, and to consolidate the hoped for happiness of King and People, which the pretended Parliaments of our late Times of Usurpation, busying themselves in laying Burdens and Taxes upon the People, for the maintenance of a War, and an Arbi∣trary power, and Tyranny, and the continuance of their miseries, could never find the way or leisure to establish. A Royal and Princely yearly Revenue may be settled upon his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and to the end to make the Plaister or the Tent proportion∣able to the wound, and to the cure intended, and not make the repaires of his Revenues to be insufficient or
more chargeable and burdensome, by doing it by parcels or at several times, whereby it may ruine, before it can be repaired, or suddainly after; and for the better satisfacti∣on of some of the Purchasers, who were the cause of their own and his Majesties troubles and miseries, and of the Kings Loyal Party who suffered with him in it? The highest monethly Assessement or Tax which in our late times of confusion, was One hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem, may by Assesse∣ment or Subsidies, or some other way proportionable unto it for the next two years, if the Parliament shall think fit, be assented unto, and yearly collected and paid into such hands as they shall appoint, and such part thereof not exceeding the sum of two hundred thousand pounds, be destributed by his Majesty, to the suffering and Loyal English who took Armes for him or his Royal Father, and never deserted their Loyalty; or to their Wives and Children surviving them, as his Majesty under his sign Manual shall direct, and some o∣ther part of the said moneys, not exceeding the sum of one hundred thousand pounds arising out of the said Assessements be imployed for satisfaction, without al∣lowance for Interest (which should not be for wicked∣ness or sinfull contracts) of such Wives and Children of Purchasers, or the Purchasers of Purchasers, which have yet received no satisfaction according to his Ma∣jesties Declarations, by the Bishops, Deanes, and Chap∣ters, or Prebends, or out of his Majesty or his Royal Mother the Queens Revenues, or which have not been Purchasers by false Debenturs; and the other remaining undisposed moneys as aforesaid, of the said two years Taxe, to be and remain to his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, as a sacred Patrimony unalienable to be annexed, inseparably to the Crown of England, not to be Leased or Rent charged, further then for one or two Lives, or one and twenty years. That after the end of five years next ensuing, there be another monthly Tax or Subsidy of 120000 l. more for two whole years then next ensuing, to be raised as a∣foresaid, and disposed of by such as the Parliament shall appoint for his Majesties use, of which, if his Majesty shall please, there may also be issued by Warrant under his Majesties sign Manual, such moneys as his Majesty shall think fitting, not exceeding the sum of two hundred thousand pounds, to be imployed for the further relief of such of the Loyal suffering party in England for his Majesty, or his late Royal Father, as his Majesty shall appoint, and that the residue of the monys to be col∣lected and raised by the said monethly Tax or Assesse∣ment for two whole years be, as soon as conveniently it may, laid out and disposed for the purchasing of an ho∣norable Revenue in Land for the King & his Successors unalienable as aforesaid, and to no other use or purpose, which they that could pay as much, and a great deal more to uphold a Slavery, may be better contented to pay, to establish a redemption and freedom. And that after the end of three years next after the said two years, there be a like monethly Tax gathered and collected for two whole years next ensuing, to be disposed of by such as the Parliament shall appoint, for the buying of an honorable and Princely Revenue in Lands of inheritance for the King and his Heirs and Successors, never to be aliend from the Crown of Eng∣land, other then as aforesaid. And although it may
seem to be a great sum of mony in the Total, to be rai∣sed out of the people, yet it being the more prob∣able and easie way, and a great deal more necessary then what hath been done for worser ends and occasi∣ons, and being to be born by so many Cities, Towns, Counties, and people as are to contribute thereunto in several yeers, and with several respirations, will the eby not onely free them from many of the like publike Taxes and Assessements hereafter, and save them in their purses and estates, as much or more then that will a∣mount unto, by some good Laws and provisions to be made for the freeing of them from many of the grip∣ings and oppressions of one another, but entail our happiness and a greater then formerly freedom, quiet and safety upon themselves and their posterity. For there was, is, and ever will be, a necessity of pow∣er, strength, and riches to be in a King that intends ei∣ther to protect or make happy himself and his people, as well as to have their love and affection; and though David when he was in his private condition, could before he was King of Israel rescue a Lamb of his flock, slay a Lyon and a Bear, and with a sling and a peeble stone kill the dreadful Goliah; and that Nathan the Prophet (no flatterer but a man of God) had after he was a King, said unto him, The Lord is with thee, and brought him a message from God, that His house, and Kingdom, and throne should be established for ever, yet neither he, nor his subjects the men of Judah and Is∣rael, could believe him or themselves to be in any condition of safety without his mighty men of war, Militia, Captaines of thousands, and Captains o∣ver hundreds; nor did son Solomon after God had
given him a large and understanding heart, and a porti∣on of wisdom beyond that which ever was granted to mankind, with a promise likewise of riches and honor, suppose it to be any policy, to neglect his Tributes and Presents, the improvement and well ordering of his Revenues, and putting an honorable order in his hous∣hold, to build Cities of Store, and Cities for his Chari∣ots, and Cities for his Horsemen, and a Navy of Ships in Ezion Geber, and send them to Ophir to fetch Gold. Nor can it be certainly for the good and safety of the people to do by their earthly King, who untied the chains and fetters of their folly, restored them to their Laws and Liberties, and, as a balm of Gilead, cured and healed the wounds of those that never could do it them∣selves. Nor accord well with their gratitude, or the many protestations and promises which they made of sacrifi∣cing their lives and fortunes, and all that they had in or∣der to his happiness. Or with the repentance and satisfaction (which makes repentance efficacious) of those that were the causes of his twelve years misery and affliction, greater, longer, and sharper then any of his own hundred and eight Roy∣al Progenitors ever endured, enough to have turned his youth into the gray hairs and infirmities of an old and decrepit age. To doe by him as they doe by their heavenly King, take, get, and receive all they can from him, but re∣turn as little as they may for it, or by the earth their common feeder and nourisher in their lifetimes, and the receiver and entertainer of them at their deaths, by ma∣king furrows on her back, and enforcing it to serve all
their designs and business; and for all her fruits and kindness, doe not so well by her as the Heathen, who could sacrifice to Tellus and Ceres, but think they do e∣nough, if in the moneths of April and May they shall be pleased to admire her beauty, and beat Harvest well contented to fill their Barns with her bounty. And will be as likely to be for their good, as for children to have their parents so poor and impotent, as not to be able to protect them, or for those that are to go a Sea Voyage, to have the ships ill or not at all victualled, or to adventure in a War or Garrison, when the Commander in chief, or the General, upon whose wisdom, valour, strength, and conduct the safety of all dependeth, shall be every day to seek for victuals to feed them or himself, Ammunition or Weapons to de∣fend, and mony to pay them. Unless they could be assured by no doubting Oracle, that it would be for the good, honor, peace and plenty of the Kingdom to have the head, faim, languish, & want its necessary support & Food, and that the members in the body natural although never so warmely clad, or made much of, can thrive whilst the Head is sick and infirme. Or unless they would be as wise as the Citizens of Constantinople, who rather then they would impart any of their Riches to their Emperor for the most ne∣cessary defence of their City, Estates, and Religion, a∣gainst the Turk when their City was besieged by him, would reserve it for a prey to their enemies, and a per∣petual slavery for themselves and their posterities, or as our late men of Reformation, and murmerers at their own happiness, did in their complaints, and taking away Ship-money, and exchanging it for more miseries then
ever any of their Ancestors endured, when after∣wards they were enforced to call their slavery a happi∣ness, and to pay and pray, and give God thanks for it. When as the great charge of Government in times of peace, and the quietest imaginable, and the necessity of the peoples Aids and Taxes to support it may the better be believed, when Augustus Caesar, notwithstanding the enjoyment and full possession of the Empire, or greatest part of the world, with the riches and spoils thereof laid up in the publike Treasuries and their Capitol, enough (besides what Julius Caesar had in the civil Wars consumed) to make it the greatest that ever was together at one time above ground; and his great frugality and care in managing his Revenue, by keeping a book or memorials, as Ta∣citus saith, wherein Opes publica continebantur quantum Civium sociorumque in armis quot classes Regna Provinciae Tributa vectigalia & necessitates ac largitiones, and had as Bodin saith, received Immanem pecuniarum summam ex Testamentis, great Estates of Inheritance from those very many that made him their Heir, could not subsist without Tributes and Taxes, but though the bloody and expenceful Bellona was laid to sleep, and there was nothing likely to disturb that happy and grateful calm of peace with which the world was then blessed found a necessity to Tax all the world, and even Joseph with Mary the mother of the Redeemer of it, must go up to Bethlehem to be taxed and pay Poll-mony, and for all that with all his care and providence in governing that Empire, having spent two paternal Patrimonies cete∣rasque hereditates in Rempublicam, and much of his own Estate upon the Commonwealth, left but a small
and inconsiderable Revenue to his heir. And when as the King by his inestimable charges, great and daily expences for the protection and good of his people, and necessary maintenance of his Royal Dignity, is in a worse condition then any of his Nobi∣lity or Gentry, who may when their necessities en∣force them strike sail if they please, and measure their expences by their Estates. Because he cannot defend himself without defending his people, must do like a Prince, and live like a Prince, and it cannot be for the good, safety, and honor of them that he should either live or do otherwise. But should rather believe as King James the fifth, in Anno 1540. his Majesties great Grandfather did, when in a preamble to an Act of Parliament in Scotland for the annexation of Lands inseparable to the Crown, he did declare, that it Was understood and weill advisedly considered be the Kingis grace, and the Estates of his Realm beand assembled in Parlement, that the patrimony of his Crown and Revenues thereof beand angmented is the great weill and profit baith to the Kingis Grace and his Leiges; and that King James the sixth, his Majesties Grandfather, and his Parliament of Scotland in Anno 1600. did not erre in the preamble of an Act, Of An∣nexation of forefaulted Lands and others to the Crown, wherein they did declare, That it is clearly understand by the Kings Majesty and Estates of the Realm, that the augmentation of the patrimony and Revenues of the Crown, not onely serves for the forth setting and mainte∣nance of his Highness Honor and Royall Estate, but alsore∣lieves greatly his Subjects of divers charges and heavy bur∣dings. And when after his coming to enjoy the Crown
of England, he did in his Declaration in the year 1619. Declaring what things he would be moved to grant to his servants and suitors by way of bounty, and what he would not signifie his desire not to cast himself and his posterity into these wants or straits which might drive them to lay burdens on the people. Nor should the people of this nobler and better na∣tured Nation, who have in the times of Monarchy been blest with a greater freedom then France, Spain, Holland, Venice, or any Christian or Heathen people, or Kingdom were ever owners of, be unwilling to im∣ploy as much of their care and well wishes in setling the Kings Revenue, now so much weakened by age and kindness, and ruined for want of repairs, and being re∣paired, will be but to help to protect and defend them∣selves as they usually and commonly do in the repair∣ing and building a new their owne houses, amending or making new their Clothes when they perceive them to decay, or refreshing or bringing to heart again their Lands which by doing them good have needed it. When as those who contrived and assented unto Oli∣vers Instrument of Government, as it was called, who was one of the greatest of Villians and Tyrants in the Chri∣stian world, and not only murdered his King, but did all he could to destroy the Bodies, Estates, and Souls of his good people, did more resemble Antichrist then ei∣ther Pope or Turke, highly deserve a burying place un∣der the Gallows, & all that Ignomany could devise to lay upon him, and was of neither Royal or Noble Birth or breeding, and could be well contented to allow him Ten thousand Horse & Dragoons, & twenty thousand Foot, and the Navy to be maintained by a constant yearly Re∣venue
to be raised for that purpose, with the remainder of the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenues, not disposed of (except Forests and Chases, and the Mannors thereunto belonging) all the Lands of Delinquents in Ireland, in the Counties of Dublin, Kildare, Clare and Katerlaugh, the forfeited Lands in Scotland (which were great and considerable) the two parts of Recusants Lands in Eng∣land, not compounded for, and all Debts, Fines, Penal∣ties, Issues, and Casual Profits belonging to the Keep∣ers of the Liberties of England, so miscalled, with two hundred thousand pounds per annum yearly Revenue, for the Administration of Justice and charge of Govern∣ment, to be and remain to that Minotaure or Protector, so called, and his successors, and the Framers of that which was called the Petition and Advice, could after∣wards in the year 1656. by a fancied Authority of Par∣liament, not onely confirm unto him that Revenue in Land setled upon him, with the Casual profits belong∣ing to the Crown of England, but intreat him to ac∣cept of ten hundred thousand pounds per annum, yearly Revenue, to be raised upon the people without a Land Tax for the maintenance of the Army and Navy, with such other supplies, as should be needful to be raised from time to time by consent of Parliament, and three hun∣dred thousand pounds per annum in like manner to be raised for his support of the Government. Need not repine or think that, or a greater Revenue to be too much for the highest born Prince in Christen∣dom, and the Heir of a Succession of Kings for more then one thousand years last past; who could suffer their Regal Power and Authority so to be bound with the Cords of love to their people and the rules of right
reason, as the Sun in all his Travails hath never yet be∣held a people enjoying better or so good Laws, and Liberties, and less Taxed or burdened with their Princes occasions. And when as there is not any City or Town Cor∣porate in England, but have received and enjoyed their Charters and Liberties from the King or his Pro∣genitors, not any of the Nobility or Gentry, but have had their honors, priviledges and dignities, and all or some of their Lands and Estates from them; nor any kinred or family in England, which either by him or some of his famous Progenitors, or the many Josephs and Mordecai's in every age advanced by them, have not mediately or immediately been preferred and ad∣vanced, and had all that they have or enjoy by their bounty and munificence, or had much kindness or Royal favors shewed unto them, and like the lesser Trees or Shrubs in the Forest, have comfortably grown up and been protected and shadowed by Druinas Royal Oak, for which in the care of their own good and saf∣ty which are involved in his, they are as their forefa∣thers were, more then ordinarily obliged by those eter∣nal Bonds of gratitude, which time or adversity should never be able to break or obliterate, to contribute all they can to his wellfare, and this our once most famous Monarchy. That so our Hercules may not want his Club to de∣fend Himself and his people, that the cry of Debts and people wanting their mony, being the worst of An∣guishes to a virtuous and generous mind, may no lon∣ger afflict him; that the looking upon a small Re∣venue may not dishearten him to take the accompts of
it, and that a greater may, now our Janus Temple is shut, put him in mind to do as Augustus Caesar did when all the world was at quiet, keep an Exact account of his Revenues and Expences. That he who hath builded up our wasts, and raised up the former desolations, may be at rest from his sorrows, and all the people in his Dominions break forth into singing praises to the Most High, which hath made him an Instrument to do wonderful things, and like the Dove sent out of Noahs Ark, to bring us the Olive Branch, which the Deep and the rage of many waters had covered. FINIS.
