P2814 8199759 41066
The English PARNASSUS: OR, A HELPE TO English Poesie. Containing A COLLECTION Of all Rhyming Monosyllables, The choicest Epithets, and Phrases: With some General Forms upon all Occasions, Subjects, and Theams, Alphabetically digested By JOSUA POOLE. M. A. Clare Hall Camb. Together with A short Institution to English Poe∣sie, by way of PREFACE. London, Printed for Tho. Johnson, at the golden Key in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1657.
TO My Worthily, Honoured FRIEND, Mr. FRANCIS ATKINSON. I Shall not need to derive any confidence from the long acquaintance and friendship hath passed between us, to presse you to the Patronage of this work, when there are so many other Considerations that in a manner force it on you, as ha∣ving a certain right in it; it is the account of many a years Stewardship, the product of many a mid∣night thought, during my relation to you and those young Gentlemen committed by you to my charge and oversight, in a word, it had the first and last hand put to it, that is, ows both its originall and perfection to your house at HAD∣LEY. There are indeed abroad in the world many books conducing to the improvement of youth in good Letters, whereof it may be said of some, they are superfluous, of others they are burthensome, and by multiplicity of instruction di∣stract
the Learner. And this proceeds partly from an itch of reputation, which even those of that laborious, (nay, by many sleighted) pro∣fession are not free from, partly from the diffi∣culties that attend the education of youth, and partly from that generall humour, in most men of discovering their invention in furnishing the world with something that is new, or their wit in reforming and advancing what had been done by others. But for this of mine, you are not ignorant of the difficulty of the attempt, what a strange multitude of Authors I have been forced, as it were to anatomise, and that I may say, without any great losse of Modesty, that there never came yet abroad so methodicall an Insti∣tution of ENGLISH POESIE. For you, who look on education through other prospe∣ctive glasses than those of necessity or advantage, know, that it requires a person of generous incli∣nations, that as an exrprest Architect, layes the solid foundations of humane life, and un∣dertakes a businesse that hath the greatest influ∣ence on Policy, Morality, and Religion. This once granted, no pains, no care, no vigi∣lancy can be too great that is spent upon the cul∣tivation of these noble plants, were there only this inducement that we should transmit them such to posterity as that they may in them per∣ceive our care and tendernesse. Upon these
grounds did I enter into the present relation to you, which being, as I said, a stewardship, it is but just I should bring something to testifie my faith∣fulnesse. You know how beneficial this work hath been where it was brought forth, and exer∣cised, and I leave it to you, either to communi∣cate it, or conceale it. If ever it come abroad into the world, I desire it may be under the con∣duct of your name, that, for your particular, it may be satisfied how much you have contributed to the the Commonwealth of Learning, and, for mine be convinced, how conscientious I have been in the discharge of my duty, what great re∣spects I have for you, and how passionately desi∣rous I am to expresse my self, Sir, Your most affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant, Josua Poole.
To the hopeful young Gentlemen, his Schollers in that private School, at Hadley, Kept in the house of Mr. Francis Atkinson. SWeet impes of early hopes whose smiling brow Beckens the cincture of the laureate bough, Whose lips seem made, to tast no other spring, Than that by which the The spian virgins sing. Whose sprightly face, and active eyes descry The Muses in a rising majesty: You that without th'edition of a book, Can make men read a Poet in your look; Whose downy plumes with happy augurie, Presage betimes, what the fledge soul will be. For you (Ingenious spirits) thus I trie To find a milkie way to Poesie, That babes, as they the coral nipples lugge, May find an Hippocrene within the dugge, And the first milk that they shall feed upon, May be the sacred dew of Helicon, And when at first their steps the earth shall greete, At once may find their own and verses feete, After as they grow up, Pegasus may Be the first hobby-horse with which they play, And when to higher sports they come, may put An Homers Iliads in their game some nut, And whilst they take their pastime in the sun, Together make their tops and verses run, Nay to that height they shall their phancies raise, That whilst they run at, they shal win the Baies, In all their sports they shall the Poets play, And make the Birch, prevented by the Bay;
For they shal need no Masters to rehearse Long tedious precepts of the lawes of verse, In them so printed shall those lawes be seen, As if they had the lawes of Nature been. The only taske their Masters shall impose On them, will be, to learn to speak in prose; In which, they shall have, if they chance t'offend, As boys scan, verses at their fingers ends, Pleading like Ovid for to save their breech, As if Prosodia went before In speech, Or that they had into the world been brought, As Lucan died, with verses in their throat, Their cradles of the verdant laurel been, Or of those learned trees which once were seene After the Thracian Harper dance along, Wedding their motions to his well-tim'd song, And all that shal their sodain raptures hear, That Poets are not made, but born will swear. The early blossoms which I see in you, Makes me believe these my presages true; For, if you can so much already do; What will they that may sooner come unto Parnassus mount? If you so much can see On plainer ground, what will they that shal be Advantag'd by that hill, whose tops do rise In stately height, to parly with the skies? On then (sweet souls) that sacred verse may be No longer call'd the thred-bare mystery; Let the world see, what yet it scarce before Hath known, there are good Poets, yet not poore, Whose inspirations, and rich phancies be More than a Taverns frothy tympany, That conjure not up wit with spirit of wine, Nor make the bay, supported by the vine;
Like those whose thirsty fancies ebbe and flow, lust as their cups, greater or lesser grow, Phaebus and Bacchus that together link, And never write, but in or after drink: As when great showers of rain fall from the skies, In standing waters bubbles will arise. And for my selfe (though I did ne'r bestride The winged horse, and through the welkin glide, Ʋnto the forked hill; nor saw the spring, Where those sweet maids of Memory do sing: Whilst their harmonious aires give easie birth Ʋnto the flowers, and help the teeming earth: Whilst shaggy Satyrs yeild their sences thrall To the sweet cadence of their madrigals, And all the leavy standards of the wood, Quitting the place where they before had stood, Came listning on, and every gladsome tree, Link't with his neighbour to an unity, Whisper their mutual joyes, till they had made By their embrace, an unexpected shade, And all the wing'd musitians of the aire, Hid in their branches make a close repaire, That by their tunes, they might learn how to sing, And give a better welcome to the spring; Whilst savage beasts, that thither too were come Offerd themselves a thankful Hecatombe: Though I dare not make title to that tree That growes upon the banks of Castalie, Nor on Parnassus top had ever Theam Presented by the Muses in a dream, Or with my teeth unbarkt the laurel graffe, Yet) can I lend the weaker brains a staff For their supportment, till their riper wit, Shall laugh to see, they ever needed it,
Staffes cannot goe, and yet enable him That wants assistance to his feeble limbe; He that is lame, and cannot move, yet may Lie still, and point to others out the way. Many are dumb, and know not how to break Their mind in words, yet by mute signes can speak, And talk so with their fingers, that another May give that language which their dumbnesse smothers. Though whetstones cannot cut at all, they may Do service, and make knives as sharp as they Themselves are blunt, and they who cannot ring By jangling may toll better ringers in, Candles see nought themselves, yet lend a light, VVhich in the dark gives others use of sight. The height of my ambition and intent, Is but to be a luckie instrument For others good, and instruments we know, Are usefull, though themselves can nothing do; Accept and use then this my book, aspire Ʋnto the Mountains top, blow up that fire VVhich yet is but a spark Prometheus stole From Phebus wheels what burns within your soul, Then give it vent, let it advance a flame, VVhich may secure your and the Poets name, From all the malice of invading time, And conquer death with your victorious rime. And though you may perchance meet some of those That in a Satyr of their dough-bak'd Prose, Not able to reach further, lash the horse, They cannot sit, and whil'st they rudely force Their waspish language to disgrace the fount, The horse-hoof-made, scorning the sacred Mount, Too high for them to climb, turn horse themselves, And kick in vain, as waves against the shelves.
Crushing their froth, as dogs disturb the night With fruitlesse howling at fair Cynthia's light, Whilst she untroubled still along doth glide, More by their barking envy glorifi'd, In that bright Carre, their snarls cannot impeach, As much above their malice as their reach: Or like that fox, who long with greedy eyes, Did on the grapy clusters tantalise, And last contents himself to call them sower, Which he perceiveth plac'd above his power, And these may tell you that the Poets be, But the fomenters of of obscenitie, Of lust and lewdnesse, verse the Devils bait, To draw youth on to what they else would hate. Be not discourag'd, Muses none despise, That ever gave the Graces Sacrifice; Such Majesty is couch'd in numerous layes, They never understood, which can dispraise. 'Tis true, some spend their ill-disposed hour, Onely the Virgin Muses to deflowr, And in loose language make the Graces be Naked beyond the bounds of Modestie, Who whilst with shamelesse ribaldry they sing, Make Helicon a puddle for a spring, Enough to make their reader, one would think, With blushing change the colour of their ink: But must we, cause some children idly play, And cut their fingers, throw our knives away? Or cause when once their bellies full, they eat No more, but toy, must we forgoe our meat? What if some looser dames to painting fall; Shall chaster Matrons have no face at all? If some for lust their gaudie garments wear, Shall modest Virgins all their cloaths forswear?
If some by faggots ruine do conspire, Must our cold chimney therefore want a fire? And shall Lycurgus cut down every vine, Because some Thraoians did exceed in wine? Shall we all modest pictures quite decline, For the lascivious draughts of Aretine? If that abuse could take away the right, And lawfull use, we scarce should use our sight. Scripture may be abus'd, and best things may, By the same argument, be cast away. Though Caesar banish't Ovid far from Rome, He kept Parthenious Virgil still at home. All Poets are not vitious some there be, Like Cato, verse it, yet with modesty, And won to goodnesse, by their verse can show, More souls than many prose-Divines can do; Crown'd with religious bayes: for often those Are chain'd by numbers that contemn loose prose, And those whose souls are come so near the gall, Of bitternesse, as to think stoicall What speaks Religion, yet will dare to try The Poets popular Divinity, And with a yielding fancy lend an ear To all that by the Poet preach't they hear. Many have been, which Pulpits did eschew, Converted from the Poets reading pew, And those that seldome do salute the porch Of Solomon, will come to Herberts Church; For as that English Lyrick sweetly sings, Whilst angels danc'd upon his trembling strings, A verse may find him who a Sermon flies, And turn delight into a sacrifice. Then let the Poet use his lawfull bait, To make men swallow what they else would hate,
Like wise Physicians that their pills infold In sugar, paper, or the leaves of gold, And by a vertuous fraud and honest stealth, Cozen unwilling Patients into health; Like winter fires, that with disdainfull heat, The opposition of the cold defeat, And in an angry Spleen do burn more fair, The more encountered by the frosty air; Let your Phebean fires its flame advance, Blown by the cold breath of chill ignorance, And like Amphion build a lofty rhyme, That shall outlast the insolence of time, For there is hidden in a Poets name. A spell that can command the wings of fame, And maugre all oblivions hated birth, Begin your immortality on earth, "And when more spreading titles are forgot, "And spight of all their lead and searcloth rot, "You wrapt and shrin'd in your own sheets shall lye "As reliques fam'd for all posterity. No envious time or age shall ever pierce, The better marble of eternal verse, Nine Muses can cammand the fatall three, And make their baies out-live the Cypresse tree, And though they part with breath they cannot die Whose name's embalm'd in sacred Poesie, For such are the proud miracles of verse, They make men rise up from their drowsie herse, And cause the grave deaths utmost spite but be A larger womb to immortality. The Deities above, and those below, To the learn'd nine auspcious homage ow, And they whose heads the lawrel chaplets bear Can charm the gods in either Hemisphere.
What is't the Muses javelin cannot pierce? When heaven and hell are master'd by a verse, The Laurel staffe sway'd by a learned hand Carries more magick than that silver wand, Heavens verger waves, then that Medea shook, When Aeson from the scalding bath she took, Hot as the youth she gave him, or the ram, Which from the Caldron leap't a frisking lamb, Such boundlesse power doth on numbers wait Without a blasphemy they can create, Nor have they fame and strength alone, but can Surfet the unconfin'd desires of man, With soul-transporting pleasure and content, Not to be thought on without ravishment: For when the ranging fancy hath in vain Pursued delight through all things, yet remains Still empty, these with satisfaction fill; Deucalions ship rests on Parnassus hill. For as he sung, that was the blithest swain, That ever finger'd pipe on flowry plain, You may in these as oft as you shall chuse, "Hugge sweet content with your retired Muse, "And in those studies find as much to please, "As others in the greatest Palaces, "Instead of hounds, that make the wooded hils "Talk in an hundred voices to the rills, "Hear you the pleasing cadence of a line; "Struck by the consort of the sacred nine. "In lieu of hawks, the raptures of your soul, "Transcend their pitch, and baser earths controll; "For running horses, let your fancies flie "Like arrows that outrun the hunting eye; "For courtly dancing, you may take more pleasure. "To hear your verse keep time and equall measure,
"All this without expence, when others oft, "With their undoings have their pleasures bought, Such are the Poets joyes, as be no lesse Than th' image of eternal happinesse, Lke heavens; none these, save the enjoyers know, And they themselves better conceive than show, Reveng'd on their ignorance are those, Which tread the morter of untempred prose, Whose groveling fances, and too low pitcht eye Cannot reach up unto the Poets skie, And yet like those that to shoot up are bold, At what their dazled sense cannot behold, Against the poet saucily dare vent Their barrn fancies, frothy excrement, Pitiing their ignorance, wish you no worse, Than what was once the noble Sydneys curse, May Cupid wound them, and they lye forlorn, As pitied objects of their mistresse scorn, Wanting that fire which warms the poets brain To thaw the ice of her deserv'd disdain, Till dead with grief, they make the Muses laugh To see their names deni'd an Epitaph, And all their fame inearthed with their herse, Rotting for want of an embalming verse. Contemn their scorns and with a brave disdain, Sleight all those toyes, that others entertain, Which onely study how to wear their clothes, And fill up their imperfect speech with oaths, Scruing their body into every shape, And are content to be the common ape Of every Nation, so they may but be In fashion with their flanting braverie; Whose best discourse can no more skill impart, Than tales of hawks and hounds in terms of art,
Who, if they have a tatling spur and bear, Heads light as the gay feathers which they wear, Whistle in silks, and sometimes can invent Occasion for a thread-bare complement, And make a gaudie hilted rapier ride, Hd in as fine a scabbard, on their side, As more for shew than use; talk of a wench With more disease than language of the French, In whom inventious tailours forming art, And the spruce barbour claims a greater part, Than nature or their education can, Think themselves are the onely Gentile man, And complete, gallant for this outward dresse, And gilded trim, when they are nothing lesse; But shapes of men, and speaking butterflies, Attracting onely fools, and childrens eyes. Let these enjoy their humours, whose descent, And blood's the best and onely argument That they can use to prove them Gentlemen; Whilst by the raptures of your learned pen, Your sweet pac'd numbers and harmonious layes, You get the solid, and enduring praise, And shew your worth and birth by a divine, And better far than your forefathers line. Pay then the Muses Tithes, and let those powers Of sacred verse, share in your idle hours, Those ravell'd thrums of time on fruitlesse play, And emptinesse should not be thrown away. Those threads of patcht up vacant hours may Make cloths will serve you for a working day; The product rising from such vacant hours Makes this to be what I my self am— Yours Josua Pool.
THE PREFACE, Being a short Institution OF ENGLISH POESIE. IT is the ordinary misfortune of posthumous works, like Orphans, to be exposed to the mer∣cy of others; insomuch, that when they come to appear in the world, they have not those ac∣commodations, which such as are advanced by their own parents and friends, commonly have. Were the learned Author of this laborious work alive to see this production of his abilities, and extraordinary industry come abroad, there nee∣ded not any to give account of it but himself. For who could have said more for the advantage and ornament of Poesy, than a person who had so for∣tunately spent both his time and endeavours to cultivate it in the highest manner that could be? But since he is not, the Reader must accordingly abate of his expectation, and, instead of large In∣stitution of Poesie, such as might well attend the present Work into the world, accept of such as
slight account thereof, as may be proportionable to their capacities, for whose improvement, in∣struction, and convenience, these endeavours of his were intended. They indeed were calcula∣ted for their meridian who stood subject to the ferula; which yet hinders not, but they may indif∣ferently contribute to the assistance of all those, who find in themselves any natural inclination or happinesse of thought more than ordinary, to ex∣presse themselves in verse. We are then to note, that as the world became more and more civilized, Harmony, I mean that of speech and mutual expression one to another, grew more and more into reputation. Hence is it that those languages are considered as the most refined that are most susceptible of Harmony, and those most favouring of incivility and barbarisme, wherein a man cannot expresse himselfe without harshnesse and discord. This harmony, in prose, consists in an exact placing of the accent, and an accurate disposition of the words; such as delight∣ing the ear, doth in a manner captivate the passi∣ons and the understanding. Of this, strange in∣stances might be made in the ancient Orators, who may be said to lead the people whither they pleased. In Poesie, it consists besides the afore∣said conditions of Prose in measure, proportion and Rhime. All we have to say relates only to the
latter, and in that, confining our selves particular∣ly to English Poesie. There are some, who in point of Poetry attri∣bute so much to Nature that they think all rules and directions absolutely unnecessary, and conse∣quently that it is not reducible to any Art; and this they categorically affirme of some Nations, allowing to others greater advantages and incli∣nations to perfection and excellency therein, as particularly to the Greeks and Latines. But those certainly consider not that we are equally the children of Nature; that wit, and happinesse of conceit are an universal patrimony, and that there are in every language certain heights proportiona∣ble to their Idiome, as may very much advance Poetry. Besides the injustice they do the modern Languages, often comparing their Poetry to that of the Greek and Latines, and finding it some∣what disconsonant they presently condemne it as savage and barbarous, when haply, consider'd with relation to the Languages, it is much the more excellent. To which may be added the advanta∣ges, in point of Poetry, accrewing by Rhime, and consequently that the Languages that are enrich∣ed by it, are the most suscepible of Poesie. But for these and the like controversies arising concer∣ning Poetry, we refer those that are desirous of fur∣ther satisfaction to the defence of Poesie, writen by Sir Philip Sidney, printed at the end of the Arca∣dia;
Mr. Sa. Daniel's Apologie for Rhime, written in answer to a Pamphlet in his time, entituled Ob∣servations in the Art of English Poesie; and a certain Treatise entituled, The Art of English Poesie, di∣vided into three Books, the first of Poets and Poesie; the second of Proportion, and the third of Ornament, printed in the year 1589. treating of Poesie in generall, and exemplifying in the Eng∣lish. As to English Poesie, we shall lay it down as granted, that it may be fortunate in any kind, and upon any subject, if it meet with a true son of Par∣nassus, and a genius that knowes how to manage it. And yet we find by experience that the most considerable, and for ought can be found, the most fortunate therein were a sort of Chimists, men of much leisure, and sedentary lives, who writ altogether in Stanza's. In so much that for some centuries of years, the greatest part of Eng∣lish Poetry, was spent on those barren and indeed abstruse subjects of Chymistry, and the Philosophers stone, as I have it from a Gentlemans observation, who is excellently well versed in Treatises of that nature, and hath a strange, and almost incre∣dible collection thereof. But the English Lan∣guage ariving daily to greater perfection and pu∣rity, Poesie must needs accordingly extend to all subjects and occasions, incident to humane life; and since it admits of the same division into spe∣cies,
as the Greek and Latine, we must, being obli∣ged to them for their Termes, submit to their Method. The chiefest of all the species of Poesie, is the Heroick, or Epick, as being a representation of Heroes, or great and fortunate men, and accor∣dingly requiring a certain state and Majesty suita∣ble to the persons it represents. Some, in Mr. Johnson's time, vainly attempted to write a Hero∣ick poem, in imitation of the Greeks and Latines, by the measures of Spondey and Dactyl, without any regard to rime. Of that number was he, who sent him a coppy of verses beginning thus, Bēnjāmīn īmmōrtal Jōhnsōn mōst hīghlīe rēnōwnēd. In this kind were written by the Ancients, all kind of Historical Poesie, performed by most of the Europian Languages, till of late, by way of Stan∣za's. A second species of Posie is the Lyrick, which is of such extent, that it may be made use of on a∣ny occasion. To this head are referred Madrigals, Sonnets, Hymnes, Ballets, Odes, whereof some are amorous, some rural, some military, some jovial, made for drollery and drinking; in a word, what suits best with the Poets humour. To these may be added, Epithalamiums, written upon occasion of Nuptials, Epinicions, of Victories, Genethliacks
of Nativities, Congratulatories, &c. The most e∣minent of all writers of this kind, were among the Latines Horace and Catullus. A third species is that of Elegies, Threnodies, and such like long-breathed Poems on luctiferous subjects. To this is reducible, what ever may be said on sad and dolefull occasions. Of this Ovid in his book de Tristibus, is, as it were, the Grand Exemplar. A fourth kind is that which is called Dramatick Poesie, divisible into diverse species, and compre∣hending, Tragedies, Comedies, Interludes, Masks, Entertainments, Dialogues, Satyres, Frolicks, Georgicks, Pastoralls, Piscatories, Nauticals (which three last, passe commonly under the name of Ec∣logues) Memoralls and the like. In these the Poet is not strictly obliged to rhime, but only to mea∣sure, being such as are principally intended for the stage, the main grace hereof consists in repre∣sentation and action. Of all these, the most an∣cient is the Satyre, a kind of writing, reproving common and popular abuses, so called, for the bitternesse and invectives thereof, which was such that to regulte and reforme their li∣centiousresse and exorbitance Tragedies and Comedies were introduc'd. A fift is the Epigram, a facetious kind of writing, full of spirit, humour, and fancy. It is of a vast extent, as comprehending Epi∣taphs,
Characters, Emblems, Devices, Motto's, Hieroglyphicks, Definitions, Aphorisms, Distri∣butions, Paradoxes, Rebus's, Problems, It is full of mirth and salt, sententious, directive, as to Mo∣rality, proverbiall, Mythologicall, Enigmaticall, in a word hath all humane actions and accidents to work upon, closing up all with a certain smartnesse of conceit. The numerous brood of it, are, ingenious fallacies in, and extra dictionem, Encomiasticks, Vi∣tuperatories, Scoffs, Sarcasms, Jeers, Jests, Quibbles, Clinches, Quippes, Bulls, Anagrams, Chronograms, Acrosticks, Criticismes, in a word whatever is of Succinct and concise Poetry, on what subject soe∣ver, handsomly couched, and worded. To these may lastly be added certain Poeticall Treatises concerning Learning, Science, or some particular sect of Philosophy, such as that of Lucretius, Epistolary writings, such as those of Ovid, wherein he hath been imitated by Mr. Drayton, and Historicall as Lucan, imitated by the same Drayton and Daniel, and translated and sup∣plied by Mr. Thomas May, both in Latine and English. Having thus made a hasty dissection of Poesie into its severall species, it is now time we de∣scend to some few particular instructions, which duly observed, may contribute something to the ornament and embellishment thereof. There is, as we hinted before, a certain harmony in Prose,
much more necessary is it in Verse, whereof the grace and advantage consists altogether in the Symphony and cadence. The first Observation then, shall be to endea∣vour such a disposition of the words, as that, without much labour to the tongue, they make a cerrain melody in the ear, which no sooner hears it, but she judges whether the words be placed so, as to be pronounced without violence by the ac∣cent; whence this verse; though it hath the just number of feet, runs harshly to the ear, by rea∣son of the misplacing of the accent. None think reward rendred worthy his worth. The case is the same when by an inconsiderable alteration, as haply that of one word, makes what was before harsh become smooth and pleasant. For instance this, Though death doth consume, yet verue preserves, with a little transposition will run well enough thus, Though death doth ruine, vertue yet preserves. This discovers of what consequence the ex∣act observation of the accent is, which, like right time in Musick, produces harmony, the want of it harshnesse, and discord. In like manner Rhime depends altogether on the accent; whence it comes that many words terminating alike, yet
never rhime well, such as wéaknesse and confésse, náture and endúre, fortune and importune, &c. This is soon discovered by the ear. The second, to avoid as much as may be long Parentheses, which are a certain torture to the Rea∣der, forcing him to alter his tone till he come to the close of the Parenthesis, and causing in the hearer a distraction and suspence till the sense be u∣nited. Examples of this are so frequent, we need not quote any. Some late writers have endeavou∣red to avoid them even in Prose, and the attempt ought to be cherished and seconded, nor indeed is it very difficult. To this head may be added a certain licentious∣nesse, which some English Poets have in imitati∣on of the Greek and Latine, presumed on to dis∣member, and disjoyn things that should naturally march together; placing some words at such a di∣stance one from another, as will not stand with the English Idiome. Nay sometimes they fall down into flat prose; a kind of Licentia poetica by no means allowable in English, such is that of these verses. But now that she is wearied with the toil Of balling, and that all her spirits boil With scortching flames of the blind Archers fire, Which kindleth no lesse vehement desire, In her inamorato's, hence she goes, Having farewel'd the company, at whose
Earnest entreaty she was pleas'd to come Into afair and well adjusted room, &c. A third caution i, to avoid, as much as may be, frequent Apostrophe's, because of harshnesse and disturbance consequent thereto, such we have in this verse. The husband is the head, as soon's h' unlocks Where the words as and he, are apostrophated, which cannot be well admitted. It is ordinary with the same Author to apostrophate us, his, by, to, be, very, &c. very harshly, and not without vio∣lence to the ear. A fourth is to avoid feminine rimes, such as cha∣rity and parity, double and trouble, Dunstable, and Constable, &c. which in a verse of ten syllables or Heroick, speaks a certain flatnesse derogatory from the Majesty thereof, and if any where they may be allowed, it is in Ditties and Sonnets, and there hardly, Poesie being now arrived to such purity and perfection. With this we forbid the use of polysyllables, such as are proper to prose, and come not into verse without a certain violence, such as representation, skilfulness, remediles, reciprocally, convertible, spright∣fully; as also the frequent use of words, that have the accent on the fourth sillable from the termi∣nation;
as territory, disputable, protonotary, & the like. A fifth, may be an exact observation of the rime, as that wherein all the symphony and mu∣sick of a verse consists. In this Sir Thomas Ur∣quhart, a man of an extraordinary fancy, may be said to be negligent, or indeed it is the fault of his Countrey, which being obliged to France for many things, derive thence a liberty not admitta∣ble in English Poesie. Such is that of terminating with the same letters, as conceive, and receive, sun, and son, resent and consent, &c. frequent in French Poetry, or such as not allowed, Poesie, would be lost among them. As also that of making two words that have but any affinity in sound, to serve for rhime, as effects, and takes, expression and copulation, lean and den, late and set; frequent in Scotch Poets, as it were in imitation of the French, among whom it is tole∣rable. Lastly, for the Epithets, which well placed and significant, are no small ornament in a Poeme. These we would have to adde something to the signifi∣cation of the Substantive, that it may not be thought they onely fill up the line. Thus to say, briny sea, is no more than to say, the sea, the woody grove is no more than a grove, nor were it amisse to avoid a sort of harsh compound words, much affected by some, such as Thunder-thumping Jove, tempest-raising winds, which reading and experi∣ence
will soon discover to be the issues of hollow brains, filled with nought but wind. Thus having run through this short Anatomy of Poesie, all now remains to do is, in few words, to give some little account of the Author, and the design and scope of the present work, for the Au∣thor he had sometime the charge and management of a private School at Hadley near Barnet in the County of Middlesex, kept in the house of a wor∣thy Gentleman, one Mr. Francis Atkinson, who out of a design truly generous, and publick, ende∣vouring to prevent the inconveniences of irregu∣lated youth, set up a School or Academy, for the education of a select number of Gentlemens sons of good quality. There, it seems, as he confesseth in his Epistle to the said Mr. Atkinson, he writ this elaborate piece. But this is not his first appea∣rance in the world; for in the year 1655. came forth a book of his called the ENGLISH ACCI∣DENCE, very usefull for such as it was intended for, as teaching a way to make him that can but in∣differently read English, to turn any sentence into pure and elegant Latine, Printed for R. Lownds at the white Lion in Pauls Churchyard. For the Work, he hath divided it into three parts. The first treats of all rhimes imaginable in English (as the base and foundation of Poesie) according to their severall terminations. The second furnishes the diligent Lover of the Muses, with excellent
choice and variety of apposite Epithets, somewhat in imitation of Textors in the Latine. The third is an ample treasury of phrases, and elegant expres∣sions, gathered out of the best esteemed English Authors that have writ in the severall kinds of Poesie, not unlike that of Thesaurus Poeticus, in Latine. And all this is performed by such an excel∣lent method, and a certain alphabetical disposition, for the greater ease and convenience of those that shall be desirous to advance themselves thereby, that it may be confidently said, the design is ab∣solutely new, there having not any thing of this kind appeared upon the English stage before. So that there seems nothing requisite to com∣pleat the great structure of this ENGLISH PARNASSUS, or Poeticall Institution, but a Rhetoricall Treatise, such as my acquaint and fur∣nish the industrious student with these advantages and imbellishments, that advance as well Prose, as Poetry to the highest pitch. And such a Treatise there is already in the Printers hands, to be sud∣denly put into the Presse, intituled, ENGLISH RHETORICH, and that drawn by the same hand, and polished by the same indefatigable in∣dustry, as this PARNASSUS, And of that RHETORICH, there is the like presumption, that proceeding from the same Author, th is, be∣ing such as pruned off whatever is burd ome,
and unnecessary, and comprehending all that is beneficiall and conducing to the improvement o such as shall desire it, it will meet with a reward suitable to an undertaking of such concernment to all learning, a generall encouragement acceptati∣on, and applause. I. D.
The ALPHABET OF MONOSYLABLES. AB. BAbe Blabbe Crabbe Drabbe Mab Scabbe Slabbe Stabbe. ACE or AIES. Base, Bayes. Blze Brace Case Chace Face Daies Fraies Glaze Gaze Graze Grace Jayes Keyes Lace Maze Place Plaies Race Raies Praies Praise Rze Raise Sayes Slaies Spraies Staies Space Straies Swayes Trayes Trace Mace Waies ACK. Back Black Brack Clack Crack Hack Jack Knack Lack Pack Quack Rack Sack Slack Stack Tack Track Whack Wrack ACT. ut ACK. AD. Adde Badde Bad Clad Dad Drad Gadde Gad Glad Had Lad Mad Padde Sad Swadde ADE or AIDE. Aide Blade Bayde Cade
Fade Fraid Jade Laid Made Maid Naigh'd Plaid Pay'd Raed Said Shade Spade Splaid Staid Straid Swaid Trade Wade Weigh'd AFE. and AFF. Baffe Cale Chafe Caffe Dfle Daffe Halfe Laugh Qffe Rffe Ralph Safe Staffe Ep-aph. AF. Baff Chaf' Craft Dfft Graft Haft Laught Quafft Shft Taught Waft. AG. AGS. Bag Brag Cag Clag Crag Dag Dag Fag Flag Gag Hag Lag Nag Quag Pague Rag Shag Swag Stag A Wag To Wag. AGE. ADGE. Paren-tage Badge Cage Fadge Gage Madge Pilgri-mage Pupil-lage Page Rage Sage Sage Swge Wage. AIE. AY. Aye Bay Bray De-cay Clay Day Flay Fay Gay Gray Hay Jay Lay D-lay May Dis-may Nay Pay Play Pay Ray Ar-ray Say Slay Splay
Spray Stay Stray Sway Tray Be-ray Way Be-wray AKE. Ache Bake Brake Cake Dake Flake Jakes Lake Make Quake Rake Sake Shake Slake Spke Stake Mis-take Be-take Under-take Over-take Wake. ALE. AILE. Ale Ayle Bale Dale Faile Flaile Fraile Gle Goal En-gaile Hale Ex-hale Male Naile Ple Paile Quaile Rayle Sale Syle Sale Shale Snyle Stale En-tayle Re-tale Traile Vale Avayle Pre-vaile Vaile Waile Be-waile. ALL. AULE. All Awle Ball Bawl Braul Call Caule Craule Fall Gaul Hall Maule Paul Pall Appal Shall Small Spawle Sprawl Stall Tall Thrall Wall Whalle Yawle. ALD. Bald Brawld Cald Crawld Gald Mauld Appalld Scauld Spawld Sprawld Stalld Enthralld Walld Yawld. ALDE. AILD. Bayld
Faild En-Grayld Hal'd Ex-hal'd Haild Naild Em-pail'd Raild Sail'd Scal'd En-taild Re-tayld Trayld Vaild Pre-veyld Be-wail'd ALFE Calfe Half Ralphe ALK. Balke Chalke Stalke Talke Walke. ALM. Almes Balme Calm Helm Palm Psalm Qualm Shalm. ALS. Alice Else Ayles Balles Bayles Calls Bawles Crawles Falles False Mawles Ap-palls Spawles Sprawles Stalls. En-thralls ALT. Fault Ex-alt Halt Malt Salt Shalt. ALV. Calves Halve Salve AM. Am Cam Cham Clam Cram Dam Dram Flam Ham Lambe Mam Ram Slam AME. AIME. Ayme Blame Came Claim Dame Fame Flame Frame Game Lame Mayme Name Same Shame Tame AN. ANNE Anne Ban Bran Can Canne Dan Fanne to Fanne Gan Man Nan
Pan Ran Scan Span Swan Tan Than Vanne Wanne ANCE. Radiance Daliance Chance Dance France Glance Lance Prance Igno-rance Delive-rance In trance. En-hance Countenance Maintenance AND. And Bnd Brand Fan'd Grand Hand Land Sand Scand Spand Withstand Understand Stand Strand Tan'd Wand ANE. AINE. Bane Blaine Bain Cane Crane Dis-dain Dane Drain Pro-fane A-gain Fane Grain Grane Jane Lane Maine. Paine Counter-Pane Com-plain Raine Raigne Slain Spain Sprain Stain Constrain Disstrain Swain Eente-tain Abs-tain Con-tain Re-tain De-tain Ob-tain Sus-tain Main-tain Train Restrain Vane Wane Waine. AMP. Camp Champ Cramp Damp Lamp Ramp Samp Vamp. ANCH. Blanch Branch Hnch Lanch Stanch ANG. Bang Fang Gang Hang Pang Range Sang Sprang Stang Tang Twang ANGE. Ex-change Grange
Mange Range Estrange. ANK. Mounte-bank Blank Crank Dank Drank Flank Frank Hank Lank Prank Rank Sank Shank Shrank Slank Stank Thank ANT. An Aunt R-cant -hant Daunt Flaunt Gaunt Grant Haunt Pant Scant Taunt Vaunt Want. AINT Faint Paint Com-plaint Ac-quit Saint AP. Cap Chap Thunder-clap lap Gap Perhap Lap Map Nap Pap Rap Sap Slap Snap Scrap Srap Swap Tap In-trap Wrap. APE. Ape Gape Grape Jape Nape Rape Escape Scrape Shape Tape. APS. v. AP. Caps Chaps Claps Re-lape APT. Apt Chapt Capt Flapt Gapt Lapt Rapt Scap't Scrap't Shap't Slapt Snapt Swapt In-trapt Wrapt. AR. Are Bar Car Far Jar Mar Scar Spar Star
Tar War. ARE. AIRE. Are Bare Care Char Clare Dare Faire Glare Haire Hare Mare Paire I-pare R-pare Praier Rare Share E-nare Square Stare Sware Tare Tair Ware. ARB. Barb Garb Hearb Orbe. ARCE. v. ARS. ARCH. Arche March Parch Serch Search Torch. ARD Bard Card D'd Guard Hard Fa'd Heard Ja'd Lard Md Nd Pa'd Scar'd Sh'd E-n'd Spard D-spaird Squard Star'd Starrd Rward Ward Yard. ARF. Dwarf Scarf Warf Wharf. ARGE Barge Chrge Large Serge Targe Verge. ARK. Ark Bk Cark Cleark Drk Heak Jk Lrk Mark Park Queck Srk Shark Spark Stark Yak ARLE Carle Charle Marle Parle Sle Wharl ARM. Arme
Barm Charm Farm Harm A-larm Sperme Swarme Terme Warme ARN. Barn Fern Learn Sterne Warne Yarne ARP. Carp Chirp Harp Querp Sharpe Warpe ARS. v. AR. ARE. Arse Barrs Carrs Dares Fares Scarce Mars ARSH. Harsh Marsh ART. Art Cart Clart Dart Fart Heart Hart Mart Parte Quart Smart Start Tart Thwart Wart ARTH. Dearth Earth Girth Hearth Swarth ARV. v. ERVE. AS. Asse Brasse Basse Classe Glasse Grasse Lasse Masse Passe Was. ASE. v. ACE. ASH. Ash Brash Cash Clash Crash Dash Flash Gash Mash Psh Plash Quash Rash Slash Swash Thrash Trash Wash. ASK. Aske Baske Caske Flaske Laske Maske Pasch Taske. ASP. Aspe Claspe Gaspe Graspe
Haspe Raspe Waspe. AST. Bast Blast Cast Chast Fast A-gast Hast Last Mast Past Tast Wast AT. At Batt Bratt Cat Chat Fat Flat Hat Mat Pat Rat Squat That What ATE. Bate Deli-cates Date Fate Gate Grate Hate Kate Re-late Mate Pate Plate Prate Consec-Rate Sate Slate State Strait Wait Yate. ATCH. Batch Catch Cratch Hatch Ltch Match Dis-patch Patch Scratch Smatch Snatch Swatch Thatch Watch. ATH. Bath Faith Hath Lath Path Rathe Swathe Saith Wrath. ATS. v. AT. AVE. Brave Cave Drave Gave Grave Have Knave Nave Rave Save Shave Slave Stave Wave Thrave. AW. Aw Claw Daw Draw Flaw Haw Jaw Gnaw Mw Paw Raw Saw Spaw
Sraw Thaw AWD. Bawd Clawd Faud Laud Applaud Thawd. AWN. Brawn Dawn Drawn Fawn Gnawn Lawn Pawn Prawn Sawn Spawn Thawn Yawn. AX v. ACK. Ax Flax Lax Pax Tax Wax. AY. v. AIE. EA. Flea Key Lea Plea Sea Ya EACE EASE. De-cease Fleas En-crease De-crease Grease Lease Peace Pease Pleas Prease Seas Seze Tease These. EACH. Beach Beach Breach Leach Preach EACH. Im-peach Reach Teach. EAD. Bead Bread Dead Dread Flead Glead Head Kned Lead Mead Plead Rad Shead Shread Spread Stead Tread. EAF. Deaf Leaf Sheaf EAK. Beak Bleak Break Creak Freak Leak Peak Speak Sneak Squeak Streak Weak Wreak. EAL. Deal Heal Con-geal Meal
Peal Sale Squeal Steal Sweal Teal Re-veal Weal Wheal Zeal. EAM. Beam Bream Cleam Cream Dream Flem Gleam Ream Sam Scream Seam Sream Team Theam Extream. EAN. Bean Clean Glean Lean. Mean Quean Rain Skean Spleen Wean Yane. EAP. Cheap Heap Leap Reap. EAR. ERE. Bear Blear Chear Clear Fear Flear Hear Jear Lear Mear Near Ap-pear Peer Pheer Reer Sheer Be-smear Spear Seer Stear Swear Tear There Weare Were Where Year. EAS. v. EACE. EAST. Beast Breast De-ceast Feast Least. EAT. ETE. Beat Bleat De-ceit Cheat Feat Great Heat Jeat Meat Neat Pleat Seat Sweat Teat Threat In-treat Wheat Repeat EATH. Breath Death Heath Sheath Wreath.
EAVE. Cleave De-ceive Heave Leave Be-reave Sleave Weave EB. Gleb Neb Web. ECK. Beck Check Deck Neck Peck Speck. ECT. Checkt Re-flect Neg-lect Cor-rect E-rect Di-rect Peckt Circum-spect Re-spect Dect Pro-tect De-tect. Recol-lect Re-ject De-ject In-fect Dia-lect Archi-tect ED. Bed Bled Bred Bread Dead Dread Fed Fled Head Led Ned Red Read Shed Sped Spread Stead Shred Thred Tread Wed. EDGE. Edge Hedge Al-ledge Pledge Sedge Wedge EE. Be De-cree D Fee Glee A-gree De-gree He Knee Lee Me Pee Ree See She Thee Three Tee We Ye. EECE. EESE. Cheese De-crees Fees Geese Freeze Greece Fleece Knees Lees Peece Sees Sneze Squeeze Trees Wheeze,
EECH. Beech Creech Leech B-seech Speech EED. Bleed Breed De-creed Deed Feed Freed A-greed Heed Meed Need Red Seed Speed Seed Weed. EEF. Bef Brief Chief Grief Be-lief. EEK. Cheek Creek Gleek Greek Leeke Meeke Reeke Seeke Shreek Sleek Squeak Week, EEL. Deale Eele Feele Heele Keele Kneele Peele Reele Siele, EEM. Re Deeme Be Seeme Es-Teeme. EEN. Seen Green Keene Queen Seen Screen Skene Spleen Ween. EEP. Creep Deep Keep Peepe Sheep Sleep Steep Sweep Weepe EERE. v. EARE. EES. v. EACE. EET. Bee't Feet Fleet Greet Leet Meet Sheet Street Sweet. EETH. Seeth Teeth EEVE. Beeves At-chieve Cleave Grieve Re-lieve Be-lieve
Re-prieve Shrieve. EEZE. v. Eece EF. Cleft Deft Left Be-reft. EG. Beg Dreg Leg Meg Peg Steg. EK. v. ECK. EKE. v. EAK. EL. Bell Cell Dwell Ell Fell Hell Kell Knell Mell Nell Ex-pel Com-pel Re-pel Quell Sell Shell Smell Spell Swell Tell Well Yell ELD. Dwel'd Felld Field Geld Held Queld Reeld Seld Sield Smeld Seld Sweld Wield Yield ELE. v. EALE. ELCH. Belch Welch. ELF. Delf Pelf Self Shelf. ELM. Elm Flm Helm Realm Over-whelm. ELS. ELSE. v. EL. ELT. Belt Dealt Dwelt Felt Gelt Melt Pelt Smelt Splt Swelt Welt. ELTH. Health Stealth Tilth Wealth. ELV. Delve Selves Shelves.
EM. Con-demn Gemme Hemme Kemb Stemme. EME. v. EAM. EN. Ben Den Fen Hen Ken Men Pen Skenne Ten Then When Wren. ENCE, ENS, ENSE. In-cense Inno-cence Frankin cence Consci-ence Of-fence De-fence. Influ-ence Dili-gence Exi-gence Negli-gence Indi-gence Hence Excel-lence Com-mence Im-mense Ex-pence Recom-pense Elo-quence Circum-infer-ence Confer-ence Quintis-sence Tense Pre-tense Thence Whence. ENCH. v. EN. Bench Drench French Quench Sench Tench Trench Wench Wrench END. Bend Blend Tran-s-cend Con-de-scend De-fend Of-fend B-friend Appre-hend Compre-hend Repre-hend. Lend Com-mend De-ex-pend Rend Send Spend At-tend In-tend Ex-tend Con-tend Wend. ENGTH. Length Strength. ENE. v. EAN. ENS. v. ENCE. ENT. Bent Inno-ascent Inno-decent In-dent Negli-gent Indi-gent Dili-gent Kent Lent Commande-ment Argu-ment Re-pent Meant Elo-quent Shent Spent Sprent Con-straint Re-straint
Sent Represent As-sent Con-sent Dis-sent Re-sent Tent In-tent Con-tent Ex-tent At-tent Trent Vent E-vent In-vent Circum-vent Under-went. EP. v. EAP. Crep Hep Skep Step. EPE. v. EAP. EPT. Cept Kept Leapt Ceapt Slept Stept Swept. ER. v. EAR. Her De-ferre Re-ferre Pre-ferre In-terre De-terre. ERB. Hearb Verb. ERCE. ERSE. Fierce me-herse Herse A-merce Pierce Serce Terse Theirs Con-Verse Re-verse Un-verse ERCH. Birch Pearch Search ERD. Beard Brd Cheard En-deard Feard Fleerd Herd Heard Jeerd Ap-peard Sheard Steard Be-Stird. ERGE. v. ARGE. Verge Dirge. ERK. v. ARK. Cleark Ferk Jrk Heak Rick Perke Querke Smerke Yerke. ERL. v. ARL. Earle Girle Pearle Whirle Twirle. ERM. v. ARM. Sperme Firme Terme ERN. Dis-cerne Con-cerne Derne Learn
Ferne Spurne Yearne Earne Chirne ERP. Chirpe Quirpe ERS. v. ERCE. Bears Chears In-dears Fears Fleers Jeeres Hers Lears Peers Pears Sears Shears Be-smears Spears Stirres Stears Stears Swears Tears Re-verse Con-verse Wears Years Erres Pre-ferres Re-ferres De-ferres. ERT. v. ART. Heart Male-pert Shrt Skit Squirt Con-vert Di-vert In-vert Per-vert De-sert In-sert. ERTH. Birth Dearth Gith Mirth Earth Perth. ERV. ARV. Carve De-serve Pre-serve Re-serve Con-serve Serve Nerve. ESS. Besse Blesse Ex-cesse Chesse Addresse Re-dresse Guesse Jesse Lesse Messe Op-presse R-presse Ex-presse De-presse Sup presse Yes Di-stresse Re-gresse Di-gresse In-gresse Pro-fesse Con-fesse ESE. v. EAS. ESH. Flesh Fresh. EST. Bst Blest Brest In-cest Chst Crest Ad-drest Re-drest Pro-fest Con-fest Hest Jest Guest Lest
Nest Ex-prest Op-prest R-prest De-prest Sup-prest Rst Int-rest Quest Di-strest Test Pro-test D-test Con test In-vest De-vest Wst Wrest. ET. v. EAT. Bet Debt Counte-fet Fret Get Jet Let Pet Set Wet Whet Yt. ETCH. v. EACH. Fetch Stretch Retch Wretch ETH. v. EATH. EVE. v. EAVE. EW. Blew Chew Crew Dew Flew Hew Jew Knew Few Sew Shew Shrew View. Yew. EX. v. ECK. Rex Sex Vex. EY. Key Weigh Whey. I. Y. IE. Eie I By Buy Cry Die Dry Fie Fly Fry Guy He High Lie Ly My Ngh Pie Com-ply Re-ply Im-ply Prie Rie Sigh Shie Skie Slie Spie Stie Tie Thgh Thy Try Vie Why Wry IB. Bib Crib Gib Glib
Lib Rib Snib Squib Tib. IBE. Brbe Gibe Kbe Scribe Tribe In-scribe De-scribe Circum-scribe Sub-scribe Pre-scribe Tran-scribe ICE. ISE. Circum-cise Pre-cise Cries Dice Para-dise Sacri-fice Suf-fice Eies Flies Fies Frize Ds-guise Grice Hies Lic Tyran-nize Me Nice Pies Preci-pice Plies Price Com-pize Rice Rse Size Sice Des-cries Skies Slice Spice Sties In-tice Thrice Trice Twice Vice. Ad-vise De-vise Wise. ICH. v. ITCH. Rch Which. ICK. Brick Chick Dick Flick Kick Lick Nick Pick Prick Quick Sick Stick Tick Thick Trick. ID. Bid Chd Did Hid Kid Lid Mid Rid Strid. IDE. A-bde Bide Chide Cryed Dyed Dryed Cruci-fied Fryed Glide Hide Be-lied De-nyed Ap-plyed R-plyed Com-plyd Im-plyed Pride Pyed Ride Side De-scried Slide Spied
Sride Tide Tryde Vied weighd Wide. IDGE A-bridge Didge Flidge Ridge IFE. Fife Knife Life Rife Strife Wife. IFF. Cliffe Quffe Sriffe Whiffe IFT. Drift Fift Gift Lift Quift ift Shift Rift Swift Thrift Whift. IG. Big Dg Fig Gig Jig Lig Pig Trig Twige Whig. IGH. v. IE. IGHT. v. ITE. IKE. Dke Hke Pike Spke Srike. ILE. Bile Rcon-ile Croca-dile De-file Ile Be-guile Mile Nile Com-pile Sile Smile Stile Tile Vile Wile While ILL. Bill Chill Dill Drill Fill Gll Hill Kill Mill Nill Pill Qill Rill Shrill Skill Spill Squill Still Swill Till Thrill Till Will ILD. ILL. EILD Build Filld Gild Killd Milld Pilld
Skilld Spilld Stilld Swilld Tilld Trilld Willd. ILDE Recon-cil'd Child De-fil'd B-guild Com-pi'd Smi'd Stil'd Ti'd Wilde. ILK. Mlke Silke. ILM. v. EIM. ILT. Built Guilt Gilt Milt Quilt Spilt Tilt Wilt. ILTH. v. ELTH. Filth. Tilth. IM. Brim Dm Gim Him Limb Prim Rm Skim Swim Trim. IME Chime Crime Grime Lime Prime Slime Rme Time. IMP. Gimp Limp Pimp Shrimp IN. Bin Bin Chin Din Fin Inne In Gin Be-gin Grin Kin Lin Min Pin Sn Shin Skin Spin Thin Tin Twin Win. INE. Concu-bine Colum-bine Bine In-cline De-cline Chine Dine Fine Kine Line Mine Nine Pine D-signe R-signe Shine Shrine Swine valen-tine Thine Tine Twine
Di-vine Wine Whine Whrine INCE. INS. v. IN. Prince Mince Quince Rinse Since Convince Wince. INCH. v. ENCH. Finch Inch Pinch Stench Winch. IND Friend Grind Lind Pin'd Sind Skind Spind. INDE Binde Blinde In-clin'd De-clin'd Din'd Finde Grinde Be-hinde Lin'd Kind Minde Pin'd Rnde D-sign'd Re-sign'd Shin'd En-shrin'd Twin'd Winde Whin'd Whrin'd ING. Bringe Clinge Dnge Fling Hinge King Ling Rig Sng Sling Sping Sting String Swing Thing Wing. INGE Cringe Fringe Hinge Singe Swinge Re-venge. INK. Brink Blink Cinque Chink Drink Linke Pinke Sinke Shrink Slink Stink Be-think Twink Wink. INS. v. INCE. INT. Dint Flint Hint Lint Mint Splint Squint Stint Im-print IP. Chip Clip Dip Hip Lip
Nip Pip Quip Rip Sip Ship Skip Slip Sip Strip Tip Trip Whip. IPE. Gripe Pipe Ripe Snipe Stripe Type Tripe Wipe. IPS. v. IP. IPT. Chipt Clipt Dipt Hipt Quipt Ript Spt Shipt Skipt Slipt Snipt Stript Tript Whipt IR. v. ER. Fre Mihe Sir Be-stirre. IRE. Buyer Brier Cryer Dire Drier Fier Fier Frier Ire Hgher Hire Lyer Ad-mire Lyre Niher Quire De-sire Shire Ex-spire Con-spire E-squire R-ire A-ire Tryer Wre. IRK. v. ERK. IRL. v. ERL. IRN. v. ERN. IRP. v. ERP. IRS. v. ERCE. IRT. v. ERT. Dirt Girt Shirt Skirt Squirt IS: Is. Blisse Cis Dis Hisse Kisse Misse Pisse Swisse Tis Wis. ISE. v. ICE. ISH. Dsh Fish Psh Rush Wish.
ISK. Brisk Frisk Whisk. ISP. Crisp Lisp Whisp IST. Fist Exor-cist Grist Kist Lst Mist Wist In-fist Con-ist D-ist Pe-ist R-ist IT. Bit Chit Fit Flit Hit Kit Knit Nit Pit Ac-quit Sit Shit Slit Spit Split Tit Twit Wit Writ. Com-mit Ad-mit Sub-mit Re-mit. ITE. IGHT. Bite Bright Dght Fight Height Kite Knight De-Light Might Mte B-Night Pight Plight Re-quite Up-right Over-sight Requ-site Oppo-site Shite Smite Spite Sprte Wight White Write Ex-cite In-cite Re-cite. ITCH. Bitch Beech Dtch Fitch Flitch Pitch Rich Stich Swich Twitch Witch Which. ITH. Blith Lith Sith Tyth Wirh Writhe IVE. Dive Drive Five Give Gyve Hive Live A-live Con-nive De-prive Re-prive Rive Shive Shrive Slive Strive
Thrive Wive. IX. v. ICK. IZE. v. ICE. O. v. OW, Doe-dough Foe Fro Goe Loe Moe Noe Po Roe So Shoe Sloe Throe To Toe Though Woe Wooe Who OB. Obe. Globe Job Robe. OACH. Bloach Broach Coach En-croach Loach Poach Ap-proach Re-proach. Roach. OAD. ODE. A Bode A-boad A-broad Goad Load Roade Rode Toade Trode Yode. OAK. OKE. Oake Broake Choke Cloke Croak Poak Soke Smoke Spoke Stroke In-voke Pro-voke Re-voke A-woke Yoke. OALE. OLE. Bole Coale Dole Foale Goale Hole Mole Pole Soale Sole Shoale Sole Whole OAM. OME. Foam Home Combe Roam Tome Womb OAN. ONE. One Bone Cone Drone Flown Gone Groan Hone Joan Loan A-lone Moan None Roan Shone Stone Tone Throne. v. Own. OAP. v. OPE. Ope Cope Coap
Grope Hope Pope Rope Sope Scope Sloap Trope OAR. ORE. Oare Ore Boare Bore Core Doore Floore A-dore Be-fore Goare Glore Hoare Lore More Moores D-plore Im-plore Poore Pore Roare Soare Sore Score Shore Sore Re-store Swore Tore Wore Yore OARCE. ORCE. Ores Boares Course Doores A-dores Force Floores Goares Moores Poores De-plores Im-plores Roare Hoarse Source Scores Shores Snores Stores Whores Re-morce OARD. Board Bo'd Ac-cord Re-cord Af-ford Ab-hord Goard Gor'd Hoard Im-plor'd De-plor'd Por'd Roard ORD. Sno'd Sword Whor'd Word Lord. OB. Bob Cob Fob Rob Sb Throb. OCHT. v. OTCHT. OCK. OX. Block Brock Cock Clock Dock Flock Frock Knock Lock Mock Pock Rock Sock Shock Smock Stock
OCKT. Blockt Cockt Flockt Knockt Lockt Mockt Rockt Stockt. OD. Cod Clod God Nod Plod Rod Sod Tod Trod. ODGE. Ddge Lodge OFF. Cough Doffe Goffe Scoffe Trough OFT. Cought Croft Dofft Oft Soft Scoft OG. Bog Cog Clog Dog Fog Frog Gog Hog Jog Log Pog OKE. v. OAK. OLE. v. OAL. OLL. Coll Doll Goll Loll Moll Poll Roll Scroll Con-troll Toll. OLD. Old Bold Cold Hold Mold Roll'd Sold Scold Ex-told Told Controll'd OLK. Folk Yolk. OLT. Bolt Colt Dolt Golt Polt Re-volt. OLVE. In-volve Re-volve Wolves OM. Comb Come Comm From Gom Some Plumb Tom Womb Whom
OMP. v. OAM. Pompe Rompe. ON. v. OAN. Up-on Conne Donne Gone John None Wonne ONE. v. OAN. ONCE. v. OAN Once Sconce OND. Bond Conn'd Donn'd Pond Srond En-thron'd Bemoan'd Groand. ONG. Long A-mong Song Strong Thong Throng Wrong Young ONS. v. ONCE. ONT. v. OUNT. Front Wont. OP. Crop Chop Drop Fop Hop Knop. Lop Sop Prop. Shop Slop Stop Top. OPE. v. OAP. OPT. Chopt Cropt Hopt Lopt Propt Stopt Topt. OR. Or Dor Fore Nor ORE. v. OAR. ORCE. v. OARCE. Dis-course Re-course Force Horse Hoarse Remors Nource Source. ORCH. Porch Scorch Torch. ORD. v. OARD. RGE. Forge Dis-gorge Goge Scourge. ORK. Cork Fork Pork Stork Work York,
ORLD. v. URLD. World Hurl'd Curl'd. ORM. Dorm Form Storm Worm. ORN. Born Corn Horn For-lorn Morn Mourn Scorn Shorn Sworn Torn Thorn Worn A-dorn ORN'D. A-dorn'd Horn'd Scorn'd Mourn'd. ORS. v. ORCE. ORT. Court Dort Ex-hort De-hort A▪mort Re-port Trans-port Sort Short Sport Re-tort Ex-tort Wort. ORTH. Forth Worth. OS. Im-boss Cross Dross Goss Gloss In-gross Loss Moss Soss Toss. OSE. v. OZE. Chose -close Ens-close Di Dose Glze Hose Lose Nose Pose Com-pose Ex-pose Re-pose De-pose Im-pose Trans-pose Sup-pose Rose Those Whose OAST. OST: Boast Im-bost Cost Crost Frost In-grost Host Lost Most Im-post Tost. OT. Blot Clot Got Grot Hot Jot Knot Lot Not Pot Plot Rot Sot Scot
Shot Snot Spot Trot Wot. OTE. Boat Bloat Coat Doat Float Goat Groat Moat Note Oate Quote Rote Shote Smot Throat Vote Wrote OTCH. v. OCH. Botch Notch Scotch. OTH. Oath Both Broth Cloth Doth Froth Loth Moth Quoth Sloath Troth Wroth OW. Bow Bough Blow Brow Cow Crow Dow Flow Glow Grow Know How Low Mow Now Plow Prow Row Sow Show Shrow Slow Snow Bestow Strow Tow Thou Throw Trow Vow You. OWN. Own Blown Brown Clown Crown Down Drown Flown Frown Gown Known Grown Mown R-nown Shown Town Thrown OX. OCK. Oxe Boxe Foxe Poxe OY Boy Coy Cloy In-joy An-noy De-stoy Toy Em-ploy
OYD. Cloy'd En-joy'd An-noy'd D-stroy'd Voy'd OYLE. Oyle Boile Broile R-coile Foile Moile Quoile Soyle Spoyle Toyle. OYLD. v. OYLE. OYLS. v. OYLE. OYNE. Foyn Groin Joyn Pur-oin. Coyn. OYNT. Ap-point Dis-appoint Un-joynt An-oynt▪ OYS. v. OY. Choice Hoise Re-joyce Poize Voice. OIST Foist Rejoyc't Voic't OOD. Bood Food Mood With-stood Wood Woed. OOF. Hoof A-loof Re-proof Roof Scroof Woof. OOK. Book Brook Cook Hook Look Rook Shook Mis-took. OOL. Cool Fool Pool School Stool Tool OOM. Bloom Broom Coom Doom Groom Loom Rome Roome Tombe Womb. OON. Boon Moon Noon Spoon OOP. Doop Hoop Loop Poop Stoop Troop Whoop
OOS. Boughs Loose Nooze Goose. OOT. Boot Foot Root Soot Shoot. OOTH. Sooth Tooth Youth OUCH. Couch Pouch Crouch Slouch Touch Dis-a-vouch OUD. Bowd Cloud Croud Flow'd Glowd Loud Mow'd Proud Shroud Vow'd OULE. Owle Bowle Cowle Fowle Howle Joule Poule Roule Soul Seroul Toule Con-troule OULD. v. OLD. Could Should Con-troll'd Would. OULT. v. OLT. OUND. A-bound Re-bound Crownd Drownd Found Fround Hound Pound Round Sound Stound Wound. OUNCE. Bounce Plounce Re-nounce Pounce Trounc. OUNT. v. OWN Ac-count Re-count Fount Mount. OUR. Our Bower Foure Flower Houre Lowre Power Pa-ra-mour Con-que-rour Poure Soure Shower Tower Toure D-vour Your. OUS. v. OW. Blouse House Louse Mouse
Rouse Souse OUT. OUGHT. A-bout with-Out-through Oought Bought A▪bout Brought Clout Doubt Drought Fought Flout Gout Lout Nought Pout Rout Sought Spout Sprout Sout Taught Thought Trout De-vout Wrought. OUTH. Grouth Mouth South Youth. OVE. A-bove Clove Dove Drove Glove Grove Love Move Ap-prove Re-prove Rove Sove Shrove Stove Strove. VB. Cub Chub Club Dub Grub Rub Srub Shrub Snub Tub. VCE. VSE. A-buse Ac-cuse Ex-cuse Chuse Re-cluse Cruse Dues Re-fuse Con-fuse Dif-fuse Trans fuse Juyce Jewes. Luce Muse Newes Scrues Sluce Spruce Sues Tuce Use. VCH. v. VTCH. VCK. Buck Chuck Duck Luck Muck Pluck Suck Stuck. VD. Bud Blood Cud Flood Good Hood Mud Sud Spud Under-stood Wood.
VDE. Bewd Im-Breud Es-Chewd Con-clude Ex-clude In-clude Cude Feude Glewd Lewd Mued Re-new'd Rude Scr'd Shrewd Spu'd Su'd Srewd In-trude Viwd. VDGE. Budge Drudge Grudge Ad Judge Snudge Trudge. VF. Buffe Cuffe Chuff Huffe Muffe Puffe Ruffe Suffe Tough Through VFT. v. VF. VE. Blue Brue Cue Clue Ac-crue Due Drew Fw Flew Glue Hiew Hugh Jew Knew Liew Mue Re-New Pue Rue Scrue Shew En Sue Slue Sew Spue Stue Stew Threw True View You. VG. Bug Dug Drug Hug Jug Lug Rug Shrug Tug Trug. VL. Bull Cull Dull Full Gull Hull Lull Mull Disa-null Pull Trull Wooll VLE. Mule Pule Rule Thule. VLD. Bulld Culld Dulld
Gulld Lulld Mulld Disa-nulld Pulld. VLF. En Gulfe Wolfe. VLK. Bulk Hulk Sculk. VLS. v. VLLS. Pulse Repulse. VM. Bm Come Crum Dumb Drum Gum Hum Mum Numb Plum Some Scum Summ Swum Thumb Thrum Wombe Whom VMP. Bump Crump Dump Frump Lump Pump Rup Stump Thump Trump. VME. Fume Plume Rheum As-sume Pre-sume VN. Dun Done Gun Nun Run Sun Sonne Shun Spun Tun Won. VNE. Prune Tune. VNCE. VN. Dunce Once Nonc VNCE. Bunch Clunch Munch Punch. VND. Snd Shund Tund. VNG. Bung Clung Dung Flung Hung Lung Rung Sprung Sung Strung Swung Tongue Young. VNGE. Plunge Spunge.
VNK. Drunk Monke Punk Snk Shrunk Slnk Stunk Trunk VNS. v. VN. VNT. Blunt Bunt Fount Hunt Runt Wont VP. Up Cup Tup Sup. VR. Bur Bur Cur Furre D-mure Slur Spur Sire. VRE. In-ure Cure En-dure A-lure De-mure Im-mure Pure As-sure Ob scure Skuer VRB. Cube D-stube VRCE. VRS. Ds-burse Curse Purse Wos. v. VR. VRCH. Birch Church Lurch. VRD. Bird Blud Fur'd Surd Curd Slurd Spurd Sword Turd Word. VR'D. v. VRE. VRF. Scufe Tufe VRGE. Forge Purge Surge Scourge Dis-gorge. VRK. Lurke Turke Work: VRLE. Curle Churle Hurle Purle. VRLD. Curl'd Hurld Purld World VRN. Burn
Churne Mourne Spurne Turne Vrne. VRS. v. VR. VRT. Blurt Curt Durt Hurt Spurt Wort VS. Busse Trusse Us Thus. VSE. v. VCE. VSH. Bush Blush Brush Crush Flush Hush Gush Push Plush Rush Tush Thrush. VSK. Busk Husk Musk Tusk. VST. Bust Crust Dust Gust Just Lust Must Rust Thrust Trust UT. But Cut Gut Glut Nut Put Rut Scut Slut Stut Strut. VTE. Crute Flute Lte Mute Ste Ds-pute Re-pute Im-pute De-pute Com-pute. VTCH. Clutch Crutch Dtch Grutch Much Such Smuch Touch. VTH. Ruth Truth Youth. VX. v. VCK. VRST. Dis-burst Curst Durst First Nourst Worst.
TO THE READER. READER, THou hast here, what some would count big enough to deserve the name of Booke, and give thee arguments from the indu∣stry in the compiling, and benefit in the use, to work thee to a liking, and extort thy appro∣bation. For my own part, if thou wilt be pleased to pardon the aspiring loftinesse of the title, and to consider for whom it was intended; Nec Suffae∣nus sum, nec inscribo Praxitelem. If thou find∣est any thing here either for thy pleasure or profit, thank not me, but the greatnesse of the volume: for could it have been easily transcribed, or any o∣ther way made generally usefull to all them for whose sakes I have principally taken this pains; it had neither troubled thee, nor the Presse: nor had I added one more to the numberlesse multitude of scriblers. Condemn it as unworthy the light in what words thou pleasest, and I shall owe thee thanks for giving my thoughts expression by thy langnage. If thou disapprovest it and art a wise man; I shall be too proud to know an understanding man of my judgement: if thou beest a foole, I shall not be very sory to see some hopes of an improve∣ment in thy judgement, by beginning in this to
know what justly to condemne. If thou commendes any thing, whether thou heest wise or otherwise,  shall be so far from giving thee thanks, that I sha be halfe angry with thee, for so much crossing m expectation. Vale. Qui gravis es nimium potes hic jam Lector abire Quo libet—Mart.
The Books principally made use of in the compiling of this Work. DUbart as works. Ben. Johnson. Brownes Pastorals. Randolphs Poems. Drayton. May's Lucan. Quarles divine Poems. Quarles divine fancies. Sandys Ovid's Metam. Sandys Paraphrase on the Canticles. Herberts Poems. Totthams Poems. Withers Poems. Orlando Furioso. Heywoods Dialogues and Dramms. Chapmans Homer. Overburies Characters. Balzacks Epistles. Cowleys Blossoms. Horace translated. Ovids works translated. Johnsonus Virbius. Spencers fairy Queen. Comedies and Tragedies, many. Quarles Solomons Recantation. Gomersals Levites revenge Sr. Philip Sidneys Arcadia Shakespeare Heywood of Angells. Carewes Poems. Danyel. Mayes Edward 3. Quarles Emblems. Quarles Argalus and Par∣thenia. Sandys of Christs passion. Habbingtons Castara. Sr. John Beamounts Poem. The valiant Bruce. Burtons Melancholy. Chapmans Hero and Leand. Blunts Characters. Massingers Secretary. Lovelace's Pastorals. Virgil translated. Cowpers Hill. Elegies on Mr. King. Chaucer. Aviso. Holydaies Persius Quarles Eclogues.
Howels Instructions for foraine Travell. Howels vocal Forrest, and Englands Tears. Fullers Holy State. Dunns Poems. Malvezzi. Davenants Poems. Wallers Poems. Miltons Poems. Sandy's Paraphrase on Iob. Sandy's Paraphrase on Psalmes, Ecclesiastes, &c.
The ENGLISH PARNASSUS. Aaron. SAcred, mitred, holy, blessed, grave, priestly, pious. Abbey. Rich, wealthy, cloysterd, monkish, religious, old, antient. Abbot. Old, antient, religious, cloysterd, recluse, mitred, reverend, regular, grave, humble, devotious, retired, zealous, abstemious, monkish. Abraham. Obedient, aged, old, prudent, faithfull, blessed, wise, devout, pious, godly, religious, reverend, sage, grave, holy. Absence. Envious, long, prolonged, tedious, unwelcome, constrained, forgetfull, oblivious. Abstinence. Sober, thrifty, honest, frugall, cleanly, chast, lent-like, spa∣ring, chearfull, healthy, wholesome, temperate. Absurdity. Foolish, dotish, clownish, sortish, repugnant, contradictious, grosse, great, improper, ridiculous, incredible, simple, ignorant. Abuse. False, deceitfull, ignorant, vain, malicious, grosse, injurious. Abysse. Gaping, yawning, dreadfull, profound, devouring, darke, in∣satiate, covetous, deepe, vast, dangerous, affrighting, low, dark, unfathomed, hideous, obscure, hellish, dismal, wide, open. Accents. Sweet, harsh, harmonious, well-tuned, wounding, killing,
stabbing, dying, short winded, long winded, pleasing, delight∣full, sad, joyfull, mournfull, shill, flat. Accident. Sodain, unexpected, unthought of, surprizing, casual, fatal, doubtfull, unhoped, unforese, usual, common, various. Accomplishment. Perfect, entire, wisht, final, happy, successefull, joyfull, for tunate, blest, desired, dispatcht, absolute, total, full. Accord. Peaceable, amiable, mutual, amorous, composed, unjarring, happy, uniting, sweet, gentle, friendly, agreeing, calme. Acheron. Deepe, profound, infernal, hellish, shady, sad, black, deadly, dismal, cused, unhappy, greedy, devouring, flow, tormenting, flaming, burning, scalding, scorching, boyling, broylng, gloo∣mie, pitchi, joylesse. Achilles. Valourous, couragious, swift, warlike, stout, valiant, subtle, cruel, untamed, angry, hardy, fierce, doughty, inexorable, strong, great, brave, generous, willfull, furious, stormy, proud, undaun∣ted, implacable, violent, passionate, seaborn, stubborn, sturdy, unmooved, bloody, fearlesse. Acquaintance. Familiar, private, sociable, friendly, sweet, long, short. Acres. Rich, well tilld, fruitfull, fat, wealthy, flowry, hearby. Accuser. Odious, quarelous, envious, contentious, malitious, angry hurtfull, hated, hatefull, shamelesse, litigious, importunate, un∣just, calumnious, loathed, black mouthd. Adam. Old, antient, first born, dust formed. Adamant. Hard, unrelenting, iron-drawing, subtle, lasting, enduring, uxorious, loving, wooing, courting, alluring, obdurate, uncon∣quered, solid, eternal. Adder, v. Snake, Serpent. Writhed, hissing, cold, poysonous, invenoming, long, gliste∣ring, swelling, biting, stinking, creeping, crawling, lurking, deadly, dreadfull, mischievous, crested, malicious, scaly, speckled, slppery, lybian, loathsome, folded, cruell, bowed, knotted.
Adieu. Last, tedious, sad, grieved, sighed, loathed, lingering. Adonis. Brave, faire, beautifull, maiden, smooth-chind, neat, spruce, young, amorus, venereous, lovely, sweet, fresh, trimme, tender, soft, pittied, unhappy, deplored. Admonition. Wise, fatherly, christian, usefull, wholsome, healthy, cordial, sage, grave, timely, provident, carefull, prudent. Adventure. Hardy, bold, daring, improvident, doubtfull, casual, rash, sodain, brave, strange, happy, couragious, stout. Adversity, v. Affliction. Infortunate, pittied, calamitous, unhappy, deplored, hated loathed, ruining, crushing, gauling, wringing, pressing, sad black, usefull, tutoring. Adultery, Adulterer. Unchast, vicious, infamous, lascivious, odious, loathsome, secret, cautelous, wary, watchfull, nightly, base, lewd, lustfull, bestial, brutish, lawlesse, licentious, rammish, rampant, ranke, baudy, obscene, savage, injurious, neat, spruce. Advocate v. Lawyer. Mindfull, cautelous, wary, subtle, clamorous, eloquent, faire, spoken, knowing, skillfull, ready, consulting, dissembling, col∣loguinge, silver-griping, see, some, ingenious, witty, nimble, at∣tentive, long tayld. Aegypt. Memphian, fruitfull, heabie, fertil, cornie, reedy, superstiti∣ous, ingenious, witty, swarthy, fat, mysterious. Aeneas. Pious, godly, religious, devout, doughty, hardy, stout, cou∣ragious, valiant, valorous, wandring, Trojan, perjured, fore-sworne. Aeolus, v. Wind. Tempestuous, windie, bul-hekt, stormie, imperious. Aetna. Smokie, sulphureous, burning, flming, fiery, Sicilian, dread∣full, vaulty, high, lofty, Trinacrian, vaporeous, unquenched, noysefull, belching. Aeacus. Just, grimme, severe, grave, inexorable, unbribed, rigo∣rous,
uncorrupted, unfeed, impartiall. Affaires. Important, urgent, importunate, pressing, weighty, great. Affection. v. Love. Vehement, passionate, hot, flaming, hearty, ardent, burnin unfathomd, unmeasurd, immense, great, adventurous, uncon¦trold, couragious, transporting, intrancing, willing, impati¦ent, amorous, disordered, inordinate, doting, blind, fon officious, strong, obsequious, melting, zealous, tyrant, impe¦rious, wanton, untam'd, thoughtfull, carefull, soft. Affliction. Grievous, bitter, pressing, galling, grating, wringing, pain¦full, dolorous, cruel, hard, sad, rough, sharpe, sowre, insuppo¦table, deadly, vexing, cursed, unhappy, unwelcome, unwish laborious, wearying, hated, fretting. Affrica. Affrican. Scorcht, sandy, thirsty, monstrous, monster bearing, ho scalding, sweltering, spatious, large, wide, salvage, soultry broyled, swarthy, tawnie, perfidious, light cloathed, crue fierce, rebellious, unfaithfull. Age. Gliding, slipperie, stealing, creeping, flying, swift, fleete irrevocable, hating, envious, journeying, glib, feathered, wing¦ed, rolling, wheeling, riding, succeeding, encroaching, intruding, assaulting, invading, devouring, growing, running, galloping, light-foot, passing, hasty, nimble, swimming, speedie, leaping soft-foot, posting, spurring, swift-wingd, light-heeld, ambling, greedie, succeeding. Oldage, v. Old. Agate. Indian, precious, spotted, soveraigne, bright, Sicylian, shining, veinie, chearful, painted, streaked, checkerd, scorpion-hating, interlaced, motley, many coloured, chamfered. Agave. Theban, furious, mad, outragious, fierce, cruel, bloudie, raging, savage. Ajax. Unconquered, untamed, fierce, undaunted, couragious, vali∣ant, rash, headie, stout, furious, mad, warlick, sterne, hardy, cruell, valorous, strong, great, fearlesse, sturdy, fullen, grimme.
Aire. Fleeting, guilded, pliant, spicie, glowing, sulty, scattered, boundlesse, diffused, dilated, un-inclosed, free, singing, whispe∣ring, yeilding, passive, mooving, whirling, chrystal, casing, in∣trenchant, unwounded, dewie, pressed, sounding, empty, win∣ding, swift, fleete, dispersed, nimble, breathing, shrugging, shapelesse, formelesse, soft, wandring, liquid, enlightned, ambi∣ent, transparent, stirring, buxome, subtle, lightsome, clear, thinne, moist, circumfused, light, rolling, open, beamie, slip∣pery. Aires. Soft, sweet, good, pleasing, enchanting, intrancing, soul mo∣ving, pious, gentle, harmonious, melodious, well-tuned, char∣ming, sprightly, delicious, soul-raping, sence-bereaving, warbling, ulling, syrenian, well composed. Alabaster. White, polisht, compact, clear, bright, shining. Alacrity. Ready, joyfull, chearful, swift, deliberate, speedy, active, nimble, lustie, industrious, youthful, pliant, flexible, briske, live∣ly, stirring, active, sprightly. Alarme. Dreadful, sodain, frighting, hot, martial, noyseful, clamorous, furious, astonishing, warlick, moving, tumultuous, unexpected, assaulting, turbulent, loud. Alcides. Valint, furious, fierce, great, grimme, sterne, strong, wan∣dring, unconquered, warlike, bloody, v. Hercules, brawny, sul∣len, sturdy, sinewie. Alchymist. Alchymie. Juggling, deceitfull, cozening, cheating, subtle, industrious, potent. Alder. Tall, sea-loving, shadie, loftie, thirsty, sucking, pithy. Alderman. Dew-lapt, slow-pac'd, great ruft, grave, venerable, gowned, cor∣pulent, Lord-Maior-would-be, magisterious, supercilious, tun-bellyd, deliberate, gouty. Ale. Spicy, nappie, nut browne.
Alecto. Furious, pitiless, black, mischievous, sad, sterne, grim, sul¦len, sturdy, impatient, balefull, poysonous. Alexander. Ambitious, victorious, insatiate, unconquered, undaunted, couragious, successefull, puissant, hardy, renowned, bold, war∣lick, great, mighty. Allurements. False, cheating, cozening, wary, sweet, flattering, soothing lovely, deceitful honyed, winning, wooing, traiterous, inticing taking, catching, attractive, drawing, mortal, deadly, licorish pleasing, luring, inveagling, syrenian, treacherous. Aloes. Odorous, Indian, black, bitter, strong, Arabian, fragrant. Altar. Burning, flaming, bleeding, smoaking, fat, vaporous, sacred, pious, religious, odorous, solemne, chast, holy, greasie, green, glittering, crowned, adored, marble, garnisht, impaled, priest∣ly, perfumed. Alpes. Cloudy, frozen, windie, cold, high, loftie, hilly, horned, stony, rockie, oakie, northern, proud, icie, snowie, open, naked, spati∣ous, shadie, desert, steep, snow-crownd, towring, craggie, rough, woody, leavie, cavie. Alum. White, icie, stony, chrystal, mineral, rockie, clear, salt, sowre, sharp, tart. Amazement. Dull, dead, wild, deepe, strange, stupid, stounding, sad, frigh∣ful, fearful, pale, astonishing. Amazon. Scythian, warlike, hardy, stout, cavaleering, cruel, fierce, au∣dacious, manly, masculine, bold, strong, Thracian, braving, one-papt, renowned, couragious, valiant, valourous, rash, heady, furious, raging, half-moon-shielded, antient, axe-bearing. Amber. Gummie, perfumed, sweet, fragrant, odorous, fat, greasie, li∣quid, gray, clear, yellow, shining, white, bright, hard, congea∣led, thin, subtle, transparent, unctious, aromarick.
Ambrosia. Celestial, heavenly, divine, delicious, sugred, lovely, licorish, healthy, sweet, immortal, honey'd, soveraigne, savory, death-ex-pelling. Ambush. Close, lurking, seceret, private. hidden, traitorous, deceitful, surprizing, concealed. Ambition. v. Pride. Big, steepe, blind, vain, jealous, hasty, wild, hot, fearish, fiery, restlesse, unsatisfied, unlimited, lofty, unconfined, haughty, proud, unhappy, infortunate, tall, burning, careful, thoughtful, plotting, pale, impatient, highrooft, bold, audacious, daring, damned, en∣vious, greedy, curious, high, swoln, curious, towring, cankerd. v. Pride. Amethist. Wittie, purple, bright, violet, shining, beaming, blazing spark∣ling. Anarchie. Seditious, factious, disordered, unruly, distempered, confuted, injurious, impetuous, enormous, unbiassed. Ancestors. Honoured, sage, experienc'd, wise, reverend, preceding, grave, knowing. Anchor. Crooked, unweildie, fangie, toothed, hookie, sharpe, sharp∣tooth'd, biting, firme, sure, bowed, curbing, tenacious, writhed, fastning, locking, shackling. Anchorite. v. Hermite. Sullen, zealous, pious, devout, retired, devotious, religious, recluse, abstemious, lonely, melancholy, bookish, studious, sad, pensive, withered, aged, sequestred. Angells. Watchful, winged, glorious, blessed, perfect, celestial, heaven∣ly, divine beauteous, smoothfac'd, heaven-bred, bright-harnest. Anger. v. Rage Boyling, swelling, frantick, furious, raging, flaming, burning, enchested, passionate, waspish, impatient, red-lookt, inflaming, incensed, stormie, scarlet, moody, cholerick, wrathful, revengeful, chasing, foaming, hot, heating, sparkling, rash, blind, heady, disordered, sterne-visaged, giddy, flame-eyed, dizzy-eyed, ghostly, distempered, transporting, tempestuous, blustering, fierce, crel, violent, impetuous, threatning, menacing, unbridled, untamed,
mistaking, overseeing, frothy, implacable, pettish, bitter, rough wild, stubborn, unruly, litigious, austere, dreadful. Angler. v. Fisher. Patient, cunning, ensnaring, treacherous, expecting, preying impatint. Anguish. Pinching, griping, hard▪ sad, painful, grievous, killing, pres∣sing, wringing, extream, dolorous, doleful, gauling, heart-brea¦king, pensive, deep, mortal, pittied, bitter, impatient, gnawing fretting, stabbing, smarting, torturing, tormenting, martyring racking, disquiet, heart-rending. Annals. Memorable, antient, long, immortal, historious, recording, ¦ternal, long-breathed. Ants. Busie, painful, industrious, active, nimble, stirring, la¦borious, swarming, numerous, frugal, thrifty, storming, laden, toyling, trooping, crawling, tugging, corne-biting, grain-bea¦ring, theeving, creeping, slender, grain-supporting. Anthems. Religious, pious, melodious, harmonious, entrancing, soul¦rapping, ravishing, celestial. Antiquity. Unpartial, sage, grave, wise, rusty, musty, moldie, dusty, gra hoary, aged, experienc't, prudent, noble, reverend, venerable faithful, honoured, annal'd, silver-haired. Ape. Toyful, toyish, sportive, gamesome, nimble, active, phanta∣stical, sprightly, counterfeiting, mimick, dissembling, crafty wise, imitating, moving, mumping. Apennine. High, cold, naked, old, hoary, lofty, oakie, snowie, vast, stony, rockie, icie, hilly, craggie. Apostle. Holy, blessed, divine, faithful, glorious, many-tongued. Apollo. Beautious, unshorne, fair-haired, yellow-haired, Amber-trest, pleasant, blith, neat, buxome, rosy, divine, laureat, quivered, bea∣ming, glorious, radiant, smooth chin'd. Apostacy, Apostate. Damned, curst, hellish, false, faithlesse, perjured, revolting,
unruly, irregular, infamous, vicious, rebellious, voluptuous, mu∣tinous, debaucht, dissolute, wretched. Apothecary. Druggie, hearbie, expert, simpling, industrious, hopeful, art∣ful, drug-tongued. Apparel. Sumptuous, magnificent, costly, pompous, gorgeous, neate, trim, spruce, handsome, delicate, rich, gay, gaudie, fashionable. Apples. Dangling, blushing, vermilion, sweet, delicious, yellow, gol∣den, hanging, juycie, roseate, fragrant, odorous, round, wild, swelling, pendent, ripe, tast-pleasing. Appetite. Ranging, insatiare, delicious, unsatisfied, hungry, greedy, gluttonous, desirous, unbridled, untamed, baring, devouring, ar∣dent, unruly, disordered, covetous, insatiable, voluptuous, judi∣cious, gurmandizing, wolvish, sensual, craving, lingring. Apprentice. Sowre, young, novice, unexpert, untaught, tutor'd, unexperi∣enc't, simple, rude, ignorant, learning, saucie, unruly. Apricot. Velvet, dangling, delicious, tast-pleasing, hanging, lurking soft, hairie, yellow, golden, woolly. April. Flowrie, grassie, verdant, sunnie, chearful, gladsome, amorous, springing, pleasant, delightful, vernal, lively, lovely, smiling, youthful, teeming, wealthy, rich, fruitful, lusty, fragrant, bloom∣ing, budding, blithe, quickning, jocund, buxome, gleesome, merry, pregnant, bridal. Arabia, Arabian. Hot, perfumed, theevish, unchast, happie fruitful, spicie, wild salvage, odorous, aromatical, fertile, palm-bearing, rich, wealthy, hot, sweltering, soultry, painted, mitred, remote, un∣shorne. Archer. Quiver-bearing, ayming, warlick, sinewie, strong, ready, ar∣rowing, quick-sighted, pricking. Arbour. Flowrie, tusted, leavie, shadie, cooling, covert, thick, branchy,
spreading, coole, silent, screening, refreshing, grassie, green, thick-set. Argonautes. Famous, valent, proud, adventurous, stout, hardy, Jasonian, conquering, Aenionian, couragious, Pelasgian, Grecian, bold, au∣dacious. Argument. Subtle, strong, undoubted, confirming, sure, true, false, glo∣ring, inferring, concluding, conclusive, succinct, ergoing, grave enforcing, slght, rational, authentick, perswading, rational, pro∣vng, probable, satisfying, discoursing, disputing, wrangling, litigi¦ous, contending, undenied, faith-begetting, knotty, easy, hard opposing, unanswered. Armes of the body. Encircling, twining, clasping, embracing, winding, ivory, gras∣ping, encosing, yoaking, twisting, twining, sinewie, strong, snowie brawni, hugging, fleshie, puissant, valiant, rigorous, veinie, ner¦vous, laborious, toyling, wielding, victorious, extended, industri¦ous, active, working. Armes. Armour. Clashing, clattering, ratling, sounding, angry, warlick, bloody murthering killing, invasive, offensive, defensive, manly, flaming sparkling, victorious, conquering, glistering, shining, revengeful noble, hreatning, menacing, dreadful, destroying, warlick, mar¦tial, unhappy, hurtful, noyseful, tumultuous, jarring, furious, sa powerful, raging, injurious, devouring, odious, abhorred, deteste hated, trembling, bright, violent, impetuous, mortal, hostile deadly, cruel, rebellious, fatal, rigid, blood-thirsty. Armie. Numerous, great, puissant, powerful, martial, dreadful, furiou hostile, revengeful, strong, embattelled, conquering, victorious resolved, couragiou, adventurous, bold, thundering. Aristotle. Learned, knowing, industrious, subtle, knotty, famous, wis grave, divine, eloquent, piercing, judicious. Art. Artizan. Artist. Careful, elaborate, laborious, industrious, studious, curiou running, learned, knowing, expert, experienc't, profitable, con¦ducing, witty, ingenious, judicious, piercing, quick-sighted, ready active, nimble, subtle, noble, famous, honoured, esteemed, i¦structed, commendable, praiseful, deviceful, quick, inventive, ¦gilant, early, working, sweating.
Arrogance. Frothie, skie-towring, proud, presumptuous, over-weening, self-conceied, aspiring, audacious, bold, advenurous, rash shame∣less, unblushing, stubborn, vaunting, braggng, threatning, at∣temptive. v. Pride. Arrow. Bab'd, bearded, deadly, mortal, poysoned, winged, fatal, piercing, singing, deathful, whistling, whirling, thrilling, shap pointed, poynant, wounding, killing, trembling, flying, flutt∣ring, shivering, quivering, digging, sharpned, darted, wingie, Cretian, light-wing'd, swift, swift-pac'd, light-foot, norched, forked, light, Thessalian, Scythin, Thracian, gal-dipped, Par∣thian, Sidonian, cruel, revengeful, speedie, showring, towring, Armenian, sodain, slender, martial, warlick, harmful, bandisht, blood-thirsty, bloodie, impetuous. Asia. Fertile, fruitful, rich, vast, wealthy, spatious. Asse. Tardie, lasie, sleepie, drowzie, sluggish, loytering, slow-pac't, dull, heavie, long eard, cold, chilly, suffering, loadned, patient, pack-bearing, braying, cold-fearing, shivering, quivering, trem∣bling, sottish, lumpish, broadnosed, stiffe-haired, sluttish. Ash. Thick-leaved, tall, shady, snake-hated, rugged, barren, aged, solid, leavie, trembling, quivering. Ashes. Rude, smothering, pale, peaceful, quiet, sad, mournful, re∣pentant, warme, light, hot, hollow, black, trembling, thinne. Aspe. Deadly, poysonous, dangerous, fatal, dull, frighted, dreadful, inflamed, venemous, Aegyptian, drowsie, swelling, sleep-causing. Aspect. Tragical, mild, benigne, favourable, smiling, sad, lowring, frowning, maligne, unhappy, unluckie, envious, sterne, grimme, malicious, gratious, happy, prosperons, successeful, fiendly, un∣frinly. Astonishment. v. Amazement. Atchievements. Brave, glorious, great, famous, happie, adventurous, bold, pro∣sperous, slour, valiant, valourous, couragious, generous, ver∣tuous.
Atheists. Dull, desperate, dissolute, faithlesse, audacious, heady, daring, rash, presumptuous, adventurous, godlesse, damned, cursed, re∣probate, wicked, impious, vitious, voluptuous, mercilesse, cruel, bloody, wretched. Athens. Learned, ingenious, wel-lettered, studious, industrious, famous, Palladian, fertile, fruitful, towrie, lofty, ancient, eloquent. Athos. Vast, Aemonian, craggie, ragged, icie, Atlas. Heaven-bearing, skie-propping, cold, rough, icie, old, aged, craggie, pine-bearing, Lybian, cloudie, cloud-kissing, heaven-knocking, heaven-brushing, star-sweeping, hideous. Atomes. Small, flying, un-divided, un-numbred, wandring, little, dwar∣fish. Attention. Soft, still, silent, quick, obedient, patient, humble, pliant, willing, yeilding, silent, reverent, submisse, officious, obsequious, thirsty. Attempt. Bold, rash, vain, presumptuous, proud, arrogant, daring, brave, glorious, base, valiant, couragious. Avarice. Orsurious, pernicious, cruel, blind, cursed, wretched, detested, abhorted, odious, hateful, ravenous, devouring, impious, vile, base, filthy, loathsome, dishonest, servile, slavish, presumptuous, hoarding, sparing, pinching, griping, raping, greedy, damned, thirsty, gouty, insatiate, stanchlesse, eating, heart-enthralling, muck-worme, mudling, toylesome, laborious, careful, nasty, slut∣tish, scraping, penurious, needy. Augur. Augurie. Learned, knowing, foretelling, sooth-saying, auspicious, luckie, unluckie, happie, divine, lying, presaging, fore-seeing, foreknowing, fatal, jugling, cunning. Auster. v. Wind. Moyst, cold, clowdie, raging, furious, uncertain, deceitful, im∣petuous, swift, speedy, dull, strong, rainie, showrie, watrie, swel∣tring, soultry, remorselesse, black boysterous, cruel, noxious, grim, tempestuous, blasting.
Autumn. Wine-pressing, grapie, morst, teeming, aguish, wealthy, lux∣uriant, unhealthy, diseaseful, feavourish, bare, naked, durty, tree-stripping, maturer, sober, yellow, abundant, fruitful, gray, ripe, sun-burnt, mellow, hoary. Aw. Obsequious, humble, obdient, respectful, respective, strn, reverential, princely, grim, majestick, grave, fearful, cowng, re∣verent, restraining, bridling, servile, slvish. Awle. Long, pointed, sharp, industrious, searching, handled, work∣ing. Axe. Sharp, heavie, bloodie, blood-hirsty, edged, sacrificing, heaved, wounding, rigid, dreadful, avenging Ayd. Succouring, propitious, helpful, friendly, comforting, success∣ful, timely, charitable, auspicious, supplying. B. Babe. SUcking, smiling, whining, harmelesse, simple, soft, toyish, gamesome, pettish, sportive, puling, unpractised, touchie, sillie, blooming, crying, tender, easie, credulous, foolish, young, an∣gry, waspish, plump, fleshie, weak, nesh, fumbling, prating, stam∣mering, swathed, cradled, go-by-ground, soon-pleased, soon-per∣swaded, puppit-dandling, imitating, apish, twatling. Babylon. Ancient, proud, wealthie, spatious, rich, populous, Aegyptian. Bacchus. Frolick, thrice-bearing, Theban, martial, thigh-borne, re∣freshng, cheering, drunken, merry, esteminate, warlick, wine∣pressing, Jonian, horned, vine-dressing, ox-eyed, furious, raving, raging, ivie-crowned, Hymenean, care-killing, revengeful, disso∣lute, childish, plump, blyth, buxome, gamesome, sportive, toyish, babling, apish, sottish, silenian, Semelean, youthful, Indian, free, valiant, grape-crowned, chu-cheekt, twice∣borne, adventurous, wanton, sacred, generous, goatish, Maeonian, Thyonean, Bassardian, shamelesse, immodst,
fair-hair'd, bright-hair'd, faire-cest, fire borne, feastful, roseat, beardlesse, smooth chind, frothie, lightsome, delicious, briske, stammering, reeling, spungie, twatling. Baies. Fresh, immortal, triumphant, victorious, glorious, Phaebean, Prnassian, crackling, sacred, chast, virgineous, maiden, broad-leav'd, green-leav'd, peaceful, crowning, shadie, leavie, soft, moist, verdant, prophecying, learned, tufted, storm-contemning, Baite. Calling, luring, provoking, training, treacherous, syre∣nian, inveagling, pleasing, wooing, courting, licorish, deadly, mortal, drawing, attractive, pasted, taking, enticing, traytorous, alluring, honeyed, deceitful, lovely, soothing, flatering, inviting, sweet, wary, cheating, false wanton, soft, cozening. Baldnesse. Smooth, thin-haired, slick, aged, naked. Ball. Round, light, sportive, gamesome, bandied, Balme. Esterne, odourous, sweating, ambrosial, delicious, muskie, ro∣seate, astringent, pretious, genial, fragrant, breathing, aromatick, spicie. Banishment. Sad, cold, detested, abhorred, loathed, uncomfortable, hard, wo∣ful, wretched, bitter, wandrng, unhappy, ignominious. Bankes. Flowrie, shadie, lilly-paved, sedgie, hollow, winding, spongie, reed-crowned, traytorous, pregnant, frothy, foaming, sandie, shelving, thirsty, sucking, verdant, herbie, craggie, grassie, hem∣ming, mossie, fringing, river-edging. Banner. v. Ensignes. Waving, royal, streaming, martial, threatning, flowing, rufling, whistling. Banquet. Feastful, costly, delicious, ambrosian, gladsome, sumtuous, mirthful, buxome, frolick, ioyous, luxurious, sweet, pleasant, genial, voluptuous, fat, full-rabled, high-feeding, nectarean, mer∣ry, royal, superfluous. Barbary. Superstitious, savage, cruel, brutish, inhumane, bloodie. Barke. Rugged, wrapping, imbracing, knottie, porous, casing, cloath∣ing,
tender, withered, wrinkled, hollow, pimpled, rifty, stiffe, ray, aged, weather-beaten. Bark. v. Ship. Barking. Shrill, frothie, foaming, balling, rayling, dreadful, hideous, grinning, yawling, howling, hoarse, yelling, frantick, furious. Bat. Ambiguous, neutral, melancholy, night-flying, whistling, low∣flying, twilight, limber-winged, milkie. Bath. Hot, cherishing, wholsome, cleansing, sweating, refreshing, healthy. Battell. Furious, bloody, blood-thirstie, cruel, warlick, slaughtering, dreadful, murthering, thundering, deadly, dangerous, adventu∣rous, impetuous, outragious, doubtful, unhappy, fierce, hot, an∣gry, rugged, dreary, surly, strifeful, smoakie, tumultuous, blood-sucking, stormy, devouring, rustling, distresseful, sullen, gloomie, rageful, pernicious, blood-flowing, feral, mournful, sad, dis∣quiet. Bawde. Immodest, impudent, shamelesse, enticing, alluring, training, youth-corrupting, old, drunken, infamous, bibbing, loathsome, painted, lustful, gratish, rampant, brutish, beastly, itchie, ram∣mish, pockie, lascivious, obscene, leprous, strumpetting, brocheld, withered, writheld, trecherous, odious, twatling, lying, slie, cun∣ning. Beagle. Yelping, quick-nosed, ranging, well-sented, hungry, greedie, swift, speedie, pursuing, chasing, eager. Beake. Crooked, hookie, wounding, piercing, filching, pilfering, chat∣tering, sharpe, hornie, pointed, pecking. Beams. Glowing, disheveled, majestick, bristling, scattered, garish, gau∣die, dzeling, flaring, radiant, piercing, chearful, golden, life-in∣fusing, bright, beauteous, transpiercing, sparkling, conquering, victorious, thirstie, parching, scorching, burning, flamie, supping, licking, exalted, instructive, thawing, melting, dissolving, uncer∣tain, enlightned, waving, glistering, clear, painted, shining, glir∣tering, subtle, limber, wandering, guilded, deying, tavelled, jag∣ged, dispersed, chearing, blushing, streaming.
Bean. Hard, windie, flatuous, black-pated, codded, husked, hulled, pale, spotted. Beard. Bushie, bristly, needle-pointed, dagger, spade, trim, spruce, nea, grave, twirled, forked, growing, hoarie, twisted. Beare. Pannonian, pawing, ruthless, salvage, rugged, Russian, rave, nous, devouring, shaggie, nasty, hoarse, Lybian Caledonian, haiie, cruell, bloody, deformed, ugly, Numidian, fierce. Eremanthian, dim-sighted, hungry, rough, drowsie, sleepy, lazie, thievish, preying, Arabian, gluttonous, mis-shapen, ranging, fierce, grim. Bear North-star. Cold, icie, bright, shining, sparkling, Northern, Parrhasian, free-Erymanthian, Menalian, chill, rugged, frosty, bleak, stormie. Bear, drink. Strong, muddy, headie, frothy, windy, flatuous, tipling, small, thin, weak, stinging. Beast. Surly, savage, cruel, ranging, wood-haunting, bloody, fierce; grimme, nasty, rough-haird, shaggie, ravenous, devouring, greedy, wandring. Beatitude. Coveted, desired, wisht, sublime, glorious, perfect, fresh, accom∣plisht, lovely, divine, triumphant, celestiall, downy, holy, loftie, high, angelicall, supream, immense, soft, unfathomed, unmeasured, flowry, verdant, joyfull, enamouring, endless, entrancing, ravishing, heavenly. Beautie. Smiling, Enamouring, perswasive, wooing, courting, taintless, untainted, spotless, unspotted, unsullied, clear, bright, shining, glit∣tering, lascivious, wanton, delicious, intermingled, radiant, beamie, sparkling, inflaming, attractive, entrancing, inchanting, charming, garish, gloring, fresh, chast, dazling, flaring, brittle, murdering, assayling, imperious, commanding, alluring, inticing, assayl∣ing, imperious, alluring, inticing, killing, unexampled, un∣patternd, unpararelld, blazing, winning, soul-invading, heart-wounding, prompting, unexpressive, bewitching, captivating, rose∣ate, piercing, glorious, divine, exquisite, celestiall, transparent, de∣cent, neat, spruce, trimme, comely, pleasing, magnetick, eye-delighting.
Bed. Easefull, peacefull, snorting, downy, refreshing, drowsie, sleepie, soft, lazie, idle; wanton, lascivious, sportive, gamesome, Geniall, ve∣reous, dallying, swelling, yielding, reposefull, quiet, silent, dark∣me, shrowding, burying, encurtain'd, garnish't, quilted, sociable, iendly, amorous, secret, fruitfull. Bee. Tugging, industrious, laborious, slowre-sucking, swift, honey-beaing, yellow, humming, burring, busie, thriving, hriftie, suck∣g, active, painfull, early, laden, flowre-robbing, profitable, hired, aw-housed, hie, blean, wanton, quick, nimble, tawnie, slender, refull, robbing, stealing, theeving, theevish, ingenious, witty, gilded, working, waxie, cleanly, spotted, powdered, pinked, greedy, sucking, stinging, preying, sedulous, Gecropian, Athenian, chast, anging, forraging, despoyling, sprightfull, fellonious, filching, pilfering, chymick. Beech. Goodly, spreading, branched, shadie, open, leavie, loftie, towring, aspiring, mast-bearing, tufted, thick growing. Beef. Salt, fresh, powdered, fat, lean, well-fed, lustie, fatning, strength∣ning. Beesom. Sweeping, cleansing, cleanly, twiggie, spriggie, bushie homely. Beetle. Blind, dull, sharded, black, buzzing. Beggar. Stragling, needie, starved, poor, cold, neglected, contemned, nastie, naked, lowsie, ragged, tattered, unclothed, penurious, craving, vile, un-regarded, dis-respected, scorned, flouted, jeered, whining, poore, caitiffe, wretched, lank-bellied, thin-gutted, ill ccoutred, slovenly, uncleanly, sordid, patched, clouted, botched, knavish, sturdie, lubberly, impudent, shameless, mangie, scabbie, itchie, scald-headed, scraping, scrap-gathering, bawling, torn, ro∣guish, budger-bearing, weeping, wailing, complaining, unbutto∣ned, unbraced, untrussed, gluttonous, hungry, greedy, devouring, heevish, filching, pilfering.
Belides. Cruel, savage, bloody, butchering, murthering, inhuman wicked, cursed, damned, unhappy. Bell. Sounding, tolling, rolling, ringing, warning, calling, ass¦bling, noyseful, speaking, tatling, twatling, talking, tinkling, waking. Bellie. Idle, lazie, craving, hungry, unthankful, hollow, soft, rou barking, plumpe, child-bearing, smooth, insatiate, rampant, ¦veting, greedie, gluttonous, windie, flatuous, fleshie, loose, ¦vouring, hanging, desiring, sensual, gourmandising, moist, cap¦cious. Bellowes. Breathful, puffing, whistling, panting, kindling, smoakie, fla engendring, hollow, windie, pursie, hoarse. swelling, whizzing. Bellowing. Loud, noyseful, rebounding, complaining, plaintful, mour¦ful, threatning, affrighting, bemoaning, ruful, loftie, sad, sumi smoakie, dreadful, redoubled, hoarse, resounding, cchoed. Bellona. Bloodie, cruel, implacable, furious, warlick, angrie, savage, shre fierce, remorselesse, murtherous, dreadful, martial, casked, crese rough. v. Mars. v. Warre. Benefit. Rich, liberal, free, large, ample, useful, fruitful, deserving, bliging, engaging, binding, enslaving, welcome, courteous, frie¦ly, timely, officious. Benevolence. Mutual, loving, free, friendly, ready, gratious, cordial, hear courteous, liberal, affable, gentle patient. Berrie. Juycie, purple, bloodie, swelling, plump, smiling, blushing. Bill. v. Beake. Bile. Swelling, inflamed, angry, smarting, painful, rotten, stinki¦king. Billow. v. Wave. Flitting, bustling, stormie, brinie, surgie, waving, slimie, foa trembling, churlish, dancing, tripping, panting, chiding, ang disquiet, wrathful, restlesse, crowding, thronging, posting, ha rising, suily, swelling, roaring, tumbling, rolling. v. Plura, W
Birch. White-rinde, tall, aspiring, loftie, strait, awing, dreadful, swing∣ing, mastering. Bird. Industrious, active, nimble, warme clad, nested, pearching, chattering, chirping, warbling, melodious, swift, downie, fea∣therd, tatling, pratling, wandring, stragling, winged, painted, sprightful, pecking, swimming, fearful, shril, recording, towring, Birdlime. Catching, shackling, entangling, ensnaring, clammie, sticking, olding, cleaving, imbracing, amorous, clasping, clinging, gluing, glutonous. Bishop. Sacred, venerable, aged, reverend, grave, sober, pious, learned, sage, prudent, discreet, holy, mitred, religious. Bit. Foamie, hated, curbing, restraing, ruling, stubborn, chasing, champed, taming, conquering, staying, bridling, pliant, slaverd, gingling. Bladder. Flatuous, puffed, windy, stinking, moist. Blade. Slicing, slashing, cutting, wounding, butchering, murthering, stabbing, piercing, sharpe, bloodie-pointed, keene, warlick, dread∣ful, victorious, thirstie, slaughtering, revengeful, reeking, goary, devouring, shining, glittering, biting, quartering. v. Sword. Blindnesse. Dark, dull, stumbling, fumbling, grosse, mistie, foggie, duskie, obscure, ignorant, erroneous. Blasphemie. Hellish, cursed, impious, ungodly, execrable, detested, out∣ragious, injurious, sacrilegious, horrible. Blessednesse. v. Beatitude. Blood. Lusty, reeking, crimson, wanton, dancing, sparkling, streaming, spinning, high, wrought, active, gushing, fluent, ruby, scarlet, pur∣ple, flushing, sporting, goary, sprightly, rising, damaske, frothie, hot, scalding, slowing, bubling, boyling, lavaltoing, capering, rolling. Bloome. Blossom. Bud. Virgin, maiden, verdant, vernal, springing, tender, infant, flow∣ry, early, sprouting, shooting, swelling, gaudie, painted, checkerd,
tufted, pregnant, spicie, fragrant, enamel'd, perfumed, smiling, hope∣full, silver, fresh, lively, diapred, short-lived, growing, spreadin soft, velvet, wind-kissed, pride-streaked. Blot. Sullying, infamous, disgracing, fowling, slovenly, nasty, disfig¦ring, deforming, speckling, freckling, durtie, filthie, spotting, sta∣ing, besmearing, defiling, soyling. Blue. Joyfull, lightsome, glittering, shning delightfull. Blush. Rosie, maiden, chast, virgin, shamefac't, modest, bashfull, betray∣ing, guilty, flushing, conscious, ruddy, purple, scarlet, carnatio vermillion, stammel, soft, fearfull, sanguine. Board. Greasie, feastfull, crowdd, groaning, dish-bearing, oppressed, free, liberall, mirthfull frollick, furnisht, voluptuous, delicious, sumptuous, costly, wealthy, hospitable, geniall, daintie, lickorish joyous, crowching, marshald, delicious, temperate, untemperate devouring, glutonous, exalted, advanced. Boar. Chafed, foaming, tusked, bristled, sylvan, stiffe-haird, salvage, incensed, yellow, sturdy, angry, sullen, furious, mast-loving, bloody, gnashing, impetuous, rooting, furrowing, nasty, filthy, threatning, fierce, cruel, rough, wounding. Boat. Crooked, swimming, passing, wave-cutting, hollow, open, hurry∣ing, flying, swift-pac't, trackless. Bodie. Frail, weak, imprisoning, diseasefull, fleshie, voluptuous, sensual, earthly, sinewy, solid, feeble, soul-burying, soul-entombing, rotten. Boldness. Audacious, shameless, immodest, fearless, undaunted, unadven∣turous, couragious, proud, impetuous, disdainfull, daring, brave, hardy, presumptuous, presuming, impudent, unblushing, blinde, dangerous, pernicious, endangering, endamaging, impudent, in∣solent, heady, rash, unadvised, unwise, unhappy, peremptory, sawcy. Bondage. Galling, groaning, pressing, oppressing, enslaving, restraining, heavie, crushing, bruising, wretched, constrained, odious, slavish, servile, rigorous, infamous, laborious, toylsome, hard, shame∣full,
burdenous, vile, miserable, detested, hated, abhorred, igno¦minious. Bone. Hard, ivory, solid, marrowie, hollow, pithie, firm, sharp, knotty, inclosed, flesh-cloathed, flesh-coated, hoary, white. Bone-fire. Joyfull, mirthfull, feastfull, frolick, applausive, flaming, night-enlightning, sparkling, sputtering, crackling. v. Fire. Book. Sudious, industrious, learned, instructive, tutoring, silent tu∣tors, elaborate, mute-schoolmaster, treasuries of Knowledge, dumb-scholars, ingenious, wittie, communicative, imparting, vo∣luminous. Boreas, v. Wind. Gray-beard, icie, bleak, chill, cold, stormy, pinching, blustering, cold-mouth, ruffian, Ice bearded, Thracian, Northern, freezing, cloud-scattering, cloud-shattering, rough Scythian, gloomie, rigid, Samaritan, snowie, piercing, raging, impetuous, loud, tempestuous cruel, insulting, boysterous, sweeping, air-clearing, air-brushing, earth-shaving. Bosome. Hollow, boyling, soft, pregnant, warm, amorous, tender, delici∣cious, open, enchearing, cherishing, ambrosian, snowy, roseat, mus∣ly, ivory, enchesting, secret, flowry, swelling, maiden, virgin, enticing, alluring, inveagling, delightful, enamouring. Bosphorus. v Wave. Tempest. Groaning, bellowing, Thracian, stormy. Bounty. v. Benefit. Benevolence. Bough. Pregnant, hanging, laden, shadie, ratling, leavie, dangling, load∣ed, combrous, blooming, arched, tufted, intwining, twisted, spread∣ing, verdant, extended, winding, sprouting, branched, knotted, wa∣ving, trembling, luxuriant fruitfull, writhed, stragling, crooked, spatious, budding, handing, bending, leaning, stooping, declining, prickly, displayed, inter-woven, fragrant, teeming. Bow. Arched, twanging, writhed, crooked, Turkish, Lycian, Parthian,
Scythian, bended, horned, stiffe, warlick, martial, stringed, m¦thering, killing, ivory, vaultie, threatning, iturean. Bowle. Cup. Frolick, feastful, chearing, flowing, swelling, crowned, chirpi Bowle. Gamesome, round, luckie, turning, running, mooving, s rolling, smooth, sliding. Bowels. v. Entrailes. Knotted, twisted, secret, winding, seeking, gloomie, smoaki trembling, fat, rumbling, hot, warme, breathing, soft, inwra¦ped, enclosed, enchested. Bowers. Delightful, pleasant, flowrie, shadie, leavie, fresh, tufted, se silent, sun-resisting. Boy. Gamesome, sportive, stirring, active, childish, foolish, silly, s∣ple, easie, toyish, credulous, soon-pleased, prating, saucie, apish. Braggar. Vaunting, lying, vainglorious, glorying, boasting, gallant, ∣poring, coyning, bravadoing. Bramble. Scratching, sharp-hookt, fruitlesse, idle, combrous, entangli prickly, briery, bushie, bristlie, biting, catching, holding, ro twisted, twining, tearing, rending. Braine. Pregnant, shallow, spungie, working, frothie, yestie, feeli active, inventive, contriving, plotting, plodding, pliant, minti coyning, discursive, nimble, roving, forging, active, teemi wandring, shaping. Branch. v. Bough. Brasse. Ringing, solid, resounding, cleare, shining, glittering, gli¦ring, yellow, noyseful, resplendan, gingling, hard, sparkl straw-coloured, corinthian, tinkling, Cyprian, flaming, lastin Brawling. Unquiet, noyseful, hot, surly, sullen, tumultuous. Bravery. Flaunting, gallant, gaudie, painted, pompous, portly, comp¦mental, fantastick, affected, gorgeous, courtly, glittering, glo¦ous, golden, sunnie, smiling, swelling, flashing, stately. Bread. Strengthening, nourishing, savorie, chipped, fatning, cr¦e,
crustie, life-susteyning. Breasts. Snowie, vry, soft, alabaster, uberous, fluent, sagging, tender, ressed, swelling, milkie, hanging, flagging, lolling, dimpled, inie, streaked, spicie, delicious, flowing, luxuriant, warme, oursing, azare, streaked. Breath. Ambrosian, muskie, osied, perfumed, aire-perfuming, spice, inking, strong, poysonous, blasting, foggie. Bribe. Underhanding, close-fist▪d, corrupting, law-perverting, ore∣waying, blinding, coveteous, injurious, unlawfu, guilty. Brick. Babylonian, Aegyptian, well-bk', hard-burnt, lasting, blush∣ing. Bride. Bridegroome. Blushing, mincing, spruce, trimme, neat, lovely, smiling, mo∣dest, stately, gauie, gay, spritly, bashful, maiden, expecting, bautious, comely, eyes-attracting. Bridle. Waving, curbing, restraining, taming, frothie, foamie, sawing, staying, rulng, conquering, slavered, champed, gingling. Brier. v. Bramble. Bridge. Ached, bridlng, damming, wave-rebounding, water∣ossing. Brightnesse. Sining, radiant, beaming, flaming, sunny, fiery, trembling, twinkling, glittering, glistering, illustrious, enlightned, lgh∣some, aire-guilding, resplendent, piercing, chearful, dazeling, ye-conquering, glorious. Brimstone. Sulphureous, fat, oylie, blue-flam'd, scalding, catching, stin∣king, smell-offending, choaking. Britains. Warlick, valiant, cold, northern, world-divided. Brooke. Murmuring, silver, snakie, sedgie, sable, bubling, rumbling, running, gurgling, whispering, sliding, gliding, rushie, silver-breasted, gushing, bank-dividing, christal, glassie, swelling, purling, winding, flowing, rumbling, rolling, rustling, grass-fringed,
moss-fringed, grass-margend, mosse-margend, trickling skipping, wanton, amorous, uxorious, bank-kissing, bank-licking stragling, wandering, pearly, weeping, wrigling, chiding, curle fleeting, floating, dancing, posting, sullen, silent, muttering smooth-sliding. Broom. v. eesome. Brow. Smooth, sleeke, majestick, ivory, bashful, white, arched, stately beauteous, comely, sparkling, vaulted, spatious, exalted, snowie, threatning, alabaster, furrowed, crumpled, puckered, frowning, lo∣ring, scowling, plaited, unplaited, discontented, surly, sullen, clow stormie, tempestuous, smiling, supercilious, clear, joyful, polish Bubble. Glassie, foamie, frothie, rising, swelling, shining, chrystal, bre∣king, gurgling, purling, silver, boyling, impostumed. Bucket. Thirstie, hollow, diving, drinking, swallowing Buckler. v. Shield. Bud. v. Bloome. Building. v. Tower. Bull Lusty, moody, raving, fallacious, lecherous, fuming, furiou sturdie, sullen, slow-pac', dewlapt, scowling, rough-browd, be¦lowing, brasse-hoov'd, bigge-bon'd, foaming, enraged, raving. Bullet. Way-enforcing, aire-rendng, murthering, thundering sodain, unexpected, varesisted, dead-striking, transpie∣cing, inevitable, unresisted, pernicious, killing, enflamed, fie irrevocable, unrecalled, impetuous. Bulrush. Muddie, straight, slender, picked, limber, smooth, unkno soft, most, round, fruitlesse, pithie, barren, thirstie, sucking, drin¦king, sharpe-pointed, drooping, sullen, lowring, fennie, mari spungie. Pulwark. Defensive, resisting, guarding, strong, advanced, raised, shi¦ding. Burthen. Heavie, pressing, weighty, loading, massie, groaning, unwield Bush. Entangling, shrubbie, humble, shadie, prickly, thornie, brier dark, branched, scactered, grovie.
Businesse. Active, stirring, industrious, laborious, disturbing, disquie∣ting, distracting, careful, tedious, working, urgent, pressing, weighty, pelting, Butcher. Greasie, bloody, slaughtering, mercilesse, pittilesse, cruel, rude, grim, harsh, sterne, sturdy, surly, burly, slcing, slashing, lent∣hating. Butterie. Jolly, frolick, carousing, quaffing, bibbing, tipling, drunken, swimming, frothie. Butter. Soft, melting, yellow, cleaving, bread-kissing, bread-thatching. Butterflie. Gaudie, painted, mealy, guilded, courtly, swift, trembling, checkered, diaperd, silly, simple. Buttock. Rud, plump, flshe, soft, quaking, trembling. C. Cabbidge. TUfred, coated, leavie, squeezed, crispie, curled, tender, lim∣ber, folding, pleated, swellnig. Cable. Writhed, twisted, binding, puchie. Cake. Turned, savoury, delicious, sugred, spicie, honeyed. Calamity. v. Misery. Calfe. Fat, tender, sportive, frisking, wanton, leaping, silly, suckling. Calme Peaceful, quiet, smooth, slumbering, sleeping, Halcyon, smooth∣fac't, smooth-cheekt, smiling, sleeke, sweet, pleasant, soft, repo∣sed; appeased, happy, sober, stayed, wavelesse, undisturbed. Calumnie. Biting, envious, black-mouth'd, malitious, wounding, false, detracting, defaming, injurious, subtle, crafty, wily, slie, base cunning, deceitful, forging, faining, coyning, devising, inven∣ting,
tale-telling, cogging, glozing, colloguing, jealous, suspiti∣ous, reproachful, unhallowed Camamel. Yellow, sweet-smelling, odotous, sun-loving, pain-easing. Camelion. Aire-fed, abstemious, temperate, changing, jugling. Camel. Bunchie, towre-backt, bunch-backt, rough, ugly, deformed, supple-kneed, kneeling, crowching. Campe. Armed, warlick, martial, noiseful, dreadful, clamorous, pike-bristled, thundring, military, swarming. Canker. Creeping, infecting, loathsome, eating, fretting, consuming, uncured, contagious. Candle. Shining, burning, enlightning, selfe-consuming, melting, white-coated, flaming, slnder, watchful, studious. Cannon. Thundering, thunder-mocking, fire-breathing, clamorous, noiseful, dreadful, stounding, sulphury, pernitious, murthering, flame-belching, wid-mouth'd, loud-voic't, mercilesse, resistlesse. Capon. Brawnie. Capricorne. Tropick, moist, cold, watry, fierce, showry, rough. Captain. Walick, valorous, couragious, valinant, well-kill'd, experi∣enc't, prudent, politick, engineering, martial, wise, discreeter, deliberate, commanding, impetious, armed, honoured. Captivity. v. Bondage. Sad, sorrowful, slavish, dolorous, insupportable, barbarous, ty∣rannous. Carbuncle. Flaming, sparkling, fiery, shining, glisteing, pearly, beamie, a∣diant, burning, blazing. Cardinal. Scarlet, purple, red-hatted, long-bearded, grave, pompous, generous, honoured, wealthy. Care. Blood-drinking, blood-consuming, biting, swarming, thought∣ful, perplexing, studious, buzzing, boyling, jealous, waking,
watchful, anxious, sollicitous, fretting, gauling, pressing, gin∣ding, cumbering, busie, weary, unquiet, disturbing, sullen, thor∣ny, stormie, flinging, obsequious, muddie, combrous, hoary-ha∣ded, griping, consuming, soul-killing, macerating, doubful, gnawing, painfull, droyling, murthering, cutting, heart-woun∣ding, pricking, wanish, pale-fac't, wrinkled. Carkasse. Soul-lesse, stinking, loathsome, offensive, infectious, contagi∣ous, putrid, dull, dead, unmoving, rotten, noysome, fulsome, nsty. Carthage. Ancient, rich, proud, wealthy, populous, well peopled, Dd∣nian, famous, powerful, warlick, Libian, aemulous, Rome-envy∣ing, Sidonian, perfidious. Cassia. Flowry, ruddy, yellow, spce, flaming. Castle v. Tower. Towred, fensive, lofty, stately, exalted, mosse-grown, walled. Cat. Melancholy, solitary, mouse-chasing, hunting, theeving, spot∣ted, brinded, furred. Cates. Nctrean, ambrosial, delicious, eie-glutting, feastful, costy, delightfull, sumpruus, luxurious, superfluous, pleasant, tast-wa∣ving, tastul, tast-contenting, desired, palat-pleasing. Caucasus. Craggy, rockie, ragged, inhospitable, rough, cold, frosty, fre∣zing, high-browd, vaultie, barren, unfrequented, burly, clffie, loy, to ring, cloud-kssing, ice, Scythian. Cave. Shady, pitchi, ollow, vulte, rockie, dark some, gloomy, fo∣saken, soiary, melncholy, uncouth, mossi, black, sad, unknown, silent, unfrquented, dark, desert, obscure, quet, recluse, musty, nasty, filthy, dreadful, dennie, deepe, noysome, doleful, crooked, loathsome, lonely, sullen, dankish, smoakie, ragged, blind, savage, yawning, ecchoing, theevish, fustie. Cauldron. Byig, seething, flaming, smoakie, burning, hollow, capaci∣ous, greasi. Cedar. Odorous, loftie, sappie, aged, tall, stately, strait, wind-laring, smooth, slck, mmortal, lasting, un-knotty.
Cell. Darksome, melancholy, cloudy-lowly, silent, private. Censure. Judging, carping, rigorous, biing, severe, sharp, harsh, super∣cilious, hard, peevish, pettish, grumbling, muttering, haughty, snarling, lashing, invective. Centaurie. Two-shap't, furious, proud, cruel, shaggie, hairy, cloud-born. Cerberus. Barking, stigian, devouring, dreadful, howling, yelling, ga∣ping, snakie, viperous, watchful, foaming, surly, snarling. Ceremonie. Religious, devour, laudable, antient, solemne, received, pom∣pous. Ceres. Law-giving, golder-haired, wealthy, golden-ared, ingenious, dusty, torch-bearing, sheafie, yellow. Cesar. Victorious, couragious, undaunted, unconqered, warlick, am∣bitious, triumphant, dreadful, proud, attemptive, daring. Chaffe. Light, scattered, wind-driven, dispersed, useless, empty, fruit∣lesse. Chain. Binding, shakling, knottie, linkie, twisted, adamantine, ratling, dangling. Chaos. Disordered, dark, formeless, dull, ugly, empty, hideous, rude, desolate, blind, shpeless, undigested, confused, aged, black, old, Cimerian, obscure, gulphie, blended. Chaps. v. Jawes. Chaplet. v. Garland. Verdant, enamelled, diapred, flowrie, checkerd, enterlacd, le∣vie, fragrant, roseat, triumphant. Chariot. Rosie, lofty, gorgeous, ratling, hurrying, wheeling, swift, spee∣die, triumphant, painted, pompous. Charmes. v. Magick. Powerful, inchanting, magick, Thessalian, mystick, muttered, mumbled, perplexing, hellish, imperious, commanding, learned, superstitious, exercising, potent, binding, forcing, ceremoneous, mysterious.
Charity. Pious, melting, pittying, compassionate, refreshing, hearty, cor∣dial, Christian, holy, sacred, devout, reliving, heaven-ng∣ging. Charon. Stygian, inexorable, grim, sulln, surly, sad, coveteous, unre∣lenting, frowning, lowring, scowling, old, pale. Chastity. Spotles, cold, fruitless, unstained, lilly, snowie, untainted, un∣sullied, maiden, virgin, blameless, fime, uncorrupted, unrepr∣ved, unmooved, constant, white, pale, strict, stait-lac'd, vestal, fresh, holy, pious, untouched, impregnable. Chear. v. Cates. Cheater. Cogging, cunning, crafty, wily, subtle, slie, bold, deceitful, faw∣ning, flattering, fraudulent, shameless, abusive, injurious, slp∣string. Cheeke. Rosie, silken, bashful, roseate, smiling, lovely, deliciou, temp∣ting, blushing, soft, smooth, plump, gentle-swelling, purple, beau∣teous, ambrosian. Cheese. Digestive, concocting, feast-closing, milkie, fresh, fat, old, molde, hard. Cherrie. Blushing, plump, soft, tender, coral, vermillion, delicious, pleasant, lushious. Cherubin. Smooth fac', smooth-heekt, rosie-lipt, beauteous, winged, glo∣rious, celestial, joy-ravish; silver-winged, golden-plumd, helmed. Chevalrie. Active, couragious, adventurous, warlick, renowned, glorious, achieving. Child. Officious, obedient, gamesome, sportive, tender, pliant, wan∣ton, soon-perswaded, cedulou, apish, oyish. Childhood. v. Infancie. Chimney. Smoakie, sooty, grimie, tall, strait, black. Chinke. Gaping, yawning, cranied, hollow, divided, parted, clea∣ving.
Chinne. Dimpled, wagging, naked, well-thacht, hairie, slaver'd, hang∣ing, stubble, bushie, bonie. Choler. v. Anger. Chafing, foaming, haughty, testie, touchie, waspish, disdainful, revengeful, boyling, devouing, inflamed, incensed, yellow, passi∣onate, flaming, sodain, pale, angry, unsociable, unfriendly. Chronicles. Ancient, memorable, old, aged, faithful, recording, historious, studious, long-breathed, long-lived, immortal, lasting, never∣ending, eternal. Chrystall. Shining, transparent, clear, bright, glassie, smooth, sleeke, icie, slpperie, cold, azure, polisht, glistering, snowie. Chrysolite. Wise, sparkling, radiant, golden, beaming. Chymick. Industrious, ingenious, sweating, laborious, active, inventive, contriving, smoakie, subtle, naure-devesting. Cicero. Famous, eloquent, ambitious, wel-tongued, fine-spoken, per∣swasive, sweet-ongued, smooth, quaint, witty. Cindars▪ Black, ashie, dead, cold, scattered, warme, smutchie, sootie, dy∣ing, sparkling. Circe. Charmng, tempting, enchanting, decitful, transfoming. Citie. Noble, wealthy, rich, throng, populous, full, courtly, near, complemental, many-peopled. Clay. Moist, laborious, fat, clammie, compacted, glutinous, pliant, pliable, stcking, daubing, yeilding, crumbling, moldering, weak. Claw. Hookie, crooked, griping, swooping, scratching▪ theevish, tor∣turing, seising, pouncing, tending, rearing, sharpe, gredy, catching, stffe, wounding. Client. Thredbare, humble, submssive, crowching, suppliant. Cliffe. v. Rock. Ragged, solid, vaulty, yawning, craggie, uncouth, unfrequented, horned, beetling, hanging.
Cloud. Winged, floating, mourning, wandering, hovering, pitchi, hang∣g, spongy, weeping, threatning, gloomy, dusky, foggy, yellow, uffling, ambling, envious, drooping, full, dull, thick, stooping, wring, mounting, aspiring, clusterd, frowning, lowring, swarthish, athering, drowsie, scattered, dropsie, waving, sweltring, moving, under-crashing, flitting, goutie, sweating, moist, watey, ayery, andering, melting, drunken, slumbering, sleepy, crisped, curled, bscuring, darkning, contagious, smothering, strangling, vapoury, moaky, sullen, lofty, black, swarthy, Negro, rolling, dark, jea∣ous, thicke-swollen, swelling, bigge-bellied, mistie, stormy, ety, stifling, chaced, justling, Eclipsing, assembling, smouldring, regnant, sayling, hollow. Clown. Swarthy, rude, sweaty, toyling, sallow, hide-bound, lowtish, bar∣arous, game-some, gleesome, sportive, laborious, industrious, ome-bred, unfashioned, russet, unconceiving, uncurious, un∣comb'd, greazy, sawcy, slovenly, frolick, whistling, mirthfull, piping, ullen, blithe, lusty, robustious, brutish, rough, untuto'rd, rustick, ru∣all, wild, unlearned, simple, unletrerd, unletterd, filly, uncivill. Club. Murdering, cruell, knotty, knocking-striking, heavy, breaking, bruising. Clusters. Gallant, thronged, crowding, sprouting, swelling, full, budding, piled, grainy, juicie, purple, delicious, plump, blushing, hanging, compacted, heapy, dewie. Coach. v. Chariot. Coal. Glowing, sputtering, burning, flaming, crackling, sparkling, moakie. Cock. Early, crested, bristling, watchful, solacious, lecherous, spurred, med, jealous, day-presaging, day-proclaiming, watchfull, bloo∣dy, shrill, war-lick, gaming, generous. Cockle. Kissing, curled, crispy, creeping, close, embracing. Cocytus. v. Acheron. Black, Stygian, dull, dark, shady, groaning, devouring, faint, gloomy, duskie, fulsome. Coffin. Stinking, fulsome, loathsome, rotten, interred, black, mourning, vaulty, musty, fusty, moldy.
Cold. Rough, sharp, biting, piercing, duskie, gloomie, icie, chatteri freezing, dull, lazie, sleepie, drowsie, whisking, lashing, jeking, sl¦gish, snottie, barren, earth-locking, con-tracting, congealing, ang¦stormy, raw, cruel, stiffning, unactive, incroaching, astringent, b¦numming, nipping, pinching, chilling, bleak, blasting, Irksom, hi¦ous, rugged, sap-consuming. Collick. Wringing, pinching, vexing, nipping, painfull, tormenting, w¦die, flatuous, cutting, dolorous, twitching, girding, griping. Combe. Toothed, ivorie, biting, neat, adorning, dressing, hai-plaini Combate. v. Battell. Furious, martial, bickering, brabling, couragious, bloody, dou¦full, dangerous, generous, debating, strife-full, contentious, ¦friendly, blood-thirstie. Comet. Hairie, stern, dreadful, vagrant, curled, grimme, curld-head, c¦py, state-changing, ruine-portending, sad, threatning, slami streaming, portentuous, bright-haird, presaging, shag'd, disasto prodigious, bearded, waving, gazing, fierc, ruddy, fatal, blood bristled, ominous, ill-boding, unluckie. Comfort. Cordial, growing, pleasing, soft, welcome, chearing, friendly, ge¦tious, propitious. Compassion. Melting, relenting, soft, calm, tender, feeling, piteous, tend hearted. Complaint. Puling, soft, whining, just, piteous, sighing, sd, womanish, am¦rous, passionate, mournfull, bitter, groaning, deep, male-conte querulous, bawling, wayling, weeping, hoarse, powting. Complement. Unappertaining, unconcerning, needless, vain, fruitless, ceremo¦nious, apish, curious, courtly. Concord. v. Accord. Concupiscence. Sensuall, voluptuous, egging, prompting, spurring, tempting. Conduit. Flowing, conveying; gushing; gurgling. Confidence. Bold; couragious; audacious; advedturous; during; presumi
presumptuous, setled, perswaded, aspiring, easie. Confusion. ild, vast, shapeless, hideous, deformed, ugly, rude. Conquerour. aliant, valorous, couragious, hardie, martiall, generous, no∣enowned, famous, imperious, commanding, victorious, crown-aureld, insulting, glorious, triumphant, laureat. Conquest. lorious, brave, famous, bright, triumphant, victorious, wealthie, eat, crowned, white-silver, winged. Conscience. Strict, impartial, unbribed, arresting, tormenting, guilty, know∣, secret, silent, accusing, torturing. Constancy. Unremoved, resolved, stedfast, persistive, unshrinking, unshaken, red, persevering, stayed, setled. Contagion. Spreading, infectious, deadly, catching, poysonous. Content Rich, sweet, perfect, happy, blessed, pleasan, heavenly, wished, ired, compleat. Contention. Jarring, wrangling, harsh, snakie, bloodie, strifefull, jangling. Corall. Blushing, vermillion, stammel, scarlet, red-brancht, streaked, anched, tuddey, leaf-less. Cork. Light, swimming, spungie, porous, floating, hollow. Corn. Bearded, bladed, yellow, nourishing, fruitfull, full-ered, tender, nke. Corrosive. Biting, smarting, eating, burning, fretting. Cottage. Lowly, private, humble, silent, patcht, ragged, turfie, cold, shat∣ered, contry, naked. Cough. Slavery, spitting, spawling, cold, dy, harsh, belching. Countenance. Handsome, gracefull, lovely, modest, disdainfull, setled, shaped, hanging, joyfull, beauteous, smiling, pleasing, winning, wooing, arkling, attractive, grimme, stern, grave, severe, frowning, low∣ring,
sad, mournfull, chearfull, ligh some, threatfull, supercili blushing, carefull, sowre, dissembling, murdering, killing, stabb powting, affected, disguised. Countrie Clownish, flowry, grassie, fruitfull, merry, spatious, open, wo down-right, plain-dealing, honest, free-hearted. Courage. v. Valour. Daring, valiant, valorous, adventurou, presumptuous, att¦tive, audacious, undaunted, untamed, unquelled, stour, mascul constant, unmovd, unshaken, bold, proud, noble, free, active, M¦jestick, undejected, manly, haughty, heroick. Course. Speedy, hasty, winged, unbridled, careering, impetuous, post sweaty, breathless, sweeping, industrious, laborious. Courser. v. Horse. Curvetting, prancing, nimble, stirring, panting, high-boundi spur-obeying, stamping, foamy, trapped, speedy. Court. Complementall, glittering, pompous, costly, expensive, lasc∣ous, wanton, sportive, envious, smooth, royall, proud, glorio gaudy. Courtier. Avaritious, soft, smooth, oyly, sleek, near, polisht, spruce, comp¦mentall, well-tongued, fair-spoken, silk-worm, affected, fantastic rustling, stalking, sprightly, dapper, flaunting, glittering, nimb starcht, accomplisht, fine-sattin, gay, gaudy, painted, wealthy, ¦ceitfull, perjur'd, stickling, indebted, dpper, brisk, pert, silk smooth-fac'd. Cow. Lowing, milkie, fruitfull, usefull, straggeling, straying, wa¦dering, uberous. Coward. Pale, fearfull, dull, un-active, un-manly, crest-fallen, heart-les white-livered, cold, base, ignominious, yielding, crouching, leaden hearted, winking, cruel, desperate, vaunting, sneaking, flinching. Coyness. Dissembling, squeamish, pettish, pievish, froward, slighting scorning, contemptuous, sowre, bitter, easie, churlish, uncivill, proud, disdainfull, angry, tempting, perswading, wooeing, waywar, untoward. Crab-star. Hot, flaming, crooked, burning, scorching, scalding, broyling showry.
Crab-fish. Slow-pac't, dull, lazie, lither, pawing, lumpish, sleepy, wadling, ayward, crawling, sprawling. Cradle. Rocking, sleepy, peacefull, tottering, shaking, moving, drowsie, lie, warm. Craft. Cunning, fly, cheating, deceitfull, beguiling, wily, wary, jugling, gging, subtle, injurious, witty, ingenious, artificiall, secret, under∣orking, undermining, politick, devicefull, silent, double-tongues, inding, doubling, plotting, inveagling, circumventing. Cramp. Pulling, painfull, torturing, wringing, pinching, nipping, vexing, ormenting, girding, twitching. Crane. Srimonian, Thracian, soaring, mounting, towring, high-flying, hattering, warlike, watchfull, ravenous, long-neckt. Credulitie. Easie, silly, Simple, unwise, foolish, soft, indiscreet, weake, fond, ignorant. Crest. Plumed, lofty, glittering, nodding, waving, advanced, gaudie, proud, braving, radiant, flancing, glistering, jagged, brestly, staring, dreadfull: Crime. Blushless, black, haynous, odious, detested, guilty, infamous, capi∣tall, suspicious, pale, conscience-tearing, light-fearing, mischievous, unhappy, unexcusable, audacious, enormous. Critick. Snarling, supercilious, biting, lashing, captious, censorious, carp∣ing, exceptious, invective, wise, capricious, curious, exact, accurate, judging, rigorous, sharp, sharp tooth'd, severe, pettish, pievish, sponge-using, flouting, gibing, quipping, jeering, girding, rigid, snappish, grinning. Cry. Confused, yelling, noisefull, hideous, amazing, bustling, clame∣rous, aire-rending, tumultuous, rumbling, yawling, re-sounding, re-bounding, re-ecchoing, redoubled, howling. Crocodile. devouring, wily, banefull, deceitfull, noysome, weeping, Aegyp∣tian, deadly.
Crop. Wealthy, rich, hopefull, hope-answering, thankfull, fruitfull, ¦ful, gainfull. Cross. Hard, painfull, cruell, unhappy, afflicting, oppressing, bitter, ¦cred, victorious. Crow. Predictious, presaging, jetty, sable, hoarse, hungry, devourin prating, twatling, carrion, jangling, chattering, unluck, lo▪liv'd, shower-divining, thirstie, barking. Crown. Imperiall, Pearl-enchased, dazling, triumphant, victorio flowry, enameled, enterlaced, noble, guilded, royall, Princely, pe¦ly, honoured, adored, commanding, radiant, beamy, glittering, ¦ning, majestick, awfull. Cruelty. Barbarous, brutish, Scythian, marble-hearted, slintie, fli▪hearted, savage, wolvish, inhumane, odious, abhorred, detested, ¦thed, remorseless, raging, dogged, enraged, incensed, bloody, pro blood-thirsty, grimme, stern, haughtie, murdering, fleshie, dre¦full, devouring, awfull, frowning, rigid. Cuckold. Horned, cornuted, scorned, jealous, loving, simple, patient, ¦ting, conniving, contented. Cuckow, Plain-song, gray, scabbie, harsh, unpleasant, stammering, ¦tering. Cupid v. Love. Idalion, Paphian, wanton, lascivious, winged, feathered, slippe envious, jealous, swift, joyous, gamesome, sportive, Citherean, i¦constant, deceitfull, false, lying, imperious, blind, ambitious, pi¦less, bold, audacious, venerous, killing, wandering, ticklish, ¦morous. Cur. v. Dog. Snarling, barking, bawling, ravenous, angry, pievish, ch¦lish, sullen. Curiositie. Nice, studious, affected, womansh, carefull, vain, silly, fuitle idle, dainty, neat, quaint. Curle. v. Hair. Neat, crispy, shining, twisted, pleated, knotty, snake, braice dangling, sleavy, silken, scatterd, flowing, ruffled, art-less, flri
uncomposed, gracefull, waving, beauteous, frizled. Curse. Hellish, dire, banefull, impous, blasphemous, execrable, hate∣full, heavy, damned, revengefull, mischievous, vilanous, miscreant, winged. Custome. Received, aged, imperious, commanding, tyrannous, observed, laudable, commendable, ancient, long, honoured, reverent, fre∣quent, common. Cyclops. Sooty, grimy, sweaty, smoaky, one-eyed, hideous, strong, robu∣stious, massie, dreadfull, proud, fierce, labouring, industrious, rude, clownish, uncivill, lowtish, stern, grimme, old, bloody. Cymbals. Tinkling, ratling, noysefull, Berecynthian, Cybelian, joyfull, loud, mirthfull, sacred, hollow, brazen, sounding, hoarse, shining. Cynnamon. Odorous, fragrant, spicy, verdant, Pangnan, Indian, spriggie. Cynick. Snarling, currish, snapping, captious, biting, grinning, barking, brawling, bawling, carping, sharp, fanged, sharp-tooth'd, tongue∣lashing, quipping, girding, jeering, flouting, rigid, tart, sharp, smart, jerking, churlish, sullen, snappish. Cypress. Tall, strait-growing, fatall dismall, mournfull, sable, sad, verdant, lasting, weeping, smooth, lofty, towring, mounting, aspiring, odo∣rous, funereous, pensive. D. Daffadill. TAwny, guilt-bowly, purple, gaping, open, smiling, vernall. Dagger. Short, stabbing, murdering, desperate, sharp-pointed, bloody, secret, poynant, silent, stealing. Daisie. Tufted, studded, golden, vernall, smiling, sunny. Dale. Flowry, humble, lowly, delightfull, fruitfull, pleasant, sweet-cloaths,
motly, gaudy, smiling, tufted, enameld, chequer'd, gree-plusht, spotive, painted, grassie, shadie, ecchoing, resounding, re¦bounding, fragrant. Dance. Gracefull, courtly, skilfull, enamouring, wanton, sportive, a¦tractive, active, flowing, swimming, nimble, tripping, measur' well-ordered, moving, lascivious, modest, well-timed, amorous pleasing, winning. Danger. Sad, dreadfull, unavoyded, certain, doubtfull, unhappy, bitte, pensive, pressing. Darkness. v. Night. Rusty, gloomy, sullen, sooty, sad, pensive, jetty, pitchy, neg, cloudie, duskie, Aegyptian, Cymerian, sable, Ebon, dull, siln, blind, collied, swarthy, grimme, smoaky, ugly, shpeless, deformed, stumbling, shady, obscuring, sleepy, drowsie, peacefull, confused deceitfull, dull, lither, lzy, hideous, still, quiet, unactive. Darnell. Black, barren, hurtfull, choaking, over-topping, unlucky, domi¦neering, sleepy, drowsie, injurious, harmfull, bitter, eye-offending Dart. v. Arrow. Thrilling, pointed, poynant, singing, trembling, flying, flutter¦ing, quivering, whirling, wounding, poysoned, killing, winged. Daw. Pratling, twatling, noysefull, winter-presageing, thievish, pra¦ting, stealing. Dawn. v. Morn. Early, blushing, purple, spicy, rosie, dewie, rosie-fingerd, weep¦ing, pearly, gray-cheekt. Day. Winged, busie, active, lightsome, gladsome, chearfull, laborous, industrious, rght, clear, carefull, shining, beamy, enlightned, s¦ding, joyfull, posting, succeeding, sunny, rosie, purple, ambrosiaa, peering, increasing. Death. v. Destinie. Pale, wan, sable, impartiall, imperious, all-commanding, chi∣ling, cold, tyrann zing, domineering, over-ruling, all-controulling, uncontrouled, inexorable, exacting, invading, encroaching, rest∣full, quiet, silent, peacefull, unresisted, unrelenting, remorseless, hideous, yawning, ingrossing, grasping, lean, dustie, meager, bare¦ribd, flint-hearted, cruell, grimme, stern awfull, frowning, devour∣ing, ravenous, rigorous, rigid, nasty, fulsome, unwelcome, unexpe∣cted,
covetous, insatiate, abhorred, detested, loathed, loathesome, noysome, blood-thirsty, hasty, trembling, ugly, deformed, groa∣ning, timely, untimely, surprizing, arresting, envious, unbribed, implacable, unperswaded, disdainful, uncivil, proud, scornful, dis∣respective, regardlesse, carelesse, audacious, fearlesse, adventurous, saucie, unmannerly, presumptuous, ambitious, gluttonous, deaf, stifling, smothering, choking, injurious, dreadful, bitter, felonious, importunate, glorious, disgraceful, ignominious, shameful, ruthlesse, resistlesse, victorious, triumphant. Death-bed. Cold, pale, quivering, bleake, leane, meager, trembling, groa∣ning, gasping, yawning, sad, pensive Deceit. v. Craft, December. v. Cold. Fostie, cold, icie, snowie, lither, lazie, drowsie, dull, lumpish, sad, frlck, jolly, mirthful, feastful, drunken, hoary, nipping, pinch∣ing, gamesome, joyous. Deep. v. Sea. Vasty, devouring, unfathomed, unsounded, boyling, swelling, working, floating, angry, aged, wealthy, shelfie, tumbling, stor∣my, ruffld, fretting, rugged, insatiate, gulphy, swallowing, curled, surgie, remorseless. Delay. Lingring, tedious, comfortless, dull, weary, sad, pensive, slow, snail-pac't, tardy, laze, cold, freezing, dronish, needlesse, fruitlesse, vain. Delicates. v. Cates. Delight. Free, soft, dear, melting, sportive, wanton, effeminate, sensual, voluptuous, fleshly, carnal, enamouing, dallying, dandling, exta∣syde, joyous, intrancing, lavish, raping, loose, fresh, choice, temp∣ting, pleasant, gay, chearing, luxurious, riotous, superfluous, royal, desired, tickling, gaudy, courtly, princely. Den. v. Cave. Gloomie, vaultie, crooked, loathsome, nasty, noysome, fulsome, musty, fusty, dusty, moldy, rockie, doleful, melancholy, hollow, darksome, mossie, uncouth, sullen, pensive, lonely, theevish, Deere. Browsing, feeding, goodly, fearful, tripping, light-foot. Desart, Devious, wild, wide, vast, savage, uncouth, melancholy, sad,
silent, unfrequented, sandy, dreaful, sullen, shadowie, gloomie, rockie, hory, rough, pathlesse, shrubbie, bushie, unpeopled, unfruitful, b∣ren, inhospitable, scorched, dangerous. Desire. Unstified, uncontroled, uncurb'd, disordinate, irregular, invin∣cible, wiged, untamed, covetous, insatiate, ardent, passionate, am∣bitious, flaming, hot, sottish, sollicitous, unfathomed, deep, unmea∣sured, unlimited, unconfined, burning, blind, careful, amorous, un∣speakable, unexpressible, longing. Despaire. Sad, pensive, sorrowful, heavie, dull, cold, pale, comfortlesse, lzie, hellish, damned, faithlesse, hopelesse, snakie, dark, grim, sterne, lean, meage, sullen, enginous, plotting, sighing, groaning, weep¦ing, mournful, chill, low. Destiny. Changelesse, ruthlesse, remorselesse, unrelenting, unbribed, inex¦orabl, imperious, commanding, unchanged, unaltered, resistlesse victorious, triumphing, adamantine, unconquered, compelling, fixe eternal, everlasting, enforcing, fatal, uncontrolled, impartil, y¦rannizing, domineering, over-ruling, all-controlling, exactin unresisted, unprevented, surprizing, arresting, importuning, almig¦ty, inevitable, unavoyded, blind, secret, silent, unmooved, seve inclining, deaf, inflexible. Detraction. Envious, foul-mouth'd, calumnious, biting, crafty, black-mouth' malicious, injurious, subtle, slie, base, vile, forging, glozing, co¦ging, jalous, envious, babling, twatling. Device. Queint, choyce, fabulous, pleasant, painted. Devil. Subtle, tempestuous, pernicious, hideous, unclean, lying, decei¦ful, mischievous, tempting, vigilant, industrious, craftie, malitio dceiving, vilainous, enchanting, devouring, infernal, seduci fraudulent, calumniaing, cursed, damned, tormented, hurryin malignant, rebllious, wilie, snakie. Devotion, Holy, sacred, religious, quick, fervent, pious, affectionate, suppl¦ant, humble, solemn, profound, reverent, gracious. Dew. Trickling, pearly, honey-dropping, chrystal, rosie, ambrosial, ¦freshing, vegetating, early, balmie, melting, coole, morning, nig¦ly, dropping, showrie, glassie, fruitful, enlivening, flower-courtin
kissing, vanishing, short-lived, weeping, fresh, ambrosial, nectare∣ous, sprinkling, scatered. Diamond. Shining, sparkling, Indian, bright, lasting, pointed, glasse-cutting, obduring, hard, solid, unconquered, eternal. Diadem. v. Crown. Dice. Cheating, cogging, gamesome, deceitful, uncertain. Dido. Unhappy, bloody, pensive, despairing, weeping, Carthaginian, Si∣donian, Tyrian-Quer, sad, fair, beauteous, sorrowful. Dirt. Miry, slimy, muddy, filthy, nasty, loathsome, fulsome, putrid, rot∣ten, sordid, stinking, dagling. Discord. Hell-nourish't, sterne, jrring, harsh, snakie, unsociable, unfriendly, hateful, seditious, quarrelsome, uinous, pernicious, mortal, tumul∣tuous, furious, liigious, inhumane, pittylesse, merciless, bloodie, an∣gry, grumbling, war-breeding, dissentious, blood-thirsty. Disdain. v. Scorne. Proud, contemptuous, malevolous, arrogant, sober, scorneful, unkind, chast, coy, high, wry-mouth'd, insolent, sowre-eyed, pettish, peevish, brave, churlish, haughty, swelling, portly, surly, burly, squint∣eyed, currish. Discretion. Wise, sage, prudent, mature, advised, reposed, grave, modest, tem∣pered, sound, staid, sober. Disease. v. Malidy. Dull, contagious, infectious, languishing, sterne, piig, pale grievous, torturing, vexing, incurable, pettish, peevish, angry, f∣al, painful, fretting, griping, twitching, girding, sad, pinching, ipping, pulling, cutting, pressing, wringing, gauling, doleful, itter, gnawing, racking, smarting, lingring, noysome, loath∣some, filthy, fulsome, nasty, cruel, impatient, trembling, raging, plaintful, querulous, whining, puling, wasting, eating, drying, ucking, tedious. Dissobedience. Rebellious, mutinous, unruly, proud, tumultuous, seditious, sau∣y, impudent, shamelesse, daring, bold, audacious, gracelesse, unseem∣y, unfitting, uncomely, unbecoming. Disorder. Confused, tumultuous, irregular,
Doctor. Knowing, learned, skilful, grave, experienc't, pius, reverend, hnoured, famous, ancient, aged, studious, industrious, painful, in gnious, witty, prudent, discreet. Doe. Swift, light-foot, fearful, tender, flying, savage, tripping, brow∣sing, weak, frightful. Dogge. Ravenous, bawling, hungry, greedy, faithful, headstrong, thee∣vish, fierce, furious, watchful, flat-nosed, muzzeled, gluttonons, swi fleet, speedy, eager, chasing, fallow, pursuing, wel-trust, nimble, biting, snarling, grinning, yelping, yawling, ranging, deep-mouth' ful-mouth'd, well-sented, quick-nosed, spotted, speckled, surly, su∣len, stubborne, sturdy, shaggie, careful, grim, sterne, grumblin guarding, breinded, flea-bitten, lowsie, colla'd. Dogge-starre. Hot, enraged, enflamed, scorching, unhealthy, diseaseful, unwho¦some, smarting, itching, netling, sparkling, broyling, drie, burnin fiery, flaming, pernitious, thirsty, mad, raging, raving. Dormouse. Sleepie, drowsie, idle, lazie, lither, fat, plumpe. Doubt, Distractful, vexing, torturing, tormenting, anxious, netling, ca¦ful, sollicitous, perplexing, quaking, jealous, ambiguous, fear suspitious, giddie, faint, cold, heartlesse, lazie, amazing, mazie, ¦sing, jarring, strugling, quandaring, hovering, sagging, mudd wavering, wavie. Dolphin. Crooked, armed, greene, amorous, venereous, wanton, loving, ¦zure, flattering, scalie, speedie, wandering, ranging, straying, M¦sick-enamoured, bowed. Dove. Simple, trembling, sprightly, panting, timorous, fearful, ai piercing, silly, melancholy, harmelesse, billing, amorous, venereo mourning, cliping, gentle, curteous, wanton, lascivious, b swift, fleet-winged, paphian, tender, Idalian, crooing, feeled, wh¦ling, weak, tender, grave, whispering, gal-less. Downes. Motly, enamelled, flowry, tufted, dasied, painted, gaudie, s¦ling, verdant, enflowred, fragrant, hearbie, grassie, embroyder sportive, faire-cloathed, green-plush', fruitful, checkerd, wide-s¦ted, spaticu, pleasant, opn, goodly, delightful.
Dragon. Quick-eyed, quick-sighted, watchful, waking, yawning, devou∣ring, venemous, poysonous, scaly, crested, writhed, voluminon, curled. winged, wary, azure, hissing, swelling, cruel, fell, greedy, the guardian of the golden fleece, speckled, freckled, sotted. Dreame. Ominous, pleasing, wandering, black, auspicious, bewiching, emptie, vaine, slippery, flshie, fallacious, deceitful, deuding, flattering, fantastick, pale, busie, senceless, lying, flying, careful, dreadful, distracting, disastrous. Dreggs. Muddy, courser, rejected, despised, fruitless, useless. Drone. Lazie, lither, idle, buzzing, humming, yawning, barren, fruit∣less, stingless, injurious. Drop. Liquid, pearly, amber, roping, hanging, distilling, trickling ril∣ling, frothie, spotting, staining, flowing, falling, swelling. Dropsie. Self-indulgent, swelling, puffing, thirsty, insatiate, spungie. Drosse. Rejected, dreggie, base, muddy, abject, fruitless, barren, use∣lesse. Drugges. Vertuous, aromatick, spicie, outlandish, pretious, healthful, so∣veraign, oriental, easterne, sophistick, medicinal, Indian. Drum. Bellowing, thundering, clamorous, ratling, noyseful, stirring, tatling, spirit-strring, warlick, martial, affrightning, frightful, threa∣ning, hollow, light, re-ecchoing, courage-working. Drunkennesse. Swelled, nasty, loathsome, filthy, noysome, fulsome, spongie, brutish, beastly, swinish, wallowing, vomiting, spueing, apsh, bl∣ching, babling, teltale, foming, frothie, spawling, sottish, raving, flammering, reeling, lisping, faultering, surferting, diseaseful, fiery, rich-nosed, pot-tossing, infamous, volupuous, shame lesse, saucy, uncivil, staggering, indenturing, besotting, intoxi∣cating. Duck. Diving, plunged, muddy, fearful, plain-foot, watry, fearful, soft, tender.
Duel. v. Combate. Dugge. Sagging, milkie, noursing, soft, flowing, fluent, tender, pressed, hanging, flagging, lolling, veinie, streaked, azure-streaked, spicie, delicious, luxuriant. Dung. v. Dirt. Dungeon. Dark, darkesome, nastie, loathsome, filthy, hollow, vult'e, glo∣mie, obscure, doleful, dankish, fustie, mustie, fulsome, aire∣lesse. Dust. Scattered, dispersed, dry, small, filthy, thirsty, uncleanly, soy∣ling, summer, country, nasty. Dwarfe. Low, deformed, short, diminutive, little, Pygmie, three-horse-loaves-high, short-statured. E. Eagle. TOwring, soring, generous, imperious, chacing, ravenous, ra∣ping, audacious, hardy, cruel, lofty, clear-seeing, quick-ye, couagious, yellow-plumed, trussing, stately, princely, royal, ma∣jestick, full-winged, undazled, mounting, sun-confronting, flame-bearing, preying, quick-sighted. Eare. Charged, listning, yeilding, atentive, observing, glowing, whis∣pering, tender, winding, drinking, hollow, curious, secret, easie, o∣pen, gristlie, hanging, gping, cranied, insatiate, judicious, judging, flagging, inquiring. Ears of Corne. Bearded, weighty, dangling, full, fruitful, tender, yellow, fat, hoa∣ry, gilded, slnder, grained, flaxen, waving, joyful, smiling, crested, bristled. Earth. Shaggy, sullen, pregnant, teeming, many-peopled, flowry-man∣tled, dull, wealthy, sad, weighty, drossie, thirsty, sluttish, wide-ski∣ted, spatious, mssie, motly, yawning, cranied, porous, melanch∣ly, verdant, flwre-enamelled, tufted, fruitful, checkerd, fostering,
embroidered, grassie, clayie, mirie, solid, globous, meta-bearing, wealthie, painted, gaudy, sandie, hanging, cold, fat, uncleanly, dia∣pred, open, vast, extended, turfie, cloddy, gravelly, dusty, foodful. Earthquake. Impetuous, amazing, tumultuous, portentuous, aguish, dread∣ful, affeightful. Ease. Peaceful, quiet, silent, silken, restful, calme, barren, soft, smoth, reposed, happy, pleasant, volupuous, desired, faint, sleepie, drowsie, lazie, secured, warme, fruitlesse. East. Ruddie, glowing, balmie, early flowry, pregnant, blushing, gor∣geous, gray-cheekt, radiant, pearly, purple, wealthy, flaming, aroma∣tick, spicie, dawnie, guilded. Eccho. Pratling, twatling, babling, tearing, loud, tesounding, shll, vocal, cavy, talking, solitary, wood-hunting, wandering, roving, piercing. Eclypse. Darke, shady, obscuring, gloomy, sullen, swarthy, predictous, porten∣tuous, presagious, threatning, menacing, dreadful, prodigious, dis∣astrous, Eele. Slippery, glib, snaky, winding, writhing, tuning, foldng, glster∣ing, glittering, clammy, viscous, glutinou, slmy, muddy, fat, soft, moyst, wrigling. Eie. Flaming, burning, sparkling, piercing, radiant, spungy, enquiring, lively, lovely, wheeling, wounded, wounding, melting, inveigling, perswasive, rolling, longing, inflaming, pleading, hungry, greedy, ex∣pecting, Starty, glistering, betraying, discoursive, speaking, bea∣my, enamouring, gliding, singering, rransparent, instructed, Chry∣stall, soul-wounding, observing, gazefull, judgeing, luring, floa∣ting, swimming, assayling, bashfull, roving, intentive, tempt∣ing, inviing, courting, wooing, conquering, victorious, trium∣phing, attractive, love-amed, wandering, inflaming, command∣ing, busie, whispering, seaching, smiling, beauteou, mur∣thering, bewitching, chrming, delicious, trayterous, wanton, spearly, conducting, winkling, passionate, weeping, lascivious, subtle, dazling, lavish. Egge. Fruitfull, marrowy, lustfull, breeding, hatching.
Eglantine. Sweet-smelling, twining, pricklie, twisting. Egypt. v. Aegypt. Fat, fruitful, mysterious, superstitious, swarthy. Elegie. Mournful, wailing, lamenting, whining, whimpering, puling, sad, weeping, complaining, complaintful, flattering, soothing, a∣morous, baudy, wanton. Embassadour. Sage, wise, prudent, reverend, learned, honoured, grave, eloquent, stately, authorized. Embers. v. Cinders. Hssing, glowing, warme, dying, sparkling, dead, ashy, black, sooty, grimie. Embraces. Warme, hot, strict, glueing, close, soft, clasping, hugging, en∣circling, twining, grasping, twisting, yoaking, loving, amorous, ve∣nereous, greedy, mutual, fruitful, dear, sweet, pleasant, delicious, knotty, knitting, wanton, joyful, glutinous. Emrald. Flamie, beamie, radiant, chearful, green, bright, eye-refreshing, Erythraean, Scythian, sight-chearing, shining. Elephant. Castle-bearing, rough-skinned, stiffe-kneed, fleshie, Indian, massie, robustious, dreadful, warlick, Getulian, sauage, docile, fierce, cruel, untamed, white-tusked, ivory-toothed. Elme. Strait-limbed, spreading, lofty, towring, mounting, aspiring, skie-threatning, cloud-kissing, shady, branching, vine-hugging, le∣vie, spatious, tall, bough-extending. Eloquence. Winning, gaining, encroaching, perswasive, wooing, enamou∣ring, nectareous, intrancing, inchanting, encharming, delicious, ravishing, soul-raping, smooth, oylie, courtly, soft, rich, quaint, painted, glozing, soothing, infinuating, victorious, triumphing, sweet-tongu'd, grave, Cceronian, well-polisht, deceitful, inveagling, circumvning, attractive, happy, overcoming, successeful, fancy∣tickling, tempting, soul-invading, conquering, bewitching, trans∣porting, nctar-droping, captivating. Elysium. Sf, flowry, flower-enamelled, quiet, peaceful, blisseful, joyful, soul-ravishing, smiling, blest.
Enemy. Bloody, blood-thirsty, hatefull, spitefull, fierce, cruel, malicious, odious, opposing, trayterous, undermining, deceitfull, impetu∣ous, assaulting, assayling, furious, invadng, insulting, murde∣ring, ambitious, hurtfull, pernicious, crafty, despitefull, unjust, injurious, perfidious, dreadfull, proud, daring, cursed. English. Stout, couragious, valiant, true-hearted, hardy, bold, audacious, adventurous, warlick, apish, imitating. Ensigns. v. Banners. Warlick, triumpht, victorious, martiall, painted, displayed, threatning, advanced, waving. Enterprize. Bold, avdacious, adventurous, doubtfull, uncertain, uneasie, dange∣rous, perilous, brave, glorious, famous. Entertainment. Gracious, wellcome, courteous, loving, fair, kind, friendly, willing, ready, rich, liberall, pompous, hearty, glorious, costly, sumptuous, mag∣nificent. Entrails. v. Bowells. Secret, winding, reeking, gloomy, smoaking, trembling, auspici∣ous, predictious, prophetick, sooth-saying, consulted, enchested, enclo∣sed, hidden, abstruse. Envie. Pale, lean, swelling, snarling, blue-eyed, squint-eyed, restless, kil∣ling, stabbing, cutting, wounding, sullen, snaky, viperous, poyso∣nou, blear-eyed, self-eating, self-consuming, self-torturing, self-mar∣yring, black-mouthed, muttering, whispering, lean-fac't, carping, cen∣sorious, repining, underminining, snake-haird, burning, flaming, boyl∣ing, revengefull, malicious, spightfull, cancred, subtle, sly, crafty, heart-gnawing, deadly, mortall, jealous, cruell, calumnious, detract∣ing, pernicious, out-rageous, proud, disdainfull, haughty, crooked, bi∣ing, currish. Epicure. Godless, voluptuous, sensuall, brutish, bestiall, beastly, irreligi∣ous, ungodly, loose, dissolute, intemperate, vitious, wallowing, swinish, insatiate, gluttonous, gurmandizing, self-pampering, self∣pleasing. Epigram. Short, witty, loose, wanton, merry, pleasant, rayling, nip∣ping, biting, snarling, soothing, flattering, smooth, neate, facetious.
Epitaph. Mournfull, sad, pensive, weeping, moanfull, immortall, lasting, ¦numentall, re-cording, name-preserving, life-continuing. Equitie. v. Justice. Reasonable, rationall, just, sacred, sober; severe, orate, unbridled, ¦corrupted, unfed, inexorable, constant, Rhadamanthian, equall, i¦partiall, unsiding, holy, unmoved, unchanged, indifferent, unprej¦dic't, uninclining, strict, riged, even-handed, just-dealing, upright. Erebus. Misty, foggy, black, dark, darksome, vast, dismall, ugly, hideous, ¦ping, yawning, ghastly. Erinnys, Sad, fatall, ferall, snak-hairy, grimme, cruell, ghastly. Ermin. Spotless, unspotted, speckled, painted, cleanly, checker'd. Errour. Rash, fond, straying, stragling, doubtfull, seducing, fantastick, fa¦tick, obstinate, blind, ambitious, crooked, wandering, credulous, p¦nicious, gloomy, misty, muddy, doltish, audacious, bold, gross, d¦cloudy, foppish, sottish, dark, mole-eyed, beetle-braind, thick, st bling, furious, mis-guiding, black-mouth'd. Eternitie Immense, unfathom'd, unmeasur'd, unmoved, uninterrupted, l¦ing, lofty, uncorrupt, divine, during, supreame, unexpressible, per¦nent, incomprehensible, inconceivable, soft, downy, flowry, bright, gl¦rious, unlimited, unconfin'd. Ethiopian. v. Moore. Sun-burnt, swarthy, sooty, soultry, scalded, broyled, schorched, ¦led, tann'd, black, barbarous, bak'c, wild, brutish, moorish, rosted, fri naked, collied, bloody, flat-nosed, tawny, misbelieving, Negro, thi¦lipt, wainscot-faced. Evening. Cur-fue, aged, gray, silent, calm, gloomy, dappled, dewie, blushin torchy, rheumy, cool, late, black, duskie, smoaky, cloudy, shady, slo¦pac', drwosie, lazy, idle, starry. Eunuch. Smooth-fac't, smooth-chinn'd, weak, delicate, soft, weak, unmany womanish, effeminate. Euphrates. v. River, Deep, fertile, fruitfull, winding, swift-pac't, wary. Ewe. Wanton, supportive, teeming, fleecy, warm-clothed, uberous, g¦zing.
Europ. Rich, wealthy, fruitfull, healthfull, temperate, populous. Evidence. Convincing, unanswerable, undoubted, strong, firm, confirming, doubted, certain, authentick, conclusive, perswasive, faith-beger∣ng, satisfying. Exaction. Rigorous, unjust, cruell, pinching, oppressing, tyrannous, tyrani∣ll, lawless, imposed, griping, pilling. Example. Leading, teaching, guiding, encouraging, plain, evident, memora∣ble, famous, glorious, sage, wise, prudent. Excess. Dissolute, wanton, loose, vitious, intemperate, unrestrained, out∣gious, superfluous, needless: Exchequer. Rich, wealthy, swallowing, moneyed, royall. Excrement. Ejected, disrespected, neglected, odious, loathsome, nasty, sluttish, ovenly, superfluous, unnecessary, fulsome, noysome. Excuse. Shifting, lying, cogging, coin'd, forged, painted, dissembling, pro∣able, studied, fair, subtle, alledged, just. Exercise. Laborious, industrious, active, stirring, studious, wholsome, usefull, beneficiall, advantageous, strength-confirming, health-confirm∣ing. Exhalation. Fat, oyly, aspiring, sinoaky, cloudy, vaporous, earth-engendered, able, gloomy, dusky, foggy, misty, malignant, smothering, rising, mounting, towering, infectious, unhealthy, breathing. Exile. v. Banishment Exorcisme. Exorcist. Charming, inchanting, magick, hellish, powerfull, commanding, imperious, conjuring, dark, black. Expectation. Longing, long-looking, desirous, waiting, tedious. Experience. Certain, prudent, discreet, sage, wise, approved, infallible, sure, as∣sured, grounded, clear-eyed, aged, old, tutord, long-taught, dear∣bought, grave, learned, gray-silver-hoary-haird, sober, school∣ng.
Extasie. Ravisht, soul-raping, unconcerving, death-like, astounding, ad¦ring, amazed. Extortioner. Rigorous, oppressing, injurious, lawless, cruell, unjust, tyranno tyrannicall, heavy. F. Fable. VAin, lying, old, facetious, witty, devised, feined, fictious, ¦gar, frivolous, idle, ingenious, incredible, popular, doi truthless, monstrous, mysterious, instructive. Face. v. Countenance. Beauteous, roseate, inchanting, bewitching, enamouring, smili wanton, downy, joyfull, pensive, lowring, wooing, unfullied, del¦ous, entrancing, attractive, heart-wounding, captivating, unp¦tern'd, unexampled. Faction. Jarring, disagreeing, contentious, strifefull, seditious, furious, ¦multuous, litigious, siding, dissentious, blood-thirsty, wa breeding. Fagot. Flaming, bundled, sputtering, crackling, consuming, self-eati heating, pitchy. Fairie. Dancing, night-walking, nimble, active, stirring, tripping, sprigh¦full, cleanly, nipping, pinching, sporting, night-tripping, light, silen soft-foot, dairy-hunting, green-cloth'd, yellow-skirted. Faith. Sence-conquering, quick-seeing, almighty, servent, powerful wonder-working, miraculous, zealous, assured, firm, adhering, inviola¦ble, constant, stedfast, unmoved, indissoluble, untainted, im¦mortall. Fame. Wide, flitting, lasting, immortall, eternall, enduring, swift, l¦vish, winged, embalming, immortalizing, eternizing, surviving death-less, swelling, blabing, babling, long-tongued, wide-mouth
pratling, twatling, gossipping, gracefull, swift-winged, flying, ather-footed, nimble-winged, Eagle-winged, unextinguished, nowning, sleek-tongued, glib-tongued, spreading, smiling, bright, ry, glorious, lying, tale-telling, light-heeld, spurring, posting, busie, anting. Famine. Lean, pale, thinne, lean-chapt, pinching, impetuous, cruel, mea∣er, ravening, devouring, sharp-fang'd, clinging, lanck, lawless, ecessitating, constraining, panting, sharp, gaping, yawning, ra∣ing, greedy, gluttonous, barking, tedious, consuming, anxious, ard, torturing, torm enting, vexing, meager-fac't. Fancy. Nimble, contriving, active, stirring, roving, vagrant, roaming, anging, forging, working, quick, pregnant, teeming, busie, mint∣ng, coyning, spinning, enritched, wealthy, forraign, shaping, in∣ustrious, travelling, inventive, plotting, studious, plodding, wan∣dering, projecting. Fantasmes. v. Phantasmes, Farewell. Tedious, sad, grieved, loathed, last, sighed, lingring, pen∣sive. Fast. Abstemious, lean, temperate, chaste, frugall, cleanly, moderate, healthy, wholesome, faint, meager, mortyfiing, flesh-subduing, re∣ligious, vertuous, sober, penetentiall. Fate. v. Destiny. Driery, resistless. unpittying, flint-hearted, remorseless, unrelent∣ing, rugged, cruel, unchanged, unmoved. Father. Loving, carefull, tender, sollicitous, grave; pious, reverend, honou∣red, indulgent, tender-hearted. Fauchion. v. Blade. Keen, bright, slicing, slashing, cutting, slaughtering, murdering, quartering. Faulcon. Towring, Princely, stooping, swift, thundering, couragious, freck∣led, wheeling, lured, high-pitched. Fault. Secret, grievous, haynous, shamefull, petty, sinnefull, vicious, dishonest.
Fawns. v. Satyr. Hairy, shaggy, tripping, rude, horned, nimble, swift-footed, wan frisking, wood-haunting, lustfull, salacious, lecherous. Fear. Jealous, sallow, chilly, reverentiall, pale, shallow, trembling, lo presaging, chilling, lumpish, faint, prophetick, superstitious, omino wanny, heartless, guiltie, cold, sullen, hovering, anxious, suspitio bloodless, pressing, ignominious, unresolved, doubtful, distracted, i¦perious, degenerous, restraining, pulling, distempered, impulsive, ¦vering, boggy, winged, ghastly, suggesting, projecting, contriving, i clowdy, muddy, shuddering, shallow, restless, pale-hearted, cream-fa startling, wary, modest, blushing, impetuous, assaulting, palsied, pa¦lytick, heart-amazing. Feast. Ambrosial, gladsome, mirthful, sumptuous, costly, delicious, delig¦ful, luxurious, joyous, buxome, frolick, pleasant, genial, ful-tabled, ¦ble-pressing, voluptuous, royal, Nectarean, tast-contenting, pala pleasing, lavish, love-preserving. Feather. Hovering, waving, tufted, soft, downy, plumy, lightsome, flauntin gay, gallant, pompous, gaudy, phantastick, trembling, hangi smooth, velvet, flying, painted, wanton, stiffe, limber, freckled. Feaver. Hateful, hot, burning, panting, malignant, intermitting conta¦ous, spotted, infectious, pulse-spurring, furious, trembling, pale, vi¦lent, cruel, grievous, pettish, pievish, angry, consuming, drying, te¦ous, lingering, inconstant, dy, thirsty, secret, eating, scorching, bloc boyling. Fee. Bribing, corrupting, unlawful, injurious, secret, eating, schorch∣ing, blood-boyling. Feet. v. Foot. Field. Dusty, warlick, martial, bloody, dreadful, dismal, murdering, tented, blood-flowing. Fields. Spiced, unambitious, gaudy, painted, flowry, tufted, checked, grassie, naked, open, wild, flowre-enamell'd, motly, dasied, smiling, verdant, herby. fragrant, diaperd, enflowred, fruitful, pregnant, teeming, em∣broydered, sportive, spatious, wide-skirted, fair-clothed, green-plush't, pleasant, delightful.
Fenne. Moorish, drowsie, slimy, slothful, foggy, vaporous, unhealthy, pudly, king, filthy, durty, muddy, black-turf'd, aguish. Fetters. Shackling, binding, locking, close, strait. Fictions. Lying, devised, fabulous, deluding, deceiving, coyned, minted, in∣nted. Figge. Milky, delicious, fat, two-leaved, pleasant, sweet, lushious, broad∣aved, autumnal, sugred. Fight. v. Battell. Dusty, furious, cruel, bloody, hot, dreadful. Filberd. Clustered, shady, grovy, bushy, rank, shady, branching, twining, mber. File. Biting, toothed, smoothing, polishing, plaining, laborious, indu∣rious, gnawing, nibling, eating, fretting, wearing, correcting. Fingers. Soft, sleek, delicate, active, nimble, plianr, industrious, curious, ainty, slender, round, unequal, Ivory, bending, wanton, alabaster, rembling, quavering, filching, pilfering. Fire. Sprightly, active, ravenous, greedy, catching, hungry, wandering, evouring, crackling, flashing, lieentious, searching, all-consuming, lf-eating, glowing, whirling, quick, embracing, clasping, climb∣ng, wastful, subtle, purging, amorous, furious, unsparing, rage∣ull, sparkling, flaming, furious, schorching, broyling, roast∣ng, melting, glittering, smoakie, covetous, avaritious, flame∣belching. Firmament. Azure, wide-skirted, unmeasured, unfathomed, starrie, star-enchased, star-powdered, glittering, gilded, star-studded, rolling, wheeling, whir∣ling, spangled, arched, silver-paved, silver-bosom'd, all-clasping, bright, vaultie, glorious, Chrystal, lofty, open, wide, extended, beamy, radious, cloudy, flaming, turning, painted, all viewing, all-em∣bracing. Firre. Tall, lofty, towring, heaven-kissing, skie-threatning, aspiring, un∣knotty, fragrant, shady, crispy, curled, strait, useful, flaming, oyly, fat, igh-topt, rozen-weeping.
Fishes. Glittering, gliding, dancing, silver, silver-breasted, crooked, s nibling, nimble, inveagled, credulous, shining, watery, slippery, sli hungry, clammy, floating, greedy, silent, dumb, speechless, leapi skipping, wrigling, azure, glassie, viscuous, glutinous, wandring, str¦ling, flegmatick, finny, silver-scal'd. Fisher. Inveagling, deluding, tempting, deceiving, baiting, ho¦ing, patient, impatient, jugling, insnaring, trecherous, expecti hoping, cunning, skilfull. Flag. Spreading, waving, swelling, hanging, pregnant, winged, wa stuft, floating, ruffling, rustling, trembling, dancing, furled, curled. Flame. Insultive, wilder, hungry, catching, devouring, purging, clean sucking, licentious, scattered, wasting, active, sprightly, waving, curs crisped, whirling, aspiring, mounting, towring, ragefull, venge clasping, fretting, eating, sputtering, sparkling, lurking, embrac subtle, amorous, courting, nimble, greedy, licking, ttembling, ¦nous, searching, hungry, crackling, glowing, ruddy, blushing, furio scorching, piercing, imbosom'd, darting, singing, choaking, gli¦ing, combustious, climbing, clambering, impetuous, violent, unam oyly, belched, bright, busie, self-consuming, stragling, cheerfull, lig some, proud, ambitious, quick, pursuing, carbonadoing. Flash. v. Flame. Flattery. Flatterer. Base, servile, slavish, soft, file-tongu'd, smooth, oyly, courtly, smoo tongu'd, lisping, obsequious, gilt-tongu'd, windy, dissembling, soo¦ing, melting, officious, pick-thank, cogging, pliant, sugered, fleari fawning, traiterous, treacherous, cheating, over-reaching, jugl circumventing, cunning, deluding, crafty, wily, sly, deceitfull,  spoken, smooth-worded, raking, winning, dawbing, candid, glass-fa pyde, knee-crooking, clawing, tempting, tickling, colloguing, honey¦ed, crouching, glozing, insinuating. Flegme. Cold, moyst, watery, unactive, dull, flow, noysome, unwholeso diseasefull, distilling, rheumatick. Flea. Biting, nipping, skipping, twitching, sucking, sable, pestering, sle disturbing, peevish, blood-thirsty. Fleece. Rich, wealthy, woolly, snowy, curled, crisped, soft, hary, wa thirsty, drinking.
Flie. Buzzing, pestering, sportive, wanton, tickling nimble, skipping, ubborn, froward, sucking, blood-thirstie, importuning, provo∣ing, saucie, lickorous, stinging, sun-delighting, mgot-blowing. Flight. Dustie, speedie, hasty, confused, disordered, guilty, trembling, oasting, breathlesse, panting, fearful, ignominious, shameful, ha∣ened, accelerated. Flint. Obdurate, hard, unrelenting, fiery, sparkling, fire-engende∣ing. Flocks. v. Sheepe. Numerous, thronging, bleating, wealthy, curled, grazing, jolly, el-fleec'd, gamesome, sportive, wanton, goodly, wandering, ragling, shaggie, trooping, swarming, thriving, encreasing, ibling. Flood. Rolling, rising, swelling, silver; aged, raging, incensed, gliding, preading, glancing, hurrying, high-wrought, shower-enhanced, oaming, wind-incensed, tumbling, impetuous, enchased, vaulting, eaping, dancing, cleansing, horned, ambitious, sea-ingulphed, oaring, snakie, gulphie, careering, azure, smooth-sliding, silver-rested, invading, sweeping, intruding, amorous, chiding, chrystal, icentious, curled, enraged, wavie, glassie, whirling, rustling, rush∣ng, pearly, wandring, stragling, angry, boyling, stormy, swallow∣ng, chafing, incroaching, ruffled, wrinkled, posting, surly, sullen, ustling, murmuring, muttering, surgie, tossing, proud, bubling, umbling, wrigling, frothy, sandy, muddy, swift-pacing, wheeling, mounting, bank-courting, uxorious. Flora. Merry, mirthful, joyous, pleasant, delightful, painted, gay, gau∣dy, pompous, enamelled, pearly, amorous, wanton, lascivious, per∣umed. Flower. Pregnant, spicie, fragrant, enamelled, gaudie, pyde, perfumed, heckered, smiling, vernal, verdant, tufted, taintless, unspotted, ummer-swelling, odorous, amorous, vermilion, purple, silver, dia∣ered, painted, freckled, blushing, vernal, glittering, delicious, mus∣ie, fading, short-liv'd. Foame. Boyling, hissing, curled, froathie, angry, belched, snowie, hoary, oating, waving, chafing, ayrie,
Foe. v. Enemy. Fogge. Unhealthy, unwholsome, diseaseful, gloomy, vaporous, choaking, misty, drowsie, dull, spongie, duskie, mufling, drooping, swarthy, dropsie, sullen, gouty, sleepy, stifling, stinking, ascending, smell-offending, contagious, infectious, fen-suckt. Foole. Soft, dul-eyed, lean-witted, motley, knotty-pated, grosse, un∣conceiving, silly, shallow, admiring, stupid, sottish, doltish, dul-wi∣ed, beetle-brained. Foote. Swift-pac't, hollow, flying, tripping, vaulting, wanton, nimble, active, dusty, ivory, delicate, tender, soft, silent, beauteous, ambro∣sial, snowie, silver, stalking, trampling. Force. Male, masculine, mastering, manly, domineering, imperious, compulsive, commanding, tyrannizing, couragious, sinewie, rob∣stious, untamed, impetuous. Forehead. v. Brow. Stately, smooth, sleeke, beauteous, comely, delicious, maj∣stick. Forest. Hoary, leavie, shady, salvage, verdant, fragrant, shaggie, glooy, mssie, grassie, rockie, rough, wild, desert, wide-skirted, devio, vast, uncoth, melancholy, unfrequented, sullen, pathless, unpeo¦pled, beast-haunted, silent, bushie, shrubbie, ecchoing, tufted, br∣ly, spatious, mast-bearing, dreadful. Forester. v. Swain. Forgetfulnesse. Darke, shady, obscure, rusty, rude, musty, moldy, unkind, d∣courteous, cruel. Fornace. Flaming, burning, scorchng, scalding, flame-belching, sput∣ring, sparkling, hollow, smoakie, devouring, sulphureous, ∣pouring. Fortitude. Daring, valiant, valourous, adventurous, prudent, attempti undertaking, undaunted, unquelled, unconquered, noble, und¦jected, majestick, manly, couragious. Fortune. Wheeling, uncertain, unconstant, giglet, lying, delud
imperious, commanding, domineering, tyrannizing, trecherous, injurious, envious, cruel, epdame, dreadful, pernicious, peevish, froward, wanton malicious, mocking, flattering, audacious, almigh∣ty, disasterous, turning, slippery, perfidious, proud, stubborn, ma∣lignant, fullen, surly, insolenr, licentios, lawless, fickle, hood∣winkt. Fountain. Chrystal, gushing, rustling, silver, gliding, purling, pearly, wee∣ping, bubling, gugling, chiding, clear, grasse-fringed, mosse-frin∣ged, sacred, grasse-margend, mosse-margend, trickling, soft, delici∣ous stragling, dancing, vaulting, murmuring, muttering, wispering, pratling, twatling, sweet-rolling, swelling, rising, sparkling, flow∣ing, frothy. Fowler. Subtle, crafty, wily, skilful, cunning, treacherous, ensnaring, tempting, deceiving, inveagling, alluring, expecting, hoping, wary. Fox. Wily, sly, subtle, theevish, ravenous, greedy, stinking, strong-breath'd, bush-taild, inearthing, snarling, cunning, crafty, devou∣ring, pullet-eating. France. French. Fruitful, healthful, rich, wealthy, learned, warlick, courtly, ge∣nerous, ingenious, deviseful, active. industrious, lascivious, wan∣ton, stately, courteous, cavoleering, couragious, complementive. Friend. Friendship. Faithful, constant, cordial, hearty, familiar, ayding, helpful, ad∣vantageous, affectionate, sacred, loyal, trusty, sociable, certain, pleasing, favouring, courteous, dear, loving, happy, firme, equal, agreeing, uniting, cementing, unchanged, inviolated, assured, peace∣ful, sincere, unloosed, united, conjoyned, chained, pliant, stable, glued, riveed, unanimous. Frenzie. Raving, chafing, doting, witless, dreaming, hot, cholerick, fu∣rious, untamed. Frog. Sprawling, croaking, loathsome, fulsome, querulous, complaint∣ful, noiseful, yellow, hoarse, fen-haunting, shrill, babling, gugling, spring-forespeaking. Frost. v. Cold. Sharp, keene, grave, nipping, hoary, silver, chilling, icie,
gray-haired, pinching, rough, biting, piercing, chattering, astrin∣gent, benumming, bleak, sap-consuming, stinging, gray-bearded. Froth. v. Foame. Frowne. Surly, sullen, haughty, disdainful, proud, angry, churlish, currish, lumpish, rough, stormie, discontented, brow-pursing, cloudy, tem∣pestuous, supercilious, imperious, domineering, awful, tvrannizing, brow-knitting, brow-puckering, lowring, scowling, ruffled. Fruit. Dangling, delicious, timely, tast-pleasing, palar-wooing, savoury, pleasant, sweet-smelling, leave-enwrapped, hanging, painted, de∣lightful, autumnal, expcted, desired, ambrosial. Funeral. v. Obsequies. Fury. v. Anger. Blind, disordered, distempered, frantick, burning, giddie, stern∣visaged, head-strong, unruly, untamed, flaming, wrathful, snake∣haired, revengeful, sparkling, flame-eyed, lean-chapt, waspish, cruel, dzzy-eyed, flamie, grim, ghastly, enraged, barbarous, seditious, dreadful, pernicious, boyling, tempestuous, stormie, frothie, fant¦stick, impatient, unbrideled, transporting, impetuous, tumultuous incensing, distracted. Furies. Snake-haired, dismal, haggish, hellish, malicious, envious, grim, sullen, ghastly, dreadful, swelling, snarling, blue-eyed, torch-bea∣ring, snake-crowned, squint-eyed, black-mouth'd, torturing, tor∣menting, heart-gnawing, spightful, blood-thirsty, strifeful, conten∣tious, debateful, revengful, Stygian, inexorable, deformed, missh∣pen, ugly, hideous, mischievous, night-bone, flame-eyed, Furre. Soft, warme, shaggie, cold defending, lining. Furrow. Long, sliced, ridged, seed-noursing, crooked, dividing, Furze. Bushie, shrubbie, combrous, prickly, ranke: G. Gain. WElcome, wealthy, fruitful, expected, desired, pleasing, sweet, recompencing, satisfying, contenting, large, am∣ple, thrifty, sweet-smelling, dear-bought,
Gale. Gentle, fanning, refreshing, breathing, rusling, whistling, whis∣king, cooling, whispering, flitting, soft, pleasant, flowing, warme, wanton, wholsome, floating, fruitful, puffing, courteous. Gall. Bitter, biting, swelling, black, glassie. Gallowes. Shameful, ignominious, infamous, unlucky, detested, painful, dreadful. Game. Sportive, joyous, mirthful, pleasing, care-killing, time-stealing, refreshing, inchanting, bewitching, facetious, frequented, solemne, unthrifty, wanton, idle, carelesse. Ganges. Silver, rich, wealthy, azure, deepe, wavie, sandie, Indian, guil∣ded, spatious, east-flowing. Ganymed. Phrygian, Trojan, Idean, beauteous, wanton, lascivious, prince∣ly, Jove-beloved, Jove-enamouring, Joves Catamite, faire, young, Eagle-hurryed, Garden. Flowry, gaudy, painted, enameled, checkered, enflowred, fruitful, wel-drest, fragrant, verdant, pleasant, hearby, smiling, delitious, bordered, knotted, squared, enclosed, levelled, diapered, weeded, neat, handsome, embroidered. Gardian. Careful, faithful, watchful, regardful, jealous, observing, atten∣tive, unbribed, officious, diligent. Garland. v. Crownes. Leavie, triumphant, victorious, fragrant, roseal, flowry, enami'd, checkered, swathing, hooping. Garments. v. Apparrel. Garner. Thrify, wealthy, swelling, wel-lin'd, storing. Gate, Brasse-rib'd, leavie, folded, plankie, studded, creaking. Geese. v. Goose. Gemmes. v. Jewels. Shining, reflecting, sparkling, radiant, beaming, oriental, Ea∣sterne, pendant, dangling, enchacing, bright, blazing, pearly, costy, rich, sumptuous, glittering, orient, Indian, stary, flaming, aie∣gilding, aire-enlightning, unvalued.
Gentleman. Noble, watlick, valiant, generous, free-hearted, honoured, brave, illustrious, famous, ingenious, pompous, courtly, gaudy, gallant, haughty-spirited. Gentles. Superstitious, paganish, misbelieving, incredulous, obstinate. Germans. Fierce, warlick, audacious, daring, adventurous, valiant, ingeni∣ous, industrious, rebellious, thirsty, drunken. Gesture. Flowing, speaking, graceful, comely, winning, becoming, seem∣ly, affected, unaffcted, free, composed, handsome, gracious, plea∣sing, haughty, ingratiating, curteous, stately, portly, humble. Ghosts. Fleeting, thin, affrightful, pale, grizly, ghastly, dreadful, lean, meager, light, deceased, bodiless, airy, wandering, unfathomed, ungrasped, unsubstantial, hollow, gliding, marowless, cold, glaring, unreal, heartless, doleful, deformed, sullen, vanishing, empry, fan∣tastick, bloodless, unbodied. Giant. Massie, robustious, big-limbed, great-rib'd, large-joynted, vast, audacious, stalking, sterne, grim, dreadful, earth-bread, great∣bon'd, lubberly, impetuous, proud, disdainful, haughty. Gift. Rich, free, pretious liberal, wealthy, large, ample, honourable bounteous, princely, royal, obliging, engaging, binding, sacred, costly, sumptuous, magnificent, gratious. Ginger. Biting, corroding, knotty, rugged, rough-coated, fragrant, odo∣rous, sharpe, Arabian. Girdle. Embroidered, silken, swathing, gilded, painted, hooping, clasp∣ing, buckled, embossed. Glance, Lascivious, subtle, wanton, amorous, quaint, silent, obsequious, smiling, imperious. Glasse. Smooth, slick, icie, chrystal, reflecting, resembling, represen∣ting, flaring, brittle, melting, clear, transparent. Looking-glasse. v. Mirrour.
Glead. v. Kite. Hungry, ravenous, devouring, theevish, swift, greedy, preying, raping, gouty, crow-hating, fox-hating. Gleaner. Needy, poor, stooping, searching, waiting, gathering, picking, attending, following, industrious. Glew. Viscous, clammie, uniting, fastning, tenacious, cementing, com∣pacting. Globe. Round, turning, wheeling, rolling, solid, spacious. Glory. Pompous, painted, costly, envious, glittering, shining, radiant, beaming, ambitious, eternal, enduring, lasting, triumphan, vi∣ctorious, fleeting, empty, fading, insolent, everlasting, desired, vaun∣ting, flaunting, immortal, windie, flatuous, inflaming, encouraging, provoking, egging, spurring, incensing, prompting, swelling, beau∣teous, dazling. Glove. Perfumed, fringed, embroidered, furred, fragrant, hand-shea∣thing, muskie, spruce, neat, handsome, gentile, fashionable. Gluttony. Glutton. v. Luxury. Witty, judicious, high-feeding, gurmandizing, brutish, volup∣tuous, sensual, bestial, beastly, intemperate, loose, dissolute, swinish, insatiate, selfe-pleasing, selfe, pampering, devouring, ingulphing, l∣zie, big-bellyed, swelling, epicurean, lickorous, greedy, ravenous, costly, lasciviou, slow-bellied, full-gorging. Gnat. Busie, pestering, biting, pinching, pulling, nipping, sucking, stinging, twitching, disturbing. Goad. Pointed, sharp, poynant, piercing, pricking, biting, inciting, prompting, quickning, spurring, bloody, tuoring, teaching, in∣censing, egging. Goate. Lustful, stinking, climbing, clambering, browsing, nibling, lescivious, bush-haunting, rampant, fearful, rough, haiy, shag∣gie, flat-nosed, savage, wanton, luxurious, vine-browsing, jum∣ping, braying, cliffe-bred, mountain, bearded, salacious, lea∣cherous.
Gods. Deathless, almighty, powerful, uncreated, just, immortal, in∣throned, sacred, revengeful, adored, propitious, unpassive, uneyed, invisible, al-seeing, invoked, al-knowing, omnipotent, omniscient, infallible, unerring, unchanged, unresisted, resistless, supream, so∣verain, al-ruling, awful, dreadful, reverenced, eternal, thundering, unconfined, incorporeal, unseen, immaterial, unrestrained, unde∣ceived. Cold. Massie, burnisht, envied, shining, glistering, beamie, glittering, bewitching, enchnting, charming, dazling, gaudy, corrupting, vi∣ctorious, al-conquering, triumphant, almighty, saint-seducing, eye-beguiling, tempting, provoking, wealthy, high-esteemed, yellow, imperious, commanding, way-enforcing, pernicious, way-making, care-curing, beamy, audacious, ambitious, desired, fatal, royal, so∣lid, care-remooving, pain▪easing, refined, heart-corrupting. eye-delighting, eye-rejoycing. Goose. Cackling, gagling, wadling, plain-foot, silly, fenne-laving, de∣vouring, feathered, watchful, flickering, mudling. Gore. Clotted, foamie, froathie, congealing, smoakie, gellied, rein flushing, flowing, spinning. Gossip. Pratling, twatling, tatling, babling, un-thrifty, talking. Gourd. Round, bellied, drunken, seedy, pilgrime, hollow. Gout. Knotty, rich, wealthy, painful, slow, tardy, impatient, tedious hereditary, twitching. Gown. Learned, honoured, studious, reverenced, long, low-reaching, feet-hiding, peaceful, grave. Grace. Assisting, preventing, helping, ayding, free, comely, pleasing, smiling, attractive. Graces. Wanton, loose, naked, uncloathed, decent, beauteous, pleasing, smiling, virgin, maiden, youthful, shining, merry, joyous, mirthful, chearful.
Grain. Fruitful, sprouting, increasing, propagating, vigorous, seedy, egnant, teeming. Grape. Gemmous, purple, blushing, swelling, clustered, viny, youthful, anton, chearing, bleeding, lusty, jucie, generous, delicious, dang∣ng, pleasant, nectareous, soft, plump. Grasse. Rich, proud, soft, springing, matted, flowry, verdant, tufted, slug∣ish, tender, pliant, dewie, herby, moist, pleasant, green-plusht, owre-enameled, fading, growing, checkered, crisped, snakie, pain∣ed, withered. Grasse-hopper. Stubble, loving, streaming, tatling, hoarse, shrill, querulous, noiseful, flender, summer, dew-fed, dull-eyed. Grave. Quiet, silent, undisturbed, gapeng, yawning, greedy, devouring, avenous, hated. loathed, detested, tyrannous, exacting, insatiate, ark, pale, blind, swallowing, corrupting, infectious, sluttish, nasty, oathsome, fulsome, moldie, sullen, forsaken, forgotten, peaceful, aseful, rotten, mossie, sad, cold, pensive, moist, obscure, shadie, du∣ty, fusty, dankish, dreadful, gasping, jwstretcht, wide-mouth'd, ollow, gloomy, musty. Gravity. Awful, aw-infusing, reverend, sober, setled, affected, unaffected, severe, mature, timely, sad, untimely, ripe, unripe, proud, haughty, disdainful, supercilious, frowning, aged, stately, censorious, judici∣ous, prudent, sage, beseeming. Greece. Ancient, deviseful, inventive, artful, famous, learned, art-inven∣ting, lying, proud, vaunting, ingenious, subtle. Greeke. Curled, shag-haired, long-haied, faire-haired, learned, subtle, ingenious, witty, lying, fabulous. Greene. Flow y, sportive, checkered, enflowred, wanton, smiling, em∣broidered, tufted, enameled, plushie, soft, velvet, painted, fragrant, verdant gaudie, speckled, hearby, fair-clothed, diapered, joyful, mirthful, delightful, chearful, youthful. Grief Heart-rending, tearing, contracting, killing, im-bosomed,
complaining, whining, pulling, dumpish, lumpish, sullen, gloo wrinlding, warping, whimpering, enaging, carefull, chumpish, ¦contented, macerating, eating, pensive, melting, pittied, fro peevish, pettish, swarthy, pinching, wringing, oppressing, fre smarting, torturing, gnawing, impatient, gawling, heart-breaki disquiet, tear-wringing, eye-wringing, eye-squeesing, unbounded, dious, stormy, rugged, heart-afflicting, drooping, melancholy,  wounding, heart-confounding. Griffon. Greedy, ravenous, hook-clawed, flame-eyed, winged, ¦pant, white-winged, couragious, gold-guarding, Indian,  hurting. Gristle. Bending, flexible, limber, pliant. Groan. v. Sigh. Thrilling, killing, tearing, heart-rending. Groin. Lustfull, bawdy, obsene, hairy, swelling, sweaty. Groom. Base, servile, slavish, serviceable, officious, industrious, obsequi laborious, obedient, carefull, Grove. Silent, shady, leavy, close, solitary, melancholly, lovely, unfreq¦ted, arched, wooddy, forsaken, sullen, bushy, shrubby, dark, unkno gloomy, mossie, shaggy, ecchoing, high, waving, thorny, tufted, pl¦sant, delightfull, secret, bird-hanted, uncouth, quiet, darksome, ¦scure, dusky, cloudy. Guide. Conducting, leading, convoying, teaching, foregoing, lai sure, assured, directing, prudent, sage, knowing, skilfull. Guile. v. Craft. Guilt. Conscious, fearfull, timerous, trembling, blushing, self-disclos suspitious. Gulfe. Devouring, swallowing, ingurgitating, frothy, spatious, deep, p¦nitious, dreadfull, boyling, whirling, yawning, gaping, gasping, wi▪mouthed, wide-jawed, jaw-stretcht, unfarhomed, insatiate, varitious. Gumme. Weeping, sweating, distilling, dropping, spicy, fragrant, medicin aromatick, vertuous, viscous, clammy, glewy, odorous, shining, gli¦ing, rich, wealthy, precious.
Guns. v. Canons. esistless, thunder-mocking, murdering. Gut. Winding, turning, wrigling, writhing, windy, knotty, interwoven, rementall, flatuous. Gypsie. ragling, wandering, cheating, jugling, cogging, subtle, babling, cing, careless, nimble, theevish, swarthy, fulsome, black, nasty, y. H. Hagge. MUmbling, withered, unhallowed, hellish, ugly, nasty, fulsome, hideous, furious, malicious, mishapen, cruell, mischievous, ill-king, grumbling, muttering, spightfull, dreadfull, revengefull frightfull, shameless, five-turning, image-pricking, bloody. Haggard. v. Hawke. Haile. Skipping, icy, pebble, pelting, congealed, scattered, shattered, pestuous, crackling, ratling, impetuous, Crystall, Thundering, ne-spoyling. Haire. Braided, dangling, sleavy, silken, scattered, shining, pleated, curled, otty, ruffled, fluent, artless, snarled, flaring, uncomposed, shaggy, mbrosian, gracefull, fragrant, waving, beauteous, amber-orient, angled, crisped, frizled, roseate, bushy, disheveld, disparkled, shady, iting, wrigling, gilded, snaky, spreading, wiry. Hammer. Massie, conquering, victorious, subduing, cruell, tyrannizing, en∣cing, beating, knocking, working, laborious, industrious, rude, ystererous, robustious. Hand. Officious, snowy, lilly, marble, Ivory, Alabaster, smooth, soft, fleek, tin, velvet, thrifty, frugall, tender, trembling, active, stirring, labo∣ous, industrious, revengefull, veiny, ayding, sinewy, nervous, delicate, mbrosiall, well-proportioned, beauteous. Hangings. Sumptuous, costly, gaudy, painted, embroydered, pendant, state∣, curious, courtly.
Hanniball. Valiant, couragious, cruell, grimme, stern, fierce, undaun furious, Lybian, unconquered, Carthaginian, politick, wise, w¦lick, Martiall, thundering, prudent, adventurous, renowned, sto subtle. Happiness. v. Beatitude. Coveted, desired, unfathomed, flowry, enamouring, endless, ¦trancing, ravishing, soul-raping, soft, un-disturbed, un-in¦rupred. Harbenger. Preparing, fore-running, winged, pourveying, providing. Hardness. Stiffe, stiffening, rigid, unrelenting, unmoved, unyeelding, sulle surly, resisting. Hare. Purblind, fearfull, timerous, trembling, turning, doubling, ¦ing, fur-footed, short-lived, lecherous, fruitfull, bushy, brown brindled, squeaking, speedy. Harlot. Unchaste, uncivill, lascivious, wanton, lustfull, rampant, sal¦ous, dissolute, immodest, rotten, alluring, enticing, tempt perjur'd, mercenary, abscene, filthy, persidious, shameless, impud dissembling, infamous, dallying, notoious, bawdy flearing, gadd musty, nasty, infectious, pocky, loathsome, painted, cancred, train ichy, goatish, rammish, unblushing. Harmony. According, sweet, numerous, agreeing, melodious, pleasant, j¦full, gladsome, measur'd, diaposon'd, soul-invading, soul-raping, ¦trancing, Seraphick, delicious, enchanting, encharming, ¦vishing. Harp. Melodious, harmoneous, stringed, resounding, Thracian, Aoni crooked, Ivory, gilded, Lesbian, pleasant, warbling, quavering, ¦morous, merry, wanton, sweet-sounding, Bstonian, A¦dian. Harpie. Ravenous, devouring, gurmandizing, gluttonous, greedy, theevi insatiate, saucy, lickerous, glutting, winged, deformed, nasty, ug loathsome, raping, Stimphalian. Harrow. Toothed, bruising, raking, clod-breaking.
Hart. Long-liv'd, fearfull, timerous, light-foot, fleet, chased, panting, andering, weeping, braying, long-aged, trembling. Harvest. Joyfull, fruitfull, wealthy, copious, thankfull, rich, hopefull, ope-answearing, sickce-hlunting, sun-burnt, thirsty, laborious, toyle∣me, weaty, gain-full, teeming, reaping. Hasell. Bushy, branched, moyst, shady, leavy, rank. Hast. Impatient, desperate, Eagle-winged, swift-foot, sweaty, panting, eathless, flying, rembling, undiscovered, undiscerned, unper∣ived, rash, hudling, expeditious, speedy, important, unheady, busie, weeping, toyling, ungoverned, regardless, careless, poasting, auspi∣ovus, unhappy, labouring, willing, poasting, auspicious, unhappy, borious, dispatchfull, quick, preposterous, blustering, inconsi∣erate. Hate. Hatered. v. Envie. Heart-gnawing, fretting, sullen, full-rooted, mortall, inveterate, evengefull, murderous, deadly, cancred, blear-eyed, Vatinian, ferall, nreconciled. Haven. Sure, safe, desired, long-expected, joyfull, weedy, wished, anchor∣ng, peacefull, open, spatious. Hawke. Towring, eager, sharp-set, gryping, preying, theeving, killing, aring, long-wing'd, fleet-wing'd, high-pitchd. Hay. Witherd, foddering, loose, botle, botteld, sun-burnt, stiffe, dry, nn'd. Hazzard. Adventurous, dangerous, doubtfull, uncertain, fatall. Head. Towring, stately lofty, sence-lodging, understanding, Health. Active, desired-wished, perfect, joyous, sweet. Heap. Crowded, clustered, thronging, massie, unfarhomed, unmeasured, ounting, stored, wealthy, eopious. Hearb. Powerfull, vertuous, soft, sloory, green-clothed, sprouting, fragrant, leasant. odorous, sweet-smelling, wholesome, serviceable, usefull, ruitfull, medicinall.
Heard. Horned, bellowing, grazing, sttagling, wandering, forrest-h¦ing, trouping, numerous, swarming, thronging, wealthy. Heart, Melting, marble, rocky, infractuous, winding, treasurous, tho full, passionate, wounded, bleeding, tender, obdurate, relenting, relenting. Hearth. Flaming, chearfull, smoaky. Heat. Sweltering, schorching parching, quickning, active, boyling, ¦ling, seething, scalding, roasting, soultry, stewing, baking, bu glowing, singing, smoaking, smothering, dry, flaming, drying, vent, ardent, sweating, stifling, consuming, devouring, faint, spar swarthy, dusky, sutchy. Heathen. Misbelieving, obstinate, barbarous, superstitious. Heaven. Spangled, azure, arched, silver-paved, rolling, whirling, all-cla bright, vaulty, starry, star enchased, star-enameld, wheeling, s bosom'd, chrystall, lofty, turning, moving, glittering, unfatho unmeasured, star powdered, all-viewing, all-embracing, ▪skirted. Hedge. Thorny, bushy, thick-set, shrubby, woven, leavy. Hedge-hog. Bristly, thorny, prickly, thorn-backt, armed. Height. Towring, stately, ambitious, aspiring, slippery, stupendious. Hell. Insatiate, devouring, dismall, vasty, gaping, yawning, wide-mou¦ed, jew∣stretcht, dreadfull, pale, dark, stinking, wofull, painfull, ¦menting. Hellebore. Brain-purging. Helmet. Crested, plumy, dreadfull, massie, pointed, weighty, feather bright, glittering, glistering, shining, gilded, bristled, threatn batter'd, burnisht. Help. v. Aid. Hemlock. Cold, poysonous, green, fatall, deadly.
Hen. Clocking, brooding, hatching, loving, young, protecting▪ Hercules. Brawny, massie, un-conquered, un-wearied, stern, laborious, heaven∣ring, victorious, fearless, sullen, sturdy, sinewy, fierce, grimme, ndering. Heresie. Obstinate, wilfull, damned, cursed, dissentious, contradictious, ind, Church-rending, pernitious, seditious, proud, over-weening, ntastick, self-opinioned, factious, war-kindling, unlucky. Hermaphrodite. Ambiguous, promiscuous, mixed, sex-confused, mongrell, neuter, eminate. Hermit. v. Hermitage. Humble, cold; sad, melancholy, pensive, sedentary, pious, devout, igious, sullen, zealous, retir'd, recluse, abstemious, lovely, studious, okish, thoughtfull, meditating, withered, sequestered, aged, oystered. Herse. Sable, mournfull, pensive, black, balefull, sullen, dismall, pittied, moaned, bewayled. Hill. v. Mountain. Stately, moss-thrumb'd, hearby, climbing, lofty, steepy, proud, aspi∣ng, towring, mounting, sky-kissing, sky-threatning, cloud-in-wrap∣d, high-browed, shaggy, supercilious, aire-invading, str-brushing, elling, rising, woody, bushy, ascending, rocky, craggy, insolent, oud-headed. Hind. Nimble, tripping, light-foot, skipping, speedy, swift-pac't, light∣cold, timorous, fearfull, trembling, shie, skittish, wanton, isking. Hinges. Grinding, tatling, turning, twatling, creaking, speaking, blabbing, le-telling. Hippocrene. Wit-infusing, Chrystall, purling, Poet-prompting, Enthusiastick, spiring, intrancing. Hog. Wallowing, tumbling, rolling, miry, nasty, sluggish, grunting, ristled, greedy, hungry, devouring, gluttonous, filthy, fatted, full∣orged, drowsie.
Holyness. Pious, devout, precise, strict, religious, conscientious, grave, rig¦obedient, legall, upright. Honesty. Strict, rigid, just, equall, legall, even-hand, uncorrupted, ¦tainted, upright, unmoved, plain-dealing, simple. Honey. Fragrant, Bee-wrought, delicious, lushious, nectareous, yello gilded, clammy, viscous, frothy, fulsome- Honey combe, Spongy, delicious, nectareous, porows, parched, sqeezed, Be¦wrought. Honour. Clear, fair, bright, flatuous, windy, blazing, pompous, gaudy, pa∣ted, envied, glittering, radiant, beaming, eternall, enduring, lasti triumphant, inflaming, encouraging, provoking, egging, sp∣ring, incensing, prompting, swelling, fading, vaunting, flaunti glorious, tympanizing, shining, popular, prodigious, unfathom' frothy, waxen-winged. Hoof. Horned, hollow, arched, crooked, solid, printing, impressive. Hook. Crooked, bowed, catching, intangling, inveagling. Hope. Early, blooming, promising, flattering, fawning, pleasing, heart- holding, encouraging, soothing, towring, mounting, ambitious, ¦dacious, low, dejected, lofty, expecting, becalming, quieting, aspiting enlarging, feeding, comfortable, deceitfull, trayterous, bewitchi uncertain, inchanting, charming, spurring, covetous, tedious, insole inveagling, credulous, couragious, thirsty, quickning, persw∣sive. Horn. Writheld, sprouting, bending, sounding, crooked, pointed, fork offensive, branches, rigid, stiffe, moony, hoarse, knaggy, kno ragged. Horne. Waspish, stinging, buzzing, hors-bread, pievish, angry, pettish. Horrour. Cold, pale, wan, ghastly, black, dreadfull, trembling, affrighting amazing. Horse. foaming, chafed, barbed, warlike, fierce, prancing, horn-o,
couragious, panting, trapped, insulting, careering, impetuous, in∣lustrious, generous, curvetting, nimble, stirring, laborious, swea∣ing, swift-paced, high bounding, stamping, bit-champing, spur∣beying, speedy, hasty, posting, winged. Host. v. Army. Numerous, puissant, powerful, victorious, couragious. Hound. Ranging, yelping, yelling, fulmouth'd, cheared, deep-mouthed, wel-sented, quick-sented, hungry, greedy, devouting, fawning, pu∣suing, eager, chasing, swift, speedy, quick-nosed. Hour. Fleet, light, creping, sliding, gliding, riding, light-foot, light∣heeld, nimble, running, pacing, posting galloping, passing, flying, winged, hasty, speedy, swimming, tripping, stealing, leaping, am∣bling, trotting, spurring, feathered, soft-foote, slippery, swift-win∣ged, swift-paced, headstrong, unrestrained, uncurbed, smooth-sli∣ding, equal, unrecalled, succeeding, nere-returning, changing, yeel∣ding, careering rolling, wheeling. Humility. Low, pliant, submissive, obedient▪ obsequious, pleasing, grace∣ful, winning, taking, resigned, meeke, mild, crouching. Humour. Distilling, cold, salt, rheumatick, unhealthy, diseaseful, flowing, corrupting, fretting, viscous, clammy, flowing, glewie, vaporous, oping. Hunger. Griping, chearless, meager, starved, leane, pale, thin-chapt, sharp-fang'd, clinging, lanke, panting, sharp, gnawing, fretting, barking, torturing, tormenting, thin-gutted. Hunter. Gleesome, jolly, gamesome, eager, wood-ranging, chasing, pur∣suing, patient, speedy, wandering, roaming, toyling, busie, search∣ing. Husband. Loving, careful, loyal, disloyal, jealous, suspitious, embracing, hugging, chearing. Huske. v. Chaffe. Fruitlesse, empty, swelling, useless. Hyacinth. Soft, purple, blushing, beauteous, wanton, tender, way∣ling.
Hyades. Showry, stormy, tempestuous, cloudy, weeping. Hybla. Honey-breeding, fruitful, wealthy, Sicilian, flowry, fragr rich, lofty, Trinacrian Hydra. Lernean, snakie, losse-gaining, fruitful, fierce, pernicious, poyse∣nous. Hymen. Joyous, mirthful, frolick, smiling, genial, chast, torchie, crowned, soft, pleasant, feastful, flowry. Hypocrite. Saint-seeming, sniveling, dissembling, jugling, painted, chea∣ting, gulling, glosing, masked, visarded, secret, lurking, hollow, hearted, lip-holy, temporizing, time-serving, disguised, forml, double-hearted. Hyssop. Phlegme, purging, cleansing, bitter. I. Jaile. Jailer. Loathsome, nasty, noysome, fulsome, dark, darkesome, filhy, tedious, loathed, hollow, dusty, tattered, doleful, musty,  dankish, aire-lesse, vaultie, ugly, grim, sterne, austere, frowning, lowring, careful, watchful, jealous, dogging, eying. Jakes. Stinking, filthy, loathsome, nasty, fulsome, dirty, dungie, cornered, dark, darksome, obscure. Jambicks. Swift, free, fierce, swift-pac't, wanton, cruel, biting, chafing, ∣ging, lashing, jerking, satyrical, rayling, stinging. Janus. Two-fac'd, key-bearing, key-carrying, peaceful, old, ag ancient. January. v. Cold. Snowie, icie, cold, drowfie, sluggish, snow-bearded, barren, ¦fruitful, sterne, grim.
Jason. Noble, famous, perjur'd, perfidious, disloyal, deceitful, adventu∣ous, bold, couragious, wandring, proud, insolent, undaunted, thee∣ish, audacious. Jasper. Green, azure, purple, glittering, shining, beamie, transparent, leeke, smooth, yellow, dicoloured, many-coloured, streaked, checkerd. Javelin. Trembling, thrilling, darted, pointed, mortal, wounding, whir∣ed, quivering, singing, killing, bloody, swift-pac'd, sharpe-pointed, mpetuous, death-bringing, waving, Jaw. Gaping, yawning, devouring, wide-stretcht, bloody, blood-thir∣ty, vasty, foamy, carching, grinding, lightning, gasping, threatning, readful, affrightful, ravenous, sharpe-fang'd, snatching, greedy, hamping▪ Jay. Prating, painted, gaudy, speckled, checkerd, pyde, tatling, twat∣ing, pratling. Ice. Slippery, chrystal, glassie, transparent, shining, crusted, congea∣ed, thick-ribd, chilling, stiffned, benumming, united, glistering, igid, hanging, Idea. Shady, Tojan, leavie, sacred, branching, steepie, pine-bearing, atry, pleasant. Idlenesse, Lazie, lustful, lethargick, stupid, sottish, sluggish, dronish, drow∣ie, easie, cold, unactive, yawning, freezing, soft, lither, restive, dull, olling, shady, shapeless, truant, resty, careless, neglective, vitious, ernicious, vice-noursing, wanton, mischievous, un-employed, faint, dious, loathsome, detested, nuzling, barren, fruitless. Idolatry. Detestable, Aegyptian, superstitious, doing, gaudy, cursed, lying, toneous, erring, mad, sinful, bateful, blind, fabulous, prophane; moakie, damnable, obstinate, ignorant, toyish, paganish, heathenish, ond, nuzling, garish, zealous, ceremonious. Jealousie. Cold, hellish, trembling, fretting, enraged, self-orturing, soul∣artyring, wakeful, pale, groundless, raging, burning, wary, fear∣ul, timerous, furious, cautelous, peevish, hateful, malicious, reveng∣l, chumpish, lumpish, brutish, self-harming, green-eyed, over-cu∣rious,
sottish, quick-sighted, quick-eyed, yellow, grim, obser eye-rolling, ghastly, frowning, prying, outragious, raving, susp¦ous, suggesting, disquiet, careful, rival, waking, searching, dist¦ful, hair-braind, envious, impatient, unhappy, blind, boyling, ¦menting, racking, burning, flame-eyed, frantick, distempered, g¦dy, sterne-visaged, lean-chapt, sparkling, dizzy-eyed, wrathful, ¦gry, transporting, surmzing. Jest. Wanton, sportive, harmeless, sharp-witted, seurrilous, ridicul pleasant, mirthful, free, loose, dissolute, neat, handsome, bit cutting, innocent. Jet. Attractive, Negro, sable, straw-wooing, drawing, straw-cour straw-embracing, amorous. Jew. Incredulous, unbelieving, usurious, avaritious, griping, cr bloody, flint-hearted, oppressing, marble-hearted, wandering ¦cumcised, superstitious, wealthy, obstinate, ceremonious, serv scraping, wary, thrifty, tributary, slavish, hoarding, odious, detest hateful. Jewel. v. Gemmes. Pendant, hanging, spangling, glittering, costly, pretio courtly, dangling, sparkling, radiant, flaming, aire-gilding, aire-¦lightning, unvalued. Ignorance, Foggie, misty, cloudy, gloomy, uncertain, doubtful, waver staggering, stumbling, erroneous, muddy, blind, audacious, bo raw, rude, unconcieving, dull, grosse, admiring, affected, silly, sh¦low, simple, erring, thick, groping, Cimerian, dark, black, dus foppish, dull-eyed, barbarous, doltish, barren, unfruitful, lead lead-pated, fat-headed, stupid, blear-eyed, scaly, drowsie, mol▪eyed, sottish, fond, beetle-braind, pernicious, credulous, soon ov▪reached, grinning, presumptuous. Image. Pourtrayed, resembling, mocking, imitating, mimick, thoug reflecting, shape-representing, deceiful, adorned, adored, gilded. Immortality. Soft, flowery, endless, everlasting, never-ending, unfathome unconfined, bright, glorious, unconceived, uninterrupted, unco¦prehended. Impatience. v. Anger. Testy, angry, pettish, cholerick, distempered, frantick, ragi
furious, chafing, swelling, maleconrent, sterne. Impiety. Tyrannous atheistical, godlesse, cruel, sacrilegious, furious, dm∣ed, cursed, execrable, detestable, base, irreligious, diabolical, divelish. Imployment. Busie, active, stirring, instant, pressing, urgent, weighty, grave, mportunate, great, forcing. Importunity. Uncomely, unhandsome, unmannerly, forcing, urging, odious, mpatient, unruly, ungoverned, unanswered, unsatisfied combrous, olesting. Imposture. Lying, jugling, calumnious, injurious cheating, fraudulnet, flearing, oothing, shamelesse, bold, impudent, fallacious, sly, cunning, sub∣le, cogging. Imprisonment. Sad, cold, pensive, hard, grievous, painful, ignominious, wofull, wretched, bitter. Impudence. Steeled, flinty, scared, audacious, bold, unblushing, shamelesse, immodest, shallow, brazen, headstrong, shame-confounding, un∣daunted, odious, saucie, fearlesse, unawed, proud, arrogant, insolent, vice-noursing, bold-fac'd, brasse-browd. Incense. Persumed, fragrant, smoky, flaming, gummy, sweet, religious, as∣cending, aspiring, heaven-pleasing, priestly, sacred, vaporous, odo∣rous, superstitious. Inchantment. v. Magick. Magick, strong, charming, victorious, imperious, hellish, learned, mystick, powerful, binding, forcing, undissolved. Inconstancy. Light, vain, wavie, wavering, reeling, changing, mooving, floa∣ting, wheeling, turning. Increase. Fruitful, gainful, joyful, ample, welcome, rich, happy, large flowing, doubled, blest. India. Indian. Tawny, swarthy, sallow, wealthy, spicy, fruitful, black, barbarous, spatious, pearly, drug-bearing, aromatick, diving, brown, long-liv'd, lean, scorched, sun-burnt. Industry. Eager, active, stirring, working, quick, sharp, fierce, untir'd, painful, sweating, subtile, careful, watchful, in genious, adventurous, undiscou∣rag'd, couragious.
Infamy. Blasting, black-mouthed, shameful, dishonest, divulged, ignominious, scandalous, loathsome, spotted, notorious, leprous▪ Infancy. Infant. v. Babe. Soft, sucking, simple, harmelesse, toyish, gamesome, sportive, smiling, puling, unpractised, testie, lisping, peevish, froward, pe∣ish, angry, waspish, whimpering, silly, blooming, nonaged, didling, dandled, wadling, sprawling. Infection. Spreading, contagious, stinking, putrid, corrupt, filthy, nasty, noysome, loathsome, pernitious, deadly. Influence. Vertuous, vigorous, masculine, powerful, thriving, working, efficacious, unresisted, luckie, happy, smiling, frowning, favourable, malignant, unhappy, disastrous, heavenly, celestial. Ingratitude. Fowle, base, odious, shamelesse, detestable, vitious, impious, ab∣horred, unacknowledging, proud, insolent, arrogant, saucy, oblivi∣ous. Iniquity. v. Impiety. Injury. Boysterous, wrongful, abusive, outragious, intolerable, unsup∣ported, defaming, conturnelious, grievous, displeasing, enormou ignominious, unlawful, unruly, disordered, lawlesse, unpardone bold-fac'd, insulting. Inke. Mourning, sable, gummie, blotting, spotting, flowing, usefu the sable wave. Innocence. Spotless, taintless, untainted, harmeless, unstained, unsullied, white, snowie, simple, unaffected, lillyed, pure, clear, bright, chis calme, ensoyled, meeke, blameless, faultless, religious, pious, sacred, unwary, conscientious, dove-like, peaceful, quiet, soft, silent, smi∣ling, unappeached, infant, babish, guiltless. Insolence. v. Pride. Proud, haughty, disdainful, arrogant, swelling, stately, triumphing gay, fantastick, insulting, imperious, lofty, mounting, towring, sul∣len, surly, supercilious, hateful, headie, portly, burly, bold, respect∣lesse, disrespective, presumptuous, rash, audacious, rufling, rustling bustling, scorneful, over-weening, ambitious, strutting, imperuous, tympanizing, tyranzing, flaming, bubling, currish, churlish, brow-beating, puft, pursie, soaring.
Instrument. Melodious, harmonious, well-tuned, according, consorting, re∣sounding, usefull, laborious, industrious, toylsome, needfull. Intemperance. Loose, dissolute, careless, riotous, luxurious, disorderlie, irregular, unmeasured, voluptuous, brutish, bestiall, beastly, pernicious, life, shortning, short-lived, wanton, lustfull, lascivious, sluggish, drowsie, impoverishing, prodigall, unthrifty. Invention. Quick, sharp, acute, witty, ingenious, subtle, ready, speedy, quick∣ey'd, musing, thoughtfull. Joy. v. Pleasure. Chearfull, lightsome, beart-chearing, active, nuptiall, diffusive, enlarging, melting, leaping, feeling, intrancing, coveted, smiling, bursting, ravishing, soul-raping, heart-tickling, luxurious, delicious, pleasing, transitory, fleeting, trembling, dancing, frisking, attra∣ctive, fresh, soft, inchanting, imparadising, decitfull, deluding, bal∣my, transporting. Joynt. Nimble, supple, pliant, active, proportion'd, well-shap't, beau∣teous, gracefull, Iron. Rusty, solid, sparkling, hissing, burning, stiffe, unrelenting. Isickles. Pendant, dangling, eves-dropping, hanging, chrystall, crusty, con∣gealed, dull, roping, hoary. Italy. Italian. Fruitfull, healthy, pleasant, populous, warlike, well-peopled, spruce, near, amorous, proud courtly, complementall, ceremonious, jealous, suspitious, proud, insolent. Itch. Spreading, infectious, contagious, smarting, twitching, burning, scalding, mangy, inflaming, botchy, loathsome, nasty, fulsome, noysome. Judge. Angry, sterne, grave, grimme, frowning, brow-beating, aw∣full, learned, severe, impartiall, austere, unbribed, uncorrup∣ted, reverend, short-shorn, upright, equitable, even-handed, rigorous, unsiding, sacred, dreadfull, law-making, law-expound∣ing, sterne-visag'd, decreeing.
Judgement. Quick, quick-eyd, quick-sighted, clear-eyed, clear-sighted, con∣ceaving, sage, ripe, mature, exact, grave, accurate, purged, fine∣bolted, sifted, pure, cleare, refined, setled, staid, profound, deep, di∣ving, just, rigorous, censorious, solid, firme, stable, light, uncon∣stant, steady, unsteady, haire-braind, shallow, silly, floating, well-kneaded, supercilious, dough bak't, concocted, deliberate, rash, in∣considerate, chast, sober, wel-weighed. Jugler. Nimble, cheating, over-reaching, circumventing, cogging, craf∣ty, wily, misty, subtle, active, slight-handed, cozening, abusing, win∣ding. Juniper. Sandy, mountain, hard, knotty, twisted, branched, interwoven. June. Imperious, jealous, commanding, controling, royal, almighty, revengeful, swelling, chasing, angry, bitter, cruel, genial. Jupiter. Almighty, thundering, thunder-darting, Olympick, Pano∣phean, just, revengeful, heaven-ruling, al-commanding, eternal, tempest-guiding, al-seeing, al-knowing, cloud-bestriding. Justice. Impartial, strict, upright, equitable, grim, unbribed, uncor∣rupted, sacred, untainted, unappeached, rigid, rigorous, even-han∣ded, inviolate, powerful, wholesome, blamelesse, golden, severe, awful, dreadful, sterne, unfeed, unexorable, unmoved, unchanged, unprejudiced, indifferent, unsiding, equal, un-inclining, plain∣dealing. Ivie. Clasping, wanton, youthful, twisting, clinging, twining, em∣bracing, flattering, fawning, uxorious, amorous, climing, clam∣bering, mounting, ambtious, writhing, wrigling, winding, snakie, creeping, crawling, twirling, hugging, wandering, pale, spreading, leavy, victoious, lascivious, lustful, wanton, pliant, creeping, e∣cious, trembling, encroaching. Ivory. Spotlesse, Indian, polishr, burnisht, costly, unstained, Numidian,
Assyrian, shining, speckled, smooth, fleek, unwrinkled, snowy. K. Kalender. NUmbering, time-directing, annall'd, recording, day-ranking, immortalizing, historious. Kennell, Sinking, pudly, nasty, sulsome, loathsome, noysome, flowing, uddy, filthy, dirty. Kernell. Fleshy, substantiall, inclosed, boxed, soft, pleasant, delightfull, elicious, lurking, sculking, imprisoned. Key. Treasurous, turning, safe-keeping, winding, admitting. Kidde. Frisking, climing, browsing, wanton, sportive, tender, wander∣ng, sucking, stragling, spotted, speckled, gamesome, frigging, gad∣ing, busie nimble, tumbling, gambolling. King. Scepter-bearing, crowned, scepter-swaying, awfull, dreadfull, commanding, princely, Majestick, sacred, glorious, imperious, con∣rolling, adored, powerfull, puissant, magnificent, pompous, stately, portly, glittering, victorious, God-like, renowned. Kiss. Balmy, spicy, delicious, uniting, impressive, zealous, Soul-trans∣fusing, soul-raping, inchanting, charming, heart-stealing, love∣darting, melting, sugred, Nectard, moystening, lingering, tedi∣ous, ceremonious, fond, wanton, amorous, baudy, leacherous, Printing, dinting, sealing, wounding, love-dropping, smacking, entrancing, untoward, froward, forced, wrested, warme, musky, yeilding, welcome, joyfull, chearing, sweet, billing, ambrosian, voluptuous, joyous, delightfull, lascivious, repeated, dewie, soft, ravishing, bashful, modest, Virgin, mayden, chaste, fawn∣ing, courting, arresting, smiling, tempting, wooing, strugling, coy, breathing, panting, fragrant, roseate, treacherous.
Kite. Flagging swooping, gliding, swimming, ravenous, devouri greedy, swift, theevish, preying, raping, goury, crow-hating, fox-¦ting, soaring. Kitchin. Smoaky, greasie, flamy, roasting, frying, boyling, broyling, steamy▪ black, hot, stifling fulsome. Knave. v. Raskall Base, rude, raskally, saucy, paltry, surly, stubborn, lecherous, mischie∣vous, crafty, wily, sly, cunning, cheating, cozening, jugling, ove¦reaching, circumventing, impudent, shameless, unblushing, thee filching, pilfering, malapert, unruly, boysterous, burly, lubberly, ¦governed, abusive. Knee. Supple, bending, crouching, cringing, adoring, humble, obsequ∣ous, obedient, bowing, supplyant, crooking, sinewy, willing, honour∣ing, ceremonious, complementall. Knight. Valiant, noble, famous, warlike, Martiall, crested, couragious, a¦venturous, undaunted, renowned, armed. Knowledge. Sacred, learned, venerable, ingenious, letter'd, studious, artfull, i∣dustrious, active, usefull, grave, experienc't, skilfull, quick, ready. L. Labour. INdustrious, painfull, toylsome, active, stirring, assiduous, chearf carefull, hard, vigilant, deserving, watchfull, fruitfull, gainfull, a¦vantogeous, patient, sedulous, officious, diligent, obsequious, inces¦sant, weary, unwearied, sweaty, continued, Herculean, Sy¦phian. Labyrinth. Winding, turning, amazing, twining, mazy, intricate, doubling, blind, darksome, crooked, snaky, pathless, subtle, ingenious, devise∣full, vaulty, intangling, confounding, curious. Lace. Gaudy, gay, trimming, pompous, fantastick, over-laying, the ou∣ward lining of the clothes.
Lachesis. v. Destinie. Life-twisting, fate-spinning, impartiall, unchanging. Ladder. caling, climing, ascending, mounting. Lady. Soft, feeble, weak, silken, glittering, stately, portly, courtly, paint∣d, pompous, beauteous, gracefull, neat, spruce, complementall, ver∣uous, courteous, flanting, rustling, gaudy, amorous, wanton, angled. Laies. Harmonious, melodious, well-tuned, well-timed, pleasant, glad∣ome, gleesome, joyous, mirthfull, sprightly, stately, charming, ntrancing, inchanting, delicious, soul-raping, lulling, sence-bereave∣ng, warbling, Syrenian, ear-enamouring. Lake. Unfathom'd, soundless, winding, silver, fishy, miry muddy, sluggish, rowsie, slow, still, weedy, clear, azure, swelling, crisped, wavy, gulphy. Lamb. Frisking, frigging, gamboling, tumbling, wanton, gamesome, spor∣tive, tender, gadding stragling, following, wadling, chearfull, eate-lugging, metry, skipping, fearefull, frizled, bleating, silly, Lamp. Blazing, flamy, watchfull, waking, thirsty, laborious, industrious, oyle-drinking, oyle-supping, sucking, attractive, oyly, sputtering, stu∣dious, shining, trembling. Lamprey. Azure, slippery, glewy, clammy, speckled, viscous, lickerous, muddy. Lance. Warlick, murdering, brandisht, revengefull, threatning, pointed, shaking, trembling, dreadfull, thrilling, whirling, knotty, knaggy, victorious, conquering, singing. Landskip. Various painted, pourtraid, resembling, pleasant, described, descy∣pherd, pensill'd, curious, artfull. Language v Eloquence, Flowing, sluent, smooth-pac't, flowry, strewed with flowers, well cought, winning, taking, stately, perswasive, delicious, nectarean, intrancing, inchanting, charming, overcoming, smooth, oyly, in∣sinuting.
Lantern. Shining, leading, guiding, way-showing, way-clearing, artificial-sun. Lapwing. Long-shankt, crested, nimble, worm-devouring, shell-bearing, ha∣sty, speedy, puling, coasting. Lark. Gamesome, early, early-rising, mounting, soaring, harmo∣nious, amorous, crested, jolly, merry, chirping, skipping, gentle, watchfull, morning, timely, wanton, sportive, summer, presaging, Lyrick. Laughter. Loud, loose, shrill, shallow, saucy, wanton, fawning, disorderd, unruly, fleering, sneering, unseasonable, unseasoned, filly, ignoran, disturbing, noisefull, side-holding. Law. Stern, strict, just, wholsome, rigid, unpartiall, powerfull, craggy, knotty, winding, turning, controlling, constraining, enforcing, binding, obstreperous, litigious, wrangling, brawling, coercive, compelling, directing, revenging, severe, imperious, equall, rigorous, dreadfull, awfull, cowing, awing, scourging, thorny, intangling strife-full, contentious. Lawyer. Quilletting, querking, brawling, wrangling, litigious, contend ous, arguing, purse-milking, clamorous, eloquent, moting, moving, silver-griping, feesome, obstreperous, nimble-chapt, learned, grave, knowing, skilfull, greasie-fisted, petti-fogging. Lawn. Snowy, thinne, limber, transparent, fine-spun, cob-web. Lawnes. Motly, enameld, flowry, tufted, dasied, painted, gaudy, smiling, verdant, enflowred, embroydered, checkered, delightfull, pleasan, sportive, wide-skirted, fair-clothed, spacious, green-plusht, fragran, fruitfull, herby, grassie, russet. Lawrell. Victorious, triumphant, crackling, virgin, fresh, immortall, peace∣full, crowning, green-leav'd, learned, tufted, prophesying, verdant Lead. Massie, dull, heavie, melancholly, melting, solid, pliant, yielding. League. Friendly, peacefull, according, agreeing, confederate, sociable, conjured, conspiring, combining.
Leanness. Meager, starved, thin-chapt, mishapen, deformed, hideous, ugly, unhandsome, dwindling, lank, writheld, pale, hollow-cheekt, scraggy∣bond, ghastly, greezly. Leaper Leaprosie. Loathsome, hoary, eating, freting, nasty, fulsome, scurfie, spotted, speckled freckled, measeld, hoarse, whizzing, wheazing, despised, loathed, contagious, infectious. Learning. Sacred, honoured, venerable, wealthy, ingenious, laborious, in∣dustrious, painfull, subtle, pleasant, fruitfull, usefull, gracefull, com∣mendable. Lecher. Baudy, salacious, filthy, lustfull, ramping, liver-scalded, itch∣ing, burning, goatish, beastly, licentious, rammish, ram∣bling. Lees. Dreggy, muddy, squeezed, fruitless, course. Legat. v. Embassadour. Legend. Licentious, lying, fabulous, idle, stuft, abusing, guilty. Lent. Abstemious, fishy, cleanly, sober, temperate, austere, sparing, thrifty Leopard. Cruell, swift, Lybian, azure, wary, spotted, monky-hating, thick-skind. Lethargy. Drowsie, fluggish, lither, unactive, dull, doting, forgetfull, dream∣ing, sleepy, cold, moist, sotish, lumpish, heavy, benumming. Lettice. Tender, crispy, curled, cold, milky, loosening, nourishing, folded, sober. Libbard. v. Leopard. Libell. v. Pamphlet. Scandalous, seditious, rayling, calumnious, reviling, abusive, inju∣ious, licentious, lawless, loose, dissolute, regardless, saucy, audaci∣ous. Liberty. Idle, easie, desired, ill-disposed, loose, unrestrayned, unrayned, un∣ruly, disordered, licentious, lawless, uncurbed, free, unconsined, un∣bridled, sweet, joyfull, pleasing, delightfull.
Library. Studious, industrious, laborious, well-stor'd, furnisht, famo, wealthy, copious, stately. Lice. Creeping, crawling, nasty, eating, twitching, filthy, loathsome, beggarly, infamous, many-footed. Licentiousness. v. Libertie. Lie. Liar. Deceitfull, deluding, detested, prodigious, shameless, infamous, ig∣nominious, fearfull, cowardly, loud, invented, devised, crafty, po∣litick, cheating, jugling, brass-browd. Life. v. Age. Contented, discontented, quiet, disquiet, carefull, active, unactive, swift-pac't, uncertain, decaying, flowing, frail, laborious, weary, tedious, sober, austere, happy, unhappy, laborious, easie, solitary, re∣tired, lovely, melancholly, merry, jolly, mirthfull, delightfull, joyous, delicious, voluptuous, idle. Light. Beaming, radiant, sacred, scattered, naked, disrobed, dismantled, unmufiled, sputtering, blazing, flaring, gladsome, all-quickning, joysome, gleesome, chearfull, all-cheaing, diffusive, garish, aire-gild∣ing, silver, laborious, industrious, active, shining, glittering, trem∣bling, quavering, piercing, purple, beauteous, gracefull, azure, ga∣dy, life-infusing, night-exiling, victorious, glorious, trium∣phant, Starre-chasing, waving, blushing, cleare, sparkling, trans∣parent. Lightning. Three-forkt, pale, glowing, nimble, blasting, winged, three∣winged, flashing, sulphury, whizzing, swift-pac't, resistless, trans∣piercing, sodain, flashing, flaming, streaming, silver, waving, quick, sparkling, fiery, trembling, darted, flame-feathered, flame-winged, flame-plumed, schorching. Lilly. Unsullied, unspotted, untainted, taintless, bright, silver, pale∣fac't, milk-sprung, open, smiling, painted, fruitfull, tall, royall, mayden. Limbeck. Distilling, dropping, Chymick, eztracting, glowing. Limmes. Snowy, shapefull, handsome, beauteous, gracefull, well-shape, well-proportioned, harmonious, comely, ivory.
Lips. Ruby, scarlet, vermillion, carnation, stammell, blushing, rosie, morous, balmy, tempting, melting, delicious, roseall, corall, cherry, harming, inchanting, intrancing, soft, warm, purple, gently-welling, trembling, honey-flowing, love-dropping, juycy, nectare∣us, smiling, wanton, Sister, life-breathing, life-infusing. Listening. Attentive, secret, silent, greedy, eves-dropping. Liver. Spongy, bloody, blood-making, purple, hot, desiring, blood-mint∣ng, veiny, amorous, scalding, trembling, panting, digestive. Loadstone. Attractive, drawing, tenacious, embracing, wanton, uxorious, able. Lobster. Scarlet, crawling, lusty. Load. v. Burden. Locks. v. Hair. Wiry, sleeky, shaggy, watled, spreading, snary, dangling, curled, frizled, braided, scattered, pleating, floating, flaring, amber, dishe∣velled, discomposed, disparkled, bushy, rufling, fluent, artless. Logick. Strict, arguing, wrangling, contentious, disputing Longing. Unsatisfied, desirous, covetous, greedy, insatiate, passiona, ar∣ent, burning, amorous. Look. v. Countenance. Speaking, whispering, discoursive, smiling, modest, disdainfull, ournfull, chearfull, supercilious, attractive, winning, wooing, su∣percilious, stern. Lord. Imperious, controlling, honoured, dreadfull, awfull, command∣ng, wealthy, powerfull, noble, stately, portly, pompous. Lot. Ambiguous, unconstant, uncertain, various, blind, deceitfull, de∣uding, happy, unhappy, chance-full, changing, prosperous, suc∣cessfull. Love. Officious, doting, obsequious, inflamng, uniting, resolved, power∣ull, commanding, imperious, uncontrolled, adventurous, melting, urning, zealous, affectionate, sportive, marrow-boyling, tyran∣ous, blind, cruell, remorseless, victorious, venereous, fond,
idolatrous, superstitious, jealous-winged, captivating, conqueri deceitfull, heart-stealing, thievish, inchanting, bewitching, care thoughtfull, fearfull, sollicitous, fawning, flattering, untam honeyed, fugred, wanton, lascivious, slippery, envious, joy gamesome, ambitious, audacious, ticklish, secret, un-fathom' unmeasur'd, unexpressed, silent, couragious, transporting, impatie tedious, passionate. Lover. Fantastick, stirring, active, luxurious, perfumed, gorgeous, g¦tle, neat, spruce, pert, nimble, obsequious, dancing, flatteri trimme, brisk, jeting, joyous, languishing, frizled, crisped, maide fooling, toying, sportive, dapper, impatient, inconstant, submiss kembed, sleek-hair'd, fresh, watchfull, melancholly, glancing, gle¦ing, captivated, pale, jealous, youthfull, heartless, gainsome, boasti blind, mute, flazing, uxorious, wanton, bashfull, modest, pens pleasant, whispering, gay, gaudy, neat, jolly, frolick, sad, courteo complementall, carefull, thougtfull, intranced, grieved, secret, p¦fainting, eye-ravisht. Lowse. v. Lice. Lowinge Loud, noysefull, rebounding, plaintfull, complaining, mournf lofty, sad, rufull, bemoaning, smoakie, foamie, fuming, resou¦ing, eccohoing. Lucifer. Watchfull, ushering, blushing, radiant, beaming, bight, ¦rora's harbinger. Lucke. Successefull, prosperous, desired, favourable, smiling, propitio advantageous. Lullabie. Sad, pensive, drowsie, carefull. charming, sleepie. Lunges. Spungie, lifting, wasting, fanning, breathing, panting, flappi flatuous, cooling, windie, heart-wrapping, involving, swelli pursie. Lure. Training, calling, inviting, wooing, pleasing, baiting, treach¦rous, inciting, soothing, false, czening, cheating, delusive, ¦ceiving, deceitful. Lust. Itchie, flaming, brutish, pampered, untamed, wild, sco¦inging, intemperate, goatish, stallion, lewd, disordered, gree
rampant, unrain'd, hot, uncurbed, unbrideled, rammish, unruly, nameful, burning, beastly, lawlesse, licentious, unrestrained, las∣vious, whorish, baudy, insatiate, brotheld, liver-scalding, carbo∣ading, corne-haunting, raging, exuberous, tempring, luxurious, otous, ruffian, stanchlesse, ranke, impetuous, voluptuous, sensual, eastial, filthy, odious, damned, cursed, outragious, furious, por∣entuous, infamous, stinging, provoking, obscene, inconsiderate, eady, dark, impure, secret. Lustre. Dazling, radiant, beamy, darting, resplendent, bright, reflecting, hining, glorious, beauteous, graceful, flaming, fiery, trembling, winkling, starry, sunny, glittering, cheareful, eye-conquering, aire∣ilding, enviou, victorious, triumphar, pompous, varnisht. Lute. Melodious, harmonious, warbling, quavering, trembling, care-hrming, delicious, ivory, golden, melancholy, amorous, sweet-ounding, many-stringed, Lesbian. Luxury. v. Gluttony. Prodigality. Infamous, dissolute, disordered, intemperate, pompous, revelling, ascivious, prodigal, spendthrift, expensiue, exuberous, overflowing, uperfluous, voluptuous, costly, sumptuous, harmeful, pernicious, ishonest, unchst, brutish, unmeasured, wanton, delicious, damned, cursed, detested, goatish, cramming, profuse, unthrifty, wastful, sy∣baritick, venereous, idle, slow-bellied, ful-gorged, excessive. Lybia. Lybian. Scorched, broyled, savage, portentuous, monster-breeding, dry, sandy, barren, sun-burnt, parched, soultry, swarthy, thirsty, scalding, sweltring, light-clothed, cruel fierce, rebellious, perfidious, hot, tawny. Lyon. Generous, cruel, furious, devouring, impetuous, Thracian, sa∣vage, mountain, yellow, engorging, audacious, Massylian, fierce, ea∣ger, greedy, hungry, hunger-starved, couragious roaring, undaunted, angry, proud, rough, dreadful, Lybian, frizled, shaggy, Getulian, ro∣bustious, untamed, grim, swift-pac't, cock-fearing, watchful, pursie, panting, fire-searing, chafed, stordy, awlesse, fearlesse, lusty, Numi∣dian, Arcadian, hot, Idumaean. M. Madnesse. DIstempered, wild, savage, pitied, disordered, frantick, giddy, stern∣visaged, headstrong, unruly, untamed, flame-eyed, lean-chapt,
grim, ghastly, entaged, tempestuous, boyling, stormy, frothy, in∣patient, impetuous, transporting, hair-braind, distracted. Magazin. Wealthy, wel-stored, thronging, crowded, wel-furnish, large, copious, spatious, vaulty. Magistrate. Honoured, venerable, grave, reverend, publick, just, grim, ste, stern-visaged, stately, purpled, awful, dreadful, brow-beating, an∣gry, frowning, severe, impartial, sowre-lookt, austre, rigorous, la-executing, law-entrusted, upright, unsiding, even-handed, unb∣bed, uncorrupted, crabbed. Magick. Secret, hidden, black, portentuous, wonder-causing, cursed, helli, execrable, mumbling, charming, inchanting, muttering, ceremoi¦ous, superstitious, powerful, commanding, deceitful, jugling, co¦juring, presaging, mysterious, mystick, imperious, perplexing, ¦forcing, efficacious, exorcising, victorious. Maid. Blushing, bashful, trembling, fearful, beauteous, ingenious, , froward, disdainful, smiling, modest, shamefac't, amorous, untai∣ted wanton, spruce, neat, trim, pranking, mincing, quaint. Majesty. Awful, controlling, imperial, adored, rising, fear-infusing, sove¦rain, grave, wel-tempered, sterne, stout, princely, kingly, royal, commanding, attractive, clear, proud, sacred, brow-beating, brigh, supercilious, beamy, chearful, graceful, high, rich, portly, stately, pompous, powerful, glorious, gracious, beauteous, swelling, ∣mooved, undaunted, lofty, flowry, smiling, winning, blazing. Main. v. Ocean. Sea. Impetuous, wavie, swelling, curled, frothy, floating, chafing, ∣gorging, pathless, boundless, unconfined, boyling, raging, roari, greedy, flowing, engulphing, working, licentious, gulphy, toyling unfathomed. Malady. Infectious, diseaseful, disquiet, heart-fretting, oppressing, co∣tagious, dull, pining, pale, grievous, torturing, painful, vexi incurable, hopeless, pettish, peevish, feral, griping, twitching, gir∣ing, sad, pinching, nipping, pulling, wringing, cutting, gaulin doleful, bitter, gnawing, racking, smarting, lingring, noysome, ∣dious, loathsome, impatient, wasting, sucking, eating, whining, ∣ling, plintful, soaking, ghastly, wan, bleak, discoloured, sallo
consuming, decaying, withering, sowre-lookt, crabbed, powting, diseaseful, appalling, bed-rid, wayward, froward, pittied, grumbling, complaining, groaning, grunting, unhealthful, crasie, pensive, pining, wearying, weary. decrepid. Malice. Revengeful, spightful, active, cancred, sly, crafy, secret, subtile crooked, stirring, fork-tongued, pale, black-mouthed, poysonous, sullen envious, rancorous, swelling, blew-eyed, squint-eyed, rest∣lesse, killing, stabbing, cutting, wounding, snakie, viperous, blear∣eyed, self-eating, self-consuming, self-torturing, self-martyring, whispering, lean-chapt, carping, censorious, boyling, undermining, nake-haird, burning, flaming, deadly, heart-gnawing, heart-fret∣ing, biting, currish, unappeased, implacable, cruel, bloody, calum∣nious, hard-hearted, marble-hearted, flint-hearted, inhumane, re∣morseless, unrelenting, devouring, resolved, inraged, incensed, in∣exorable. Mallowes. Bearded, hairy, loosening, light, soft, wholesome. Mandrake. Squealing, ill-boding, lustful, venereous. Mane. Shaggy, yellow, flaxen, furled, frizled, pleated, braided, rough, dangling, hanging, snarled, flaring, graceful, waving, floating, spreading. Manna. Delicious, honyed, tast-pleasing, ambrosial, oseate, heaven-sent, ained, showry, savory, falling, nourishing. Marble. Lasting, obdurate, enduring, curled, Parin, sleeke, smooth, rocky, leprous, freckled, spotted, speckled, polisht, Numidian, solid, shining, glittering, coloured, weeping, Phrygian, azure, plaine, re∣morseless, senseless, unrelenting, painted, hard, cold, stiffe, rigid, breathless, well-laboured, during, Corinthian, chill. Marigold. Flaming, blazing, gilded, time-observing, sun-courted, opening, shutting, yellow, shining, garden-sun, sun-enamoured, dew∣drowned. Mariner. Industrious, sea-tost, storme-beaten, adventurous, vowing, wan∣dring, trembling, fearful, greedy, avaritious, sea-chasing, sea-faring, sea-surrowing, sea-cutting, sea-tracing, wealthy, covetous, expert, kil-ful, wind-observing, star-gazing.
Market. Busie, thronging, crowded, clamorous, cozening, noiseful, pro∣miscuous, buying, selling uttering, open, publick, weekly, wel-stored, wel-furnisht, providing, dispensing, expensive. Marmoset. Antick, foolish, toyish, smiling, grinning, painted. Marriage. Uniting, peaceful, agreeing, mirthful, pleasant, glewing, con∣joyning, coupling, chaining, sementing, rivetting, shackling, kni∣ting, fettering, joyful, joyous, frolick, smiling, genial, sacred, flow∣ry, feastful, chast, incestuous, happy, successeful, ill-boding, lawfu, unlawful, stollen, secret, amorous, loving, solemne, ceremonious, ingrafting, manacling. Marrow. Melting, bone-lining, pithie, bone-boxed, enchested, secret, so, inward, close, enclosed, flowing, fat, oily, unctious, boyling, frying Mars. Bloody, blood-thirsty, blood-quaffing, swarthy, sweaty, crue dreadful, raging, raving, warlick, fatal, lascivious, venereous, in∣petuous, unconquered, angry, furious, flame-eyed, unappeased, ∣sparing, stern-visaged, grim, gastly, crested, casked, plumed, rough savage, fierce, remorselesse, implacable, couragious, undaunt, murtherous, thundering, inexorable. Marsh. Marish. Slimy, muddy, fenny, environed, herby, grassie, rushy, sedge, moist, plashie, watrish, dank, dirty, willow-bearing. Martyr. VVilling, patient, faithful, flame-embracing, burning, sta-kissing, pious religios, conscientious, valiant, couragious, undau∣ted, fearlesse, joyful, constant, pitied, unmoved, glorious, honoured tortured, tormented. Martyrdome. Heavy, grievous, tyrannous, painful, joyfull, cruel, bloody, ho∣noured, glorious, pious, tormenting. Massacre. Bloody, ruhlesse, cruel, murtherous, impious, hellish, butch∣ring. Mast. Lofty, towring, aspiring, winged, sail-bearing, splitting, trem∣bling, quavering. Mastiffe. Eager, fierce, snarling, couragious, grinning, watchful, noysef
barking, devouring, bristling, house guarding, bawling, hungrie, furi∣ous, greedie, yawling, surly, grimme, sullen, grumbling, muzzld, colla'd. Matron. Sober, grave, modest, portly, stately, aged, chast, honoured, respe∣ctive, well-carriaged. May. Delightsome, gladsome, gleesome, mirthful, jolly, joyful, chearful, frolick, glooming, budding, springing, flowry, fruitful, teeming, en∣ameld, cheery, youthful, checkerd, lovely, beauteous, wehy, sportful, gamesome, smiling, blossom'd, embroyderd, painted, Mt∣ley, guidie. Maze. Perplexing, ambiguous, winding, uncertain, turning-blind, dark∣some, crooked, subtle, snakie, distractful, giddy, dizzy. Mead. Meadow. v. Plains. Motly, smiling, verdant, en-flowed, fragrant, herby, grassie-paved, embroyderd, diaperd, enameld, tufted, dazied, leveld, fertle, fruitful, sportive, gamesome, green-plusht, checkerd, gaudy, painted, fair-cloathd, wide-skirted, flowre-enambled, flowry-mantled, green-mantled, soft-coatep, pleasant, spatious, flowre-spangled, green-brest∣ed, stream-embroiderd. Mean. Golden, vertuous vice-interceeding, impartial, commendable, praise-ful, vice-dividing, equal, well-tempered. Measure. Confined, unconfined, bounded, unbounded, boundless, proporti∣oned, equal, unequal, unfathomed, uncertain, squared, presribed, li∣mitted, limitless. Medea. Unchaste, cruel, charming, subtle, bloody, furious. Medicine, Cordial, powerful, healthful, confirming, helpful, comforting, health-giving, restorative, health-restoring. Meditation. Deep pious, secret, thoughtful, pensive, silent, sad, dumb, melan∣choly, solitary, retired. Megoera. Hideous, ugly, gastly, cruel, snake-haird, furious, snakie, haggish, swelling, snarling, dreadful, hellish, dismal, flame-eyed, spightful. Melancholy. v. Grief. Froward, sad, pensive, solitary, lovely, black, sable, lumpish, dumpish,
chumpish, sullen, sowere, swarthy, fearful, reposed, dull, earthy, re∣cluse, retired, drooping, discontented, gloomy, dusky, heart-con∣tracting, dejected, discouraged, drooping, whining, puling, powting, pittied, heart-breaking, sequestred, barren, rugged, slow, saturnine, unsociable. Melody. v. Harmony. Harmonious, according, sweet, pleasant, gladsome, soul-invading, soul-raping, intrancing, Seraphick, delicious, inchanting, charming, ravishing. Memory. Faithful, firme, bounteous, treasurous, recording, lasting, reen∣tive, tenacious, waxy, impressive, imprinted, thankful, happy, sacred, fruitful, teeming, pregnant, eternal, locking, enchested. Merchant. Careful, laborious, industrious, avaritions, greedy, sea-scourged, usurious, trafficking, early, busie, stirring, bargain-driving, tru∣ing, adventurous, sea-tost, sea-faring, sea-scouring, sea-cutting, sea∣cutting, sea-furrowing, sea-tracing, wealthy, storm-beaten. Mercury. Swift, nimble-footed, winged, sage, rod-bearing, subtile, thee∣vish, eloquent, sweet-tongued, cunning, crafty, wary, glozing, col∣loguing, ear-tickling, perswasive, quaint, soothing. Mercy. Embracing, pittying, gracious, melting, relenting, soft, welcome, yeelding. Mermaids. Inticing, alluring, encharming, inchanting, delicious, training, floating, green haired, crafty, subtile. Meteors. v. Comets. Portentuous, gazing, blazing, revengeful, bearded, flaming, bur∣ning, prodigious, frightful, exhaled, curled, bright-haired, presa∣ging, ruddy, streaming, bristled, glozing; Metephor. Quaint, strained, forced, fa-fetched, translated, painted, flowry. Mettals. Rich, wealthy, solid, lurking, hidden, buried, veiny, massie, refi∣ned, glittering, inerthed, interred, searched. Milk. Trembling, waving, smoaking, noursing, feeding, nourishing, curded, creamy, plenteous, uberous. Mill. Turning, winged, grinding, squeezing, whirling, twirling, trilling, news-mining, common, laborious.
Mind. Discoursive, thoughtful, active, roving, nimble, winged, wande∣ring, flitting, posting, inventive, subtile, deviseful, contriving, ro∣ming, ranging, floating, forging, working, quick, busie, minting, coyning, pregnant, teeming, wealthy, industrious, studious. Mine. Rich, wealthy. searched, obscure, secret. Mineral. Rich, wealthy, fat, sulphury, unctious, hidden, secret, lurking, concealed, inearthed, interred, buried, veiny, creeping. Minos. v. Judge. Grim, sterne, rigorous, impartial, uncorrupted, unbribed, grim∣visaged, grave, law-giving, inexorable. Minotaure. Two-shapt, bloody, cruel, devouring, deformed, ugly, hideous, monstrous, Cretian. Mint. Industrious, laborious, coyning, industrious, stamping, wealthy, golden. Minute. Swift-winged, swift-flying, nimble, light-foot, pygmy, speedy, hasty, hastening, changing, succeeding, brief, short-lived, stealing, theevish, posting, fleet, light, creeping, sliding, gliding, running, light-heeld, pacing, running, galloping, swimming, feathered, soft∣footed, ambling, slippery, rolling, wheeling, smooth-sliding. Miracle. Stupendious, admired, prodigious, subtile, divine, sacred, unac∣customed, strange, unheard, unbeleeved, powerful, amazing. Mirrour. Chystal, shining, shape-reflecting, representing, smooth, sleeke, silver, glttering, resembling, mocking, mimick, impartial, faithful, imitating, unflattering, pourtreying. Mirth. v. Joy. Frolick, jolly, joyous, joyful, pleasant, tickling, gamesome, spor∣tive, toyish, graceful, frantick, gigling, lavish, sprightful, active, youthful, gleesome, gladsome, chearful, lightsome, heart-chearing, diffusive, heart-enlarging melting, friking, soft, inchanting, loose, free, delightful, sprightly, heart-easing, giddy. Misery. Oppressing, distressed, perplexed, galling, wringing, crushing, bruising, grinding, heart-breaking, killing, heart-rending-tearing-contracting, puling, warping, enraging, pensive, dejecting, suppres∣sing,
pinching, heart-fretting, gnawing, impatient, pitied, hollow-y▪ Mist. Foggy, rusty, gloomy, dussty, drowsie, groping, dark, thick, stfling choaking, smoaky, vaporous, unhealthy, unwholsome, diseaseful, du spongy, mufling, drooping, swarthy, dropsie, swelling, sullen, fen∣su sleepy, contagious, infectious, black, obscuring, shadowing, floatin empty, dampish. Miter. Parled, enameld, crowning, sacred, glittering, gilded, honoure adored, venerable, glorious, two-topr, head-impaling. Modesty. Maiden, Virgin sober, pure, chaste, grave, vestal, silen, blushing bshful, respective, fearful, sweet, cold, graceful, winning, shamefac', well-tempered, strait-lac't, pious, trembling, corall. Moisture. Dank, watry, dampish, cold, fluid, flowing, clammy, liquid. Mole. Mining, digging, lifting, working, undermining, blind, pernicious, earthing, quick-hehring, listening. Moment. v. Minutes. Monarch. Soveraign, powerful, puissant, imperious, portly, Scepter-beari, crowned, scepter'd, renowned, valiant, royal, warlike, tyrannizing, y∣rannous, scepter swaying, awful, dreadful, commanding, majestick, ¦cred, glorious, pompous, stately, magnificent, victorious, glittering, controlling. Money. Cveted, desired, life-sustaining, almightie, useful, corrupting, rule∣ing, commanding, scraped, heaped. Monk. Shaven, cloysterd, shaved-crown, recluse, sullen, zealous, pious, e∣ligious, conscientious, abstemious, lovely, melancholy, retired, seden∣tary, solitary, bookish, studious, contemplating, devotious. Monkey. Toysul, toyish, sportive, gamesome, nimble, active, phantastick, sprightly, mimick, imitating, wily, counterfeiting, medling. Monster. Prodigious, stupendious, portentuous, ugly, gastly, hideous, de∣formed, ill-shapen, horrid, dreadful, affrightful, cruel, feral. Monument. Lasting, stately, proud, ambitious, time-worn, memorable, immor∣tal, speaking, enduring, live-long.
Moon. Silver, pale-fac't, horned, pale-eyed, humerous, inconstant, change∣g, rosie, wandering, beamy, radiant, silent, bright, blushing, ruddy, listering, aged, new-born, growing, increasing, decreasing, waxing, aining, dewy, double-horned, giddy. Moore. v. Fenne. Swarthy, tawny, sooty, Negro, mis-believing, soultry, sun∣urnt, sallow, scalded, eurled, tan'd, barbarous, rosted, bak't, broyled, ried, collied, flat-nosed, thick-lipt, oxe-eyed, furious, cruel, duskie, peedy, swift-foot, nimble-footed, wainscot-faced. Morpheus. Drowsie, sleepy, lither, sluggish, heavy-eyed, leaden, dreaming. fan∣astick, counterfeiting, black, busie, shape-representing, lead-heeld, ethargick, shape-feining. Moses. Patient, meek, pious, law-giving, couragious, faithfull, abstemious, conducting, obedient, humble, sacred, prophetick, predictious, stam∣mering, radiate, beamy. Moss. Crisped, curled, spongy, downy, frizled, hoary, ragged, idle, furd, ravell'd, thrumb'd, tufted, tasselled, fringy, shaggy. The mountains frizled coat. Moth. Eating, consumings useless, dull, silent, gnawing, devouring. Mother. Loving, embracing, indulgent, carefull, tender, solicitous, fruit∣full, kind, pampering, fond, tender hearted. Motion. Quick, nimble, active, stirring, swift-pac't, light. Mountain. Moss-thrumd, rocky, shady, cloud-headed, insolent, steep, ambiti∣ous, towring, aspiring, mossie, hoary, aged, steepy, surly, burly, lofty, all, craggy, barren, stately, climbing, sky-kissing, sky-threatning, cloud-inwrapped, high-browed, shaggy, supercilious, air-invading, hanging, brambly, desert, uncourh, solitary, heaven, shouldering, leavy, resounding, rebounding, ecchoing, thorny, inhospitable, sha∣dy, cold, freezing, unfruitfull, lovely, crump-shouldered, ragged, un∣frequented, forsaken, melancholly, clambering, sky-braving, pathless, lovely, cloud-touching, star-brushing, bushie, ascending. Mountebank. Jugling, cheating, prating, quacking, bragging, bold, boasting, sau∣cy, impudent, unblushing, shameless, deluding, cozening, strong∣lin'd, great-worded.
Morning. v. Morpheus. Mourning. Sad, sable, sullen, pensive, grievous, blear-eyed. Morning. Morn. Aurora. Rosie, dapple, infant, dawning, dew-cheekt, blushing, wakef dew-haird, purple, gray, rosie-fingerd, lovely, beauteous, dew-¦abled, wished, chearfull, silver-throned, chaste, modest, lilly-hand shining, opall-coloured, roseate, sugred, ambtosiall, dew-spangl early, balmy, spicy, weeping, gray-eyed, youthfull, gray-chee early, gladsome, lightsome, beamy, sparkling, vermillion, rud safron-coloured, yellow, gilded, painted, checkerd. Mouse. Little, short, greedy, hungry, sawcy, lickerous, gnawing, thie brown, dun, nimble, hurtfull. Mouth. Yawning, grinning, devouring, gasping, wide, stretcht, open, h¦ing, blabbing, pratling, tatling, twatling, roseate, clamorous, ¦brosiall, smiling, learned, grave, eloquent, perswasive, honey-fi¦ing, comely. Mudde. Durty, black, soft, clayie, clammy, putrid, tenacious, fen thirsty. Mulbery. Shady, cold, fearing, slow, loytering, lingering, wary, wise, p¦dent, mountain-loving, bloody, purple, loosening, aged, silk-wo breeding, tardy. Mule. Mongrill, stubborn, brren, bit-champing, strong, heady, gid self-willed, wilfull, obstinate, moody, humorous, sullen, franti sturdy, pack-bearing, ambling. Multitude. Brainless, hair-braind, heady, head-strong, moody, humero self-willed, giddy, easie, frantick, rash, shallow-headed, unlearn promiscuous, inconstant, tumultuous, unsettled. weak-brain thronging, crowding, thick-shouldered, cluttering, clusterd, co¦less, lawless, seditious, factious, rebellious, raskally, flocking, ¦numbred, swarming, wilde, credulous, soon-perswaded, soo over-reached, populous, preasing, way-ward, froward, un-ruely, u¦rained, unbridled, giddy-headed, unwary, silly, deluded, unski¦full, malignant, furious, outragious, untamed, astonisht, amaz admiring, novelty-affecting, innovating, pratling, clownish, clam∣rous, ignorant, barking, biting, braying, bustling, trooping, uncon¦ceiving, unletterd, misjudging.
Murmure. Soft, buzzing, confused, whizzing, wheazing, hoarse, trembling, umbled, shrill, broken, threatning, clamorous, factious, sediti∣s, muttered, whistling, whispering, still, silent, noysefull, grin∣ng, qnerulous, complaining, contradictious, repining, grum∣ng. Murren. Contagious, infectious, catching, spreading, pernicious, fatall, hy, nasty, noysome, fullsome loathsome. Murther. Murtherer. Pale, gilty, bloody, bloodthirsty, butcherly, inhumane, cruell, rbarous, cursed, direfull, damned, furious, outragious, mischievous, rrid, execrable, pittiless, remorseless, mercyless, unrelenting, in∣orable, dreadfull, ghastly, brutish, fearfull, pale-fac't. Mushrom. Unsavoury, tasteless, watrish, cold, moyst, soon-sprung, poysonous, ngy, thunder-engendred. Musick. Musitian. Crot-cheting, heart-ravishing, soul-invading, raping, intrancing, elodious, harmonious, well-tun'd, sweet, pleasant, well-timed, ll-measured, heavenly, celestial, Seraphick, delightful, cheerful, ul-chearing, delicious, according, agreeing, numerous, warbling, arering, consorting, diapasond, inchanting, encharming, sence∣reaving, fancy-tickling, wanton, well-proportioned, descanting. Muses. Castalian, Pegasean, Aonian, Thespian, sacred, chaste, Virgin, aiden, Pierian, Heliconian, sister, sweet-singing, sweet-tongu'd, spiring, propitious, assisting, ingenious, industrious, laborious, shfull, Sicilian, buskind, fancy-prompting, fancy-propping, flu∣t, genial, fount-sprung, laureate, Maionian. Musk. Odorous, fragrant, subtle, sweet, comforting, amorous, voluptu∣s, luxurious, chearing, perfuming, Indian, spicy, delicious, wanton, feminate. Musket. v. Canon. Mustard. Biting, sharp, strong, stinging, poynant, weeping, tear-wring∣g. Mutiny. Factious, seditious, rebellious, tumulruous, repining, contradicti∣us, murmuring, importuning, querulous, noyseful, grumbling, odi∣s, angry, froward, wayward, unruly, audacious, spleenful.
Myrrhe. Fragrant, odorous, gummie, dropping, weeping, fat, un distilling, bitter, Indian, Arabian, Aegyptian, Sabaean, aro prickly, bristly, yellow. Myrtle. Tender, Paphian, shore-loving, sable, cold-fearing, fleepy, dro fading, short-lived, fragrant, odorous, frost-fearing, quivering, ¦bling, norrow-leaved. Mystery. Concealed, hidden, secret, ceremonious, solemn, sacred,  deep, profound, unknown, unvulgar, undivulged, unexpressed conceived, uncomprehended, high, admired, amazing, strupen adored, reverend. N. Nag. v. Horse. Nailes. TEnder, clawing, sharp, scraping, scratching, pearly, ch¦horny, pilfering. Name. Lasting, immortal, eternal, enduring, glorious, renowned, balmed, eternized, surviving, deathless, unextinguist, spreading. Narcissus. Proud, coy, froward, scornful, disdainful, pievish, wanton,  spruce, trimme, briske. Nature. Powerful, vigorous, liberal, rich, wealthy, pregnant, teem fruitful, provident, kind, fore-casting, careful, sollicitous, pru curteous, prodigal, industrious, officious, imperious, command uncontrolled, unchanged, constan, skillful. Navell. Round, knotty, tying, nursing, meat-conveying. Navie. Numerous, puissant, well-armed, well-furnisht, well-provi great, strong, sail-bearing, winged-sailing, floating, sail-win brass-beakt.
Necessitie. Imperious, pressing, urgent, strict, rude, grimme, rough, violent, petuous, forcing, invincible, dire, hard, fierce, cruel, lawless, ty∣nnous, rigid, uncontrolled, severe, rigorous, stern, insupportable, all, ingenious, wittie, shifting. Neck. Ivory, alabaster, snowy, yielding, pliant, writhing, fleshie, roseall, mbrosiall, brawny, stiffe, silver, smooth, soft, fleeke, milkie, slen∣er, gracefull, beauteous, chain-bearing, Pearly, bending, owing. Nectar. Vermillion, sprightly, ambrosian, delicious, sparkling, taste-ravish∣ng, eternal, immortal, celestial, heavenly, death-expelling, sweet∣owing, fragrant, spicie, odorous, perfumed. Need. Urging, pressing, pinching, forcing, ingenious, witty, shifting, pe∣urious, perplexing. Needle. Pointed, sharp, working, slender, drawing, pricking, wounding, stabbing, industrious, laborious, piercing, unseaming, maiden, thrif∣ty, thread-ushering, frugall, embroydering. Negligence. Loose, supine, careless, slubbering, sleepy, dull, idle, lither, loyter∣ing, lethargick, drowsie, dreaming, disrespective, homely, rustick, easie, clownish, lazie, unactive, yawning, pernicious, odious, gaping, regardless, unadvised, inconsiderate. Negro. Schorced, quick, wealthy, swift-pac't, swarthy, tawny, sooty, collied, soultry, misbelieving, sallow, curled, barbarous, rosted, Sunne-bak'c, broyled, fried, duskie, thick-lipt, oxe-eyed, flat-nosed, swift-foot, nimble-footed, diving, pearly, pearl-searching. Neptune. Surgy, tempestuous, impetuous, wave-bestriding, trident-bearing, azure, gray, aged, frothy, furious, earth-shaking. Nereides. Green-haird, wanton, ehanting, gaudy, gay-painted. Nereus. Aged, frothy, blew, flormy, wandering, tempestuous, impetuous, furious. Nest. Warm, chearing, chirping, woven, hollow, hanging, industrious, leavie, plumie, downie, featherd, airie, loftie.
Nector. Old, aged, sage, grave, prudent, eloquen, decrepit, vali wise, sweet-tong'd. Net. Insnaring, intangling, catching, treacherous, windowy, corded, i¦folding, imprisoning, enraging, hampering, subtle, fly, unexpect surprizing, griping, tenacious, taking, fast-holding, deceitf trameld. Nettle. Biting, stinging, smarting, angry, peevish, touchy, sharp, usele barren, pricking, pettish. Neuter. Ambiguous, uncertain, doubtful, impartial, un-siding, un-¦ged, un-interested, un-active, un-medling, indifferent. Newes. Desired, certain, uncertain, expected, hoped, unexpected, report related, welcome, ucwelcome, joyful, publick, secret, heavy, happ unhappy. Niggard. Covetous, thrify, frugal, sparing, scraping, sordid, tenacious, ¦ritious, gathering, wretched, hated, contemned, odious, hoardi heaping, pinching, griping, nasty, toylseme, laborious, moneyd, we¦thy, rich, fat, full chested, usurious. Night. Still, silent, freezing, drowsie, dusky, dreary, swarthy, Neg gloomy, shady, Ethiopian, sullen, black-eyed, tardy, black-brow¦dampish, tedious, pitchy, sable, moyst, sacred, foggy, peaceful, grie¦ly, grimme, sooty, Ambrosian, sullied, collied, dewy, hideous. Ebo jetty, gastly, restful, dreaming, palefac't, solitary, melancholly, gra haird, aged, civil, sober, grave, humorous, vaporous, blind, bla darksome, fleepy, faint, secret, thievish, wanton, lascivious, rosie, sta painted, star-enameld, star-enflowred, star-embroydered, brow star-crowned, star-empearled, reposeful, dumb, husht, speechless amorous, misty, forgetful, vayled, close, stumbling, dreadful, masking groveling, groping. Nitingale. Sweet-voyc't, melodious, harmonious, warbling, quavering, ch¦ting, ravishing, amorous, pleasant, pratling, wanton, jolly, me delicious. Nile. Wealthy, seven-channelled, paper-bearing, swelling, monster breeding, ore-flowing, seven-horned, rich, fruitful, wanderin
winding, turning, stragling, fat, muddy, thick, running, impetuous, ven-headed. Niobe. Sad, cold, pensive, stiffe, proud, unhappy, mournfull. Nobilitie. Clear, bright, stately, honourd, high, haughty, ancient, famous, ch, wealthy, powerful, dreadful, pompous, stout, couragious, gay, udy. Nonage. v. Infancy. Gamesome, sportive, tender, soft, pliant, improvident, waxy, elding, unadvised, inconsiderate, unwary, childish, boyish, wanton, loomy. Noone, Manly, radiant, full-aged, lusty, beamy, bright-shining. North: Cold, freezing, congealed, icy, boysterous, blustering, angry, fro∣y, rainie, violent, impetuous, sharp, dreadful, cloudy, tempestuous, histling, chill, snowy, noyseful, bleak, cold-mouthed, gloomy, iercing, surly, sullen, chattering, churlish. Nose. Dropping, toting, sniveling, snuffing, gristly, scoffing, jeering, cornful, flat, crooked, smelling, quick, sagacious. Nose-trills. Open, gaping, breathing, panting, flaming, hairy, hollow, sluttish, queezed. Notes. v. Aires. Soft, sweet, pleasing, inchanting, intrancing, harmonious, melodi∣ous, well-tuned, charming, soul-mooving, ravishing, sprightly, de∣icious. Noveltie, Strange, portentuous, pernicious, un-expected, unwonted, un∣ccustomed, un-couth, monstrous, wonder-breeding, admired, ama∣zing. Novice. Unpractised, un-experienc'c, un-skilful, ignorant, learning, simple, silly, untutord, untaught, fumbling, bungling. Noyse. Confused, bustling, rumbling, tumultuous, clamorous, obstrepe∣rous, tatling, hoasre, shrill, deafning, drumming, dreadful, mur∣muring, muttering, resounding, blelowing, Ecchoing, barking, roar∣ing, thundering, loud, piercing, air-rending, tearing, startling, ama∣zing, astounding, litigious, jangling, jarring.
Number. Countless, swarming, trooping, thronging, crowding, preasin flocking, cluttering, clusterd, unrold, unmasured. Numbers. Free, flowing, fluent, eternal, lofty, stately, gentle, easie, sugred, ¦chanting, intrancing, unstraind, even-pac't, smooth-pac't, harmo¦ous, melodious, well-tun'd well-trim'd, lulling, sence-bereavin ear-enamouring, soul-raping, delicious, sprightly, lively, gleeso pleasant, pleasing. Nunne. Holy, pious, religious, vowing, praying, recluse, devout, solita cold, chaste, cloysterd, devotious, adoring, sacred, consecrated, pe¦sive, retired, zealous, abstemious, sedentarie, meditating, conte¦plating. Nuptials. v. Marriage. Amorous, solemn, wanton, gladsome, gleesome, frolick, jolly, mer¦ry, mirth-ful, pompous, feastful, chearful, sacred, celebrated, happi unhappy, joyous, joyful, successful, ill-boding, ceremonious, hono¦red. Nurse. Careful, sollicitous, sedulous, fearful, loving, indulgent, lulling dandling, feeding, hugging, embracing, tender. Nut. Brown, gamesowe, sportive, hollow. Nymph. Sleek-haird, painted, gaudy, nimble-footed, tripping, sportive, gamesome, wanton, fair, beauteous, bright, spring-haunting, dancing gleesome, frolick, merrie, flowrie, neat-drest, amoorous, skipping shining, spangled. O. Oake. KNottie, Caggie, leavie, spreading, aged, solid, branchie, sturdie, brawnie, long-lived, three-aged, boad, stately, ude, rough hewn, strong-grown, gnarled, broad-spred, thick-leav'd, well-limb'd, strong-rib'd, lofty-fronted, shady, mast-bearing, hollow, stooping, de¦crepit, jagged, tufted, savage, sacred, proud.
Oare. Industious, laborious, servile, slavish, painfull, hanging, oi∣ng, tugging, brushing, nimble, fluttering, slicing, cutting, ave-dividing, broad-palm'd, flashie, plashie, dashing, spat∣ng, tossing, flitting. Oats. Slender, barren, shrill, unluckie, piping, horse-cramming. Oath. Binding, obliging, strict, enforcing, awfull, religious, so∣mne, ceremonious, duteous, truth-confirming, sacred, invio∣able, faithfull. Obedience. Officious, obsequious, submisse, tender, punctual, meeke, umble, yeilding, pliant, waxie, resign'd, willing, active, rea∣ie, chearful, reveend, awful, filial. Objection. Thornie, knottie, knaggie, puzling, craggie, sharp, litigious, ontentious, jarring, jangling. Oblation. Pious, sacred, flaming, thankful, chearful, costly, religious, de∣vout, zealous, solemne, rich, free, fat. Obligement. Obligation. Strong, great, deep, binding, tying, forcing, slavish. Oblivion. Dark, duskie, dustie, moldie, gloomie, rustie, mustie, rude, thanklesse, shadie, discouteous, unkind, lazie, dull. Obscurity. v. Darknesse. Dark, dull, duskie, gloomie, rude, blind, mustie, black, mistie, foggie, sullen, sootie, silent. Obsequies. Pompous, sad, pious, ceremonious, pensive, weeping, so∣lemne, religious, zealous, honoured, latest, mournful, teer∣bedabled: Obsequiousnesse. Pliant, nimble, active, willing, servile, slavish, humble, crouch∣ing, yeilding, officious, obedient, waxie, readie, fawning, sooth∣ing, clawing, soft, smooth, oilie, melting, winning, daubing, slie, politick. Observation. Serious, strict, careful, regardul, eying, intent, mindful, prying. Occasion. Busie, faire, urgent, weightie, pressing, fleeting, sodain, seasonable.
Ocean. v. Sea. Pathlesse, tide-ised, hungry, boundlesse, wild, unconfined, gree∣die, gng, roaring, flowing, earth-incircling, earth-girding, engor∣gig boiling, impetuous, wavie, swelling, curled, frothie, floating, chfing, foaming, working, toiling, swallowing, unfathomed, azure, angrie, hirstie, ireful, stormie, glassie, tumbling, ploughed, dropsied, unbottomed, gray, brackish, licentious, wrathful, rufled, fretting, wind-hew'd, fishie, belching, tossing, wealthie, troubled, insatiate, ho∣ie, vaulting, tossing. Ode. Lyrick, wanton, amorous, pleasing charming. Odour. Spicie, aromatick, delightful, luxurious, voluptuous, subtile, pre∣cious, rich, balmie, persumed, aire-perfuming, ambrosian, genial, deli∣cious, pleasant, wanton, Assyrian, chafed, muskie, Arabian, grate∣ful, Indian, Sabean, Panchaian, ingrateful, noisome, loathsome, fulsome, fuming, sence-offending, infectious, overcoming, conta∣gious, filthie, stinking, sulphureous. Old age. Bed-ridden, decrepid, wither'd, crazie, cold, heatlesse, crooke, feeble, discoloured, trembling, sober, experienc't, mature, mel∣low, testie, touchie, angrie, peevish, pettish, waspish, saplesse, ab∣horred, crabbed, wrinkled, shrieveled, pensive, sad, melancholy, hoarie, silver-hired, tedious, querulous, complaintful, slow, dull, tardie, slow pac't, otten, diseaseful, sickly, doating, nastie, fulsome, weak, helpless, venerable, sowre, grave, severe, supercilious, odious, warie, provident, frugal, covetous, thriftie, sparing, avaritious, co∣sorious, rigid, thonian, Nestorean, honour'd, sleepie, drowsie, laz lither, weare. Olive. Pale, peaceful, tardie, slow-growng, fat, hoarie, gray, pliant, s∣ple, harmelesse, shadie, verdant, triumphant, victorious, goat-fearing long-liv'd, lasting, sacred, fruitful, fl shie, fertile, plump, juicie. Omen. Happie, unhappie, luckie, unluckie, successeful, prosperous, dis∣stous, propherick, presaging, portending, black, predctious, secr mistick, misterious, oncealed, dismal, dreadful, encouraging, de∣ring, affghtful. Onion. Coated, angry, biting, weeping, windie, flatuous, hoarie. Onix. Serios, slipperie, bright, shining Indian, Arabian. Onset. Assault. Furious, dreadful, impetuous, bloodie, tumultuous, cruel, warlic
importunate▪ dangerous, perilous, sharp, smart, proud, doubtful, troublesome, toilesome, adventurous, bold, daring, audacious. Opinion. v. Doubt. Errour. Vain, doubtful, floating, giddie, waving, reeling, ottering, stagge∣ring, jarring, receiv'd, common, false, suspitious, vulgar, proud, haugh∣tie, erroneous, jealous, faint, heartlesse, hovering, sagging. Opportunitie. Faire, smiling, wooing, coting, ripe, mature, seasonable, commo∣dious, fit, pleasing, favourable, desired, wshed, sodain, unexpected, wel∣proportioned, well-suiting, well-occasioned, convenient, poper. Opposition. Litigious, contentious, strong, weak hot, cold, sharp, smart, threat∣ning, jarting, jangling, brawling, furiou, impetuous, violent, tumul∣tuous, raging, angry, fuming. Oppression. Oppressour. Violent, tyrannous, cruel, hard, pitilesse, grinding, heavie, vexing, unmercifull, bloodie, sqeezing, greedie, grievous, rigorous, rough, harsh, flinty, griping, pinching, gauling, torturng, wringing, crush∣ing, savage, bruising, sterne, igid. Oracle. Doubtful, ambiguous, consulted, enquired, resolving, commanding imperious, presagious, predictious, prophetick, deluding, uerring, undeceived, fatal, anxious, mysterious, unquestioned, perplexing, pazling, darke, obscure, authentick, undoubted. Orange. Yellow, golden, gilded, delightful, delicious, odorous, savourie, tast-quickening, thirst slaking, thirst-allaying, jycie, squezed. Otator. v. Eloquence. Sweet-tongu'd, learned, insinuating, applausive, perswasive, subtile, Sweet-lipt, honey-flowing, smooth, oylie, courtlie, well-pliht, cap∣tivating, grave. Orchard. Fruitful, fruit-enamell'd, pleasant, well-drest, smiling, leavie, de∣lightful, spatious, verdant. Order. Ranged, well-rank't, sacred, disposed, harmonious, graceful, beau∣teous, decent, comelie. Orgies. Sacred, mistick, misterious, ceremonious, mad, drunken, raging, ra∣ving, furious, solemn, honour'd, wanton, ffeminate, Theban. Orin. Showrie, stooping, pale, black, rainie, clowdie, glitteing, fiece
cruel, chasing, moist, tempestuous stormie. Orison. v. Praier. Devotious, pious, zealous, fervent, religious, numbred, flow∣ing, passionate, measured, fervent. Ornament. Graceful, gorgeous, glorious, beauteous, pompous, painted, costly, envious, glittering, shining, ambitious, dazling, sumptu∣ous, curious, embellisht. Orphan. Poore, wretched, helplesse, succourless, distressed, oppressed, rag∣ged, scorned, dejected, pitied, naked, houseless, disregarded, affli∣cted, lean, starved. Orpheus. Thracian, sweet-tongu'd, melodious, harmonious, sweet-singing, aged, sacred. Ostentation. Proud, emptie, vaunting, flanting, fantastick, vain, pompous, arrogant. Ostridge. Srrong-stomacht, digestive, iron-digesting, Aethiopian, speedie, quick-pac't, winged. Oven. Smokie, burning, flaming, flalme-belching, spurtering, spark∣ling, hollow, devouring, baking. Oversight. Carelesse, neglectful, erroneous, pernicious, dammaging, impru∣dent, improvident, regardlesse. Overthrow. Dreadful, dismal, disastrous, unhappie, bloodie, pernicious, wretched, pitied, lamented. Ousill. Box-bill'd, warbling, melodious. Outrage. Violent, quarrelsome, injurious, dissolute, loose, headie, luxuri∣ous, riotous. Owle. Screeching, ill-boding, dull, clamorous, funerall, melancholy, whooping, buzzing, staring, prodigious, disastrous, fatal, Tragick, presaging, whooting, hoarse, feral, barking. Oxe. Sinewie, laborious, labouring, wearie, toiling, tugging, grim, ▪foot, slow, ardy, slow-pac't, bonie, strong, brawnie, sturdie, burlie,
massie, brass-footed, lowing, bellowing, head-strong, broad-brow'd, painful. Oyle. Oyntments. Odorous, dissolving, suppling, glittering, shining balmie, fat, uncti∣ous, costly, fragrant, aromatick. P. Pace. Winged, speedie, Eagles, Eagle-winged, breathless, hastie, quick, nimble, slow-footed, tardie, stealing, silent, gliding, creeping, grave, measured, theevish, soft-footed, assured. Pagan. Unbelieving, mis-believing, barbarous, idolatrous, superstitious, ceremonious, incredulous, obstinate, cruel, hard-hearted, unchristian unchristned, unbaptized. Page. Officious, obsequious, brisk, nimble, attending, wayting, duteous, observant, serviceable, ready, careful, quick, diligent, speedie. Pageant. Painted, pompous, gay, gaudie, gorgeous, motly, gilded, trium∣phant, joyful, glittering glorious, streaming, waving, varnisht, costly, sumptious, slanting. Pain. Dolorous, heart-fretting-wringing-eating, pinching, nipping, soul-oppressing, griping, hard, sad, grievous, killing, doleful, gauling, heart-breaking, pitied, bitter, impatient, gnawing, stabbing, smarting torturing, tormenting, martyring, racking, disquiet, heart-rending-tearing, grating, cruel, sharp, wearying, unsupported, tedious, unwel∣come. Palace. Gorgeous, stately, aspiring, loftie, magnificent, exalted, cloud-kis∣sing cloud-cleaving, aire-braving, mosse-growne, royal, ambitious, envied, proud-towred, gilded, glitering. Palate. Nice, cuious, judicious, thirstie, wittie, luxurious, hungry, greedie, tasting, delicious, gluttonous, insatiated. Palenesse. Bleak, cold, chill, trembling, fearful, wanne, sallow, discoloured, duskie, sad, grieved, deformed, fainting, affrighting, meager, muddie, gastly, disfigured, wannish.
Pallas. Wise, warlick, prudent, chast, couragious, ingenious, industrious, unmarried, gray-ey'd. Palme. Generous, triumphant, loftie, victorious, leavie, verdant, glorious, shadie, rugged, trembling. Palmer. Devout, devotiou, pious, religious, humble, wandering, melanch▪ly pensive, unknowne, gray-frockt, lonelie, wither'd, weather-beaten, sad, meditating, abstemious, wearie. Palsie. Trembling, shaking, quavering, quivering, unjointed, unsteadie, fainting, numme. Pamphlet. Loose, wanton, seditious, libellous, saucie, scurrilous, sandalous, ca∣lumnious, railing, reviling, abusiv, licentious, lawlesse, audacious, in∣jurious. Pander, v. Bawd. Odious, covetous, impure, warie, craftie, slie, importunare, perfidi∣ous, cunning, soothing, cheating, fawning, lascivious, tempting, dr∣ken, deceitful, guileful, cozening, vilanous, youth-corrupting, cog∣ing, immodest, impudent, brazen-fac't, shamelesse, inticing, alluring, training beastlie, bruitish, obsceane. Pang. v. Anguish. Paine. Panther. Savage, wild dreadful, untamed, cruel, spotted, devouring, grim∣look't, painted, stubborne, incensed. Panting. Faint, breathlesse, warme, weak, wearie. Papist. Superstitious, image-adoring, Idolatrous, ceremonious, deluded, merit-pleading bloodie. Pap. v. Dug. Sgging, milkie, nursing, soft, ender, spicie, delicious, azure-strea∣ked, veinie. Parable. Obscure, dark, concealed, misterious, grave, wise, sage, ingenious, wittie, discoursive, deepe, profound. Paradise. Happie, Celestial, immortal, deathlesse, glorious, beauteous, delici∣ous, eternal, triumphant, flowrie, joyful, enamouring, entrancing, soul-raping, ravishing, soul-invading, transporting.
Paradox. Incredible, unbelieved, improbable, stoical, un-vulgar, fals-seeming. Parasite. Fawning, soothing, flearing, dissembling, officious, obsequious, pick-thank, pliant, sugred, traiterous, treacherous, candid, glass-fac', cheating, jugling, over-reaching, circumvnting, pide, knee-crooking, cunning, deluding, craftie, wilie, slie, clawing, tempting, dawbing, de∣ceitful, fair-spoken, smooth-worded, ear-tickling, crouching, glzng, insinuating, cogging, flattering, servile, slavish, smooth, faire-mouth∣ed, lying, smel-feast, greedie, vaunting, colloguing, cozening, idle, babling, pratling, file-tongu'd, oylie, courtlie, smooth-tongu'd, lisp∣ping, gilt-tongu'd, windie, smoothing. Pardon. Favourable, gracious, remissive, free, indulgen, smiling gentle, courteous, willing. Parent. Beloved, dear, aged, careful, indulgent, affectionate, nursing, loving, tender, solicitous, grave, pious, indulgent, honoured, reverend, ten∣der-hearted. Park v. Meadow. Pleasant, flowrie, delightful, fruitful, herbie, grassie, enclosed, im∣paled, verdant, green-plusht, spatious. Parliament. Grave, honor'd, honourable, statelie, severe, wise, iudicious, justice-executing, consulting, authentick. Parnassus. v. Mountaine. Sacred, rugged, two-topt, two-forkt, loftie, learned, divine, Muse-haunted. Parret. Green, painted, pratling, talking, babling, speaking, tatling, gaudie, faire-plum'd, twtling, chattering. Parthian. Light, swift-foot, warlick, couragius, fierce, cruel, darting furious, backward, fighting, flying, perfidious, seditious, lascivious, quver-bearing, martial, Partridge. Chattering, painted, speckled, salacious, hot, devouring, lascivious, ruffled, fearful, spotted, plump, Passage. Easie, readie, open, frquented, difficult, uneasie, broken. Passion. v. Anger Fury. Rage. Disordered, wild, distempered, hot, unrulie, head-strong, frantick,
uncollected, ireful, tyrannous, stormie, wilfull, blundering, bitter, per∣nicious, disquiet, roving, affectionate, turbulent, vehement, surpr∣ing, importuning, violent, impetuous, unconstant, blind, impatient, unbridled, furious, transporting, usurping, unadvised, light-wingd. Pastime. Sportful, toyish, joyful, delightful, refreshing, honest, pleasant, swee, wanton, dallying, jesting. Pastoral. Low-stiled, humble-stiled, rustick, plain, pleasant, jolly, youthful, country. Pasture. v. Lawnes. Flowry, motly, enamel'd, tufted, green-plusht, painted, gaudie, fruitful, fat, smiling, verdant, enflowred, embroidered, herbie, gra∣sie, checkerd, delightful, dewie, pleasant, shrubbie, sportive, fragran, mossie. Path. Frequented, troden, directing, leading, grassie. Patience. Strong, resolved, willing, sottish, soft, cold, dull, pack-bearing, yeilding, burdned, flegmatick, unfeeling, unmooved, tame, coole, constant, vertuous, slow harmless, suffering, induring, holy. Patron. Liberal, protecting, favouring, careful, willing, affectionate, bene¦ficial, bountiful, propitious, defending, securing. Pavement. Low humble, dejected, foot-bearing, spurned, troden, rugged, cold, hard, dusty, dutie, pressed, beaten, Pavilion. Soft, gilded-stately, warlick, vaultie, tented. Paunch. Great-bellied, swelling, sull-gorged, tun-bellied, gurmandizing, hollow, deepe, spatious, cavie, voluptuous, luxurious, insatiate, glutto∣nous, swallowing, engulphing, hungrie, greedie, devouring, lazie. Paw. Russet, griping, dreadful, raping, fawning, crooked, hairie shaggie, rough, scratching, clawing, ravenous, wanton. Pawne. Engaging, obliging, binding, faith-binding, assured. Peace. Soft, Hlcyonian, calme, happie, feastful, mild, smiling, flowry, silken, fruitful, safe, harmonious, snudging, sleepie, unactive, disarmed, easie, friendly, silver-wing'd, white-wing'd, virgin, maiden, civil, effemi∣nate,
smooth-fac'd, turtle-footed, unbloodie, untroubled, undistur∣d, lovely blessed, lazie, joyful, desired, quiet, divine, war-chasing, sa∣ed, victorious, firme, golden, agreeing, heavenly, composed, harme∣s, gowned, genial, auspicious, triumphant, meek-eyed. Peach. Velvet, woolie, dangling, trembling, soft-skin'd. Peacock. Gay-plum'd, gaudie, pompous, glorious, glittering, starrie, proud, ested, envious, painted, stately, haughty, wheele-tail'd, moon-tail'd. Pear. Soft, sowre, delicious, dangling, mellow, savoury, sharp, brisk, tast-easing, hanging, yellow, juycie. Pearl. Indian, pretious, rich, shining, beauteous, oriental, easterne, bright ear, deliceous, curious, sparkling, reflecting, radiant, beaming, dang∣ing, enchacing, blazing, flaming, aire-gilding, aire-enlightning, orient. Pebble. Humble, purling, litle, murmuring, hissing, whistling, gushing, rol∣ling. Pedant. v. Schoolemaster. Knowing, tutoring, teaching, angry, peevish, cholerick, imperious, severe, grave, learned, lashing, scourging, sowre, cruel, tyrannous, ty∣rannising. Pedegree. Ancient, long-breathed, well-descended, famous, noble. Pedlar. Trucking, shop-brearing, wandring, stragling, trifling, trudging. Pegasus. v. Horse. Winged, swift-flying, Medusaean, Gorgonean, fleet, horn-footed. Pelican. Indulgent, Aegiptian, solitary, lonelie, melancholie, sharp-beakt, groaning, mourning, young, loving, brest-piercing, officious. Penance. Hard, sad, dolorous, painful, rigorous, severe, enjoyned, imposed, exacted. Pen. Learned, skilful, nimble, quick-pac't, clarkly, artful, industrious, laborious, painful, studious. Pencil. Skilful, artful, nimble, active, cunning, drawing, industrious, labo∣ious, painful, pourtraying.
Penury. Griping, pinching, wringing, dejecting, oppressing, uneasie, so▪squeezing, gauling, servile, craving, down-looking, ragged, corn despised, freezing, disrespected, unregarded, tattered, thread-b crushing, soul-bruising, grinding, suppressing, starving, needie. Pepper. Rugged, wrinckled, rough-coated, biting, black, sharp, hot, bruise Perfection. Complete, accomplished, absolute, rare, divine, admired, exa beauteous, desired, singular, unpatterned, unparagon'd, unparalell' unmatch'd, unpeer'd, unequalled, unexampled. Perfume. Fragrant, spicie, sweet, smell-ravishing, sacred, choice, rich, odoro Ambrosian. Peril. v. Danger. Period. Perfect, accomplished, desired, consummated. Perjury. Hollow, black, hellish, impious, damned, cursed. Periwigge. Hair. Hairie, false, counterfeited, curled, frizled. Persecution. Cruel, bloody, murderous, tyrannous, outragious, furious, unc∣stian, barbarous. Perseverance. Stiffe, stout, couragious, undaunted, firm, constant, patient, resolv unmoved, stedfast, unshrinking, setled, unshaken. Persian. Perfidous, unfaithfull, luxurious, voluptuous, drunken, bablin anointed, surfeting, strong-breath'd. Perswasion. Soft, insinuating, slie, moving, wooing, courting, encouragin winning, victorious. Pestilence. v. Plague. Infectious, contagious, mortall, deadly, spotted, tokened, ca∣ing, raging, burning, dismall, killing, devouring. Petition. Humble, suppliant, begging, crouching, wooing, earnest i∣portunate. Phaeton. Rash, proud, ambitious, audacious, y. bold, presumptuous, adve∣turous, world-fireing, world-inflaming, unhappy.
Phantasmes. Vain, vanishing, empty, uncertain, flying, shady, imaginary, aerie, dfull, affighting, pale, grieslie, fleeting, unsubstantiall, unreall. Philomel. Sad, pensive, complaintfull, wailing, sweet-voic'd, warbling, melo∣us, harmonious. Philpsopher. Philosophie. Grave, sage, wise, learned, deep, profound, sober, severe, abstemi∣s, temperate, austere, artfull, knowing, mysterious, subtle, knottie, ne, bearded, contemplative, industrious, obscure, studious, oughtfull, musing, ingenious, venerable. Phoebus. v. Apollo. Fair-haired, learned, all-seeing, predictious, bright, prophetick, urel-crown'd, bright-hair'd, Phoenix. Gay-plum'd, painted, immortall, gold-neck'd, maiden, gold-ested, immortall, reviving, spicie, lovelie, chast, unmated, long-v'd, aged, eternall, self-begotten, Assyrian, eastern, solitarie, irgin. Phlegethon. Burning, flaming, scorching, smoakie, duskie, gloomie, raging, fie∣ie, devouring, gaping, yawning, spatious, vastie, capacious, flame-elching. Phlegme. v. Flegme. Phrase. Fluent, well-drest, clear, polish'd, neat, filed, forced, sugred, win∣ing, ear-captivating, Physick. v. Medicine. Physician. Expert, learned skilfull, knowing, artfull, faithfull, carefull, dili∣gent, prudent, warie, studious, helpfull, curing. Pickerell. Greedie, gluttonons, devouring, preying, swallowing. Picture. Speaking, livelie, dumb, fair, beauteous, rich, artificiall, coloured, varnished, dead, resembling, imiating, counterfeiting, skillfull, art∣full, deceiving, eye-deluding. Pigeon. v. Dove. Wanton, trembling, quaking, ash-coloured, jealous, loyall, chast, rough-footed, crooing, crested, speckled, amorous, gallesse.
Pike. v. Lance, Pilgrim. v. Palmer. Pillar. Stately, Dorick, Corinthian, strong, firme, upholding, sustein' steadie, able, unshrinking, solid, marble, gilded, lasting, loftie, ¦vanced, massie, ivory, smooth, even-wrought, polisht. Pilot. Gain-spurr'd, tugging, skilful, wandring, expert, guiding, dire¦ing, star-gazing, industrious, sea-tost, storm-beaten, adventur trembling, fearful, North-observing, commanding, prudent. Pine. Tufted, bristled, heaven-scaling, star-kissing, loftie, skie-invad oilie, sprouting, proud, sacred, torchie, kernel-bearing, Pan-belo exalted, strait, stately, strait-bodied, branchie, supercilious, hairie, ¦unctious, Cybelean, Berecinthian, odorous, hoarie, dagger-leaved, ¦cutting. Pinion. v. Wing. Shadie, feathered flagging, spreading, floating, plumie, glidi fluttering, active, mooving, waving, industrious. Pinnace. v. Ship. Winged, fleet, saile-winged, sea-torne, adventurous, thin-rib'd. Pipe. Mirthful, merrie, jollie, sweet-sounding, melodious, rustick, har¦nious, bored, solacing, chanting, shrill, tuneful, frolick, ch¦full. Pirate. Slie, adventurous, bold, audacious, barbarous, preying, sea-robbi theeving, cruel, craftie, spoiling, merciless, unpitying, roving. Pismire. v. Ants. Thriving, industrious, frugal, thriftie, grain-bearing, crawling, ¦ctive, prudent, corne-gathering, careful, laborious, ingenious, subtil politick, painful. Pitch. Clammie, Illiian, catching, melting, tenacious, viscous, glutin Negro, sootie, ebon, ship-lining. Pith. Marrowie, enclosed, inward, soft, tender, fat. Pitie. Melting, relenting, soft, calme, tender, feeling, charitable, comp¦sionate, weeping, affectionate, yeilding, bleeding, tender-h¦ted.
Pit. Blind, darksome, deep, unfathomed, unsounded, gloomie, duskie, en, obscure, sootie, durtie, fulsome, loathsome, nasty, dreadful, dan∣ous, steepie. Plague. Mortal, contagious, infectious, diseaseful, catching, raging, sulphu∣us, burning, dismal, uncomfortable, violent, spotted, surprising, sive, dreadful, threatning, sodain, unexpected, detested, murther∣s, accursed, impartial, raging, pernicious, cruel, unsparing, unpity∣g, merciless, deadly, inexorable, fierie, devouring, consuming, thsome, nastie. Plains. v. Meadowes. patious, wide-skirted, flowrie, tufted, enamell'd, open, dasied, mot∣, delightful, lowly, humbe, smiling, verdant, fragrant, hearbie, gras∣, embroidered, levell'd, fruitful, diapred, green-plusht, sportive, fair∣athed, flower-enameled, flowre-mantled, flower-spangled, soft∣ated, fertle, pleasant, green-brested, stream-embroidered, frolick. Plane. Shadie, heavie-headed, barren, genial, feastful, tall, stately, loftie, reading, leavie, nodding, branched, dangling. Planet. Blazing, bright, shining, beaming, rolling, flaming, sparkling, floa∣ng, swimming. Plant. Vegetative, young, fruitful, tender, sappie, juycie, growing, increa∣ng, thriving. Play. Sportful, joyous, mirthful, care-killing, wanton, idle, carelesse, be∣itching, facetious, time-stealing, enchanting, unthriftie, carelesse, armelesse, soft, pleasant, frolick, vain, emptie, delightful, delicious, oluptuous, sensual, familiar, sportive, free, loose, dissolute, lascivious, me-beguiling. Pleasure. Melting, wanton, lulling, itching, lavish, soft, desired, easie, idle, sil∣n, golden, tickling, intrancing, choice, delicious, delightful, fresh, portive, attractive, magnetick, imparadising, balmie, bckning, in∣anting, bewitching, Syrenian, flashie, ravishing, soul-invading, me-beguiling, sugred, raping, temping, captivating, transporting, Nectareous, Ambrosian, spicie, sprightly, active, chearful, lightsome, eart-chearing, smiling, heart-enlrging, luxurious, voluptuous, fle∣ing, transitorie, emptie, enamouring, charming, fancie-tickling, glo∣ing, pernicious, alluring, inticing, inveagling, hooking, luring, trea∣cherous,
intemperate, gliding, care-killing, disordered, revelling, ney-flowing, unbridled, lascivious, effeminate, depraved, unmeas blind, toyish, soul-moving, entrancing, fulsome, rambl unctious. Pledge. Assured, confirming, obliging, engaging, binding, faith-b Pleiades. Dropping, weeping, showrie, sad, moist, rainy, Plenty. Luxurious, swelling, flowing, copious, fertile, fruitfull, joy gladsome, rich, pregnat, teeming, ample, large, full, superfl abounding, excessive, wanton, lavish, smiling. Plover. v. Lapwing. Coasting. Plough. Peacefull, crooked, furrowing, industrious, laborious,  wounding, slicing, furrow-making, thriftie, rustick, sordid, pain toilsome. Plough-man. v. Clown. Rustick, sordid, laborious, industrious, tugging, patient,  swarthy, toilsome, hoping, sun-burnt, tawnie, brawnie, surlie,  clownish, sturdie, rude, sweating, sallow, hide-bound, hobnail'd, ¦ish, home-bred, unfashion'd, slovenlie, frolick, blith, lustie, robust boarish, rurall, rough-hewn, unlearned, unlettered, simple,  whistling, gleesome, merrie. Plume. Hovering, waving, tufted, soft, painted, downie, aerie, lightso flanting, gay, gaudie, gallant, pompous, trembling, hanging, sm velvet, flying, wanton, limber, freckled, pide, motlie, spotted, speck air-dividing- Plumme. Dangling, hanging, delicious, juicie, tast-pleasing, nectar pleasant. Plummet. Sounding, sinking, diving, poising, guiding, mossie, heavie. Plush. Soft, smooth, rich, costly, sumptuous, courtlie, shining, shagg tufted. Pluto. Black, hellish, dreadfull, unpitying, mercilesse, unrelenting, gree gloomie, shadie, gastlie, grieslie, implacable, inexorable, rigorous, ¦gian, Sulphurie, grim, frowning, lowring, scuoling, stern-visaged, ¦varitious, raping, remorselesse, sullen.
Pome. Poesie. Poetrie. Poet. Whining, sacred, immortall, eternall, deathlesse, embalming, in∣cing, nimble, fluent, sweet-flowing, sinewie, learned, numerous, asant, sweet, brisk, amourous, wanton, lascivious, loftie, statelie, di∣e, tickling, loose, sugred, delicious, nectareous, Ambrosian, laure∣, facetious, fabulous, ingenious, wittie, lying, well-drest, captiva∣g, soul-invading, soul-raping, imparadising, immortalizing, grave, asured, well-tuned, winding, audacious, artfull, knowing, clear∣ded, honoured, biting, lashing, lavish, prophetick, melodious, monios, Muse-inspired, praise-prompted, insinuating, heaven-bred, husiastick, flattering, smoothing, glozing, smooth-swelling, well∣ck'd, well-composed, well-couch'd, wel-laboured, powerful, almigh∣ everlasting, ear, enamouring, snse-bereaving, sprightlie, livelie, esome, jollie, frolick. Policy. Working, winding, plotting, contriving, scruing, diving, craftie, e, subtle, cunning, secret, under-mining, under-working, ingenious, der-handing, devicefull, prudent, warie, circumventing, fore-cast∣g, projecting, snakie, winding, wriggling. Pomander. Persum'd, sweet, delicious, well-sented, smell-pleasing, odoiferous grant. Pomegranate. Delicious, vermilion, blushing, juicie, many kernel'd. Pomp. Gorgeous, glittering, glorious, gay, gaudie, golden, Sunny, swel∣ng, painted, statelie, costlie, sumptuous, magnificent, braving, luxu∣ous, superfluous, smiling, varnish'd, courtly, shining, flnting, gal∣nt, portlie, fantastick, flashing, blazing, profuse, lavish, unthriftie, zling, envied, eie-conquering, triumphant, solemne, proud, royal, mbitious, excessive, expensive, needlesse, vain, unnecessarie, wast∣ll, ceremonious. Poniard. Stabbing, killing, murdering, desperate, sharp-pointed, secret, lent, stealing. Pool. Sleepie, drowsie, slimie, fishie, calm, quiet, dull, lazie, sluggish, slow∣oving, waving, weedie, muddie, crisped. Pope. Mitred, adored, canonized, insulting, imperious, proud haughty, in∣olent, stately, tyrannizing, magnificent, Lording, domineering. Popingay. Gay-plum'd, gaudie, feathered, painted, mounted, soaring, high-fly∣ng, towring.
Popler. Tall, loftie, soft, weeping, leavie, amber, gummie, woollie, many coloured, river-loving, barren. Poppie. Drowsie, sleepie, cold, benumming, yellow, Lethean, oblivio chilling, refreshing, cooling, stupfying. Porcupine. Bristlie, pricklie, thornie, fretful, armed, sharp-quill'd, quill-sh¦ting, angry, revengeful. Post. Speedie, hasty, nimble, spurring, swift-pac't, winged, swift-fo fleete, light-foor, light-heel'd, panting, breathlesse, sweating, indu¦ous, quick, dispatchful. Posture. Sprightly, graceful, becoming, handsome, comely, delightful, a¦cted, unaffected, carelesse, slowing, seemly, composed, winning, pl¦sing, insinuating, ingratiating, stately portly. Poverty. Penurious, needie, sleepie, vile, unregarded, cold, whining, pii crushing, thin, meager, starving, honest, uneasie, soul-squeezing, op¦pressed, scorned, pitied, dejected, down-looking, ragged, despise freezing, gauling, pressing, wringing, pinching, sad, servile, cravi simple, disrespected, wronged, tattered, houselesse, thred-bare, so bruising, grinding, dejecting, suppressing, griping, urging, sordi neglected, contemned, nasty, lank-belly'd, thin-gutted, ill-accoute naked, fulsome, taunted, flouted, jeered, painful, laborious, indust¦ous, tugging, toylesome, necessitating, importuning, suffering, desp¦ring, inforcing, bankerupt. Power. Attractiue, magnetick, vigorous, controlling, imperious, comm∣ding, active, enforcing, compulsive. Pox. Pitting, digging, delving, beautie-marring, face-plowing, face-f¦rowing, disfiguring, ditching, marking, imprinting, ingravin scratching. Poison. Deceitful, pale, cold, baneful, raging, foamie, tainting, deadl deathful, destroying, spreading, swelling, black, consuming, eatin cruel, benumming, stupefying, creeping, viperous, inflaming, b¦ing, frothie, secret, lurking, treacherous, slic-working, Theffili snakie, drowsie, sleepie.
Praise. Just, deserved, admired, windy, soothing, gilt-tongued, lavish, so∣id, swelling, big-bellied, spurring, alluring, attractive, Magnetick, encouraging, living, lasting, immortal, enduring, never-dying, deathlesse, unfathomed, unmeasured, unsounded, tympanizing, bla∣ing, pompous, glozing, triumphant, inflaming, incensing. Praier. Wishing, longing, zealous, ardent, fervent, devout, pious, reli∣gious, earnest, winning, conquering, perswasive, mooving, passio∣ate, humble, weeping, mournful, holy, pensive, importuning, af∣ectionate, urgent hearty, instant, obtaining, solicitous, imploting. Precepts. Strict, rigid, severe, rigorou, awful, restraining, just, coercive, oul-binding. Preface. Preambling, ushering, way-making, ceremonious, tedious, com∣lemental, unnecessary. Prejudice. Disadvantageous, indammaging, corrupting, partial, blinding, urtful, harmeful, injurious. Prelate. Sacred, learned, grave wise, pious, religious, devout, zealous, nowing, reverend, venerable, aged, gray-haired, magisterious, mi∣ed. Presumption. Daring, adventurous, bold, rash, audacious, saucy, proud, inso∣nt, swelling, puft, unmannerly, arrrogant. Pretence. False, lying, colourable, likely, glozing, jugling, cogging. Pride. Ruffling, boundlesse, swelling, stately, triumphant, gay, envied, anton, luxurious, phatastick, insulting, imperious, lofty, hateful, dious, detested, purple, heady ambitious, sullen, portly, surly, bur∣, hot, mounting, towring, aspiring, respectlesse, haughty, presum∣ous, insolent, audacious, squint-yed, sterne, disdainful, scornful, ver-weening inventive, flring, gaudy, strutting, impetuous, tim∣anous, rebelliovs, Lucifrial, glittering, flming, bubling, swolln, ow-beating, bustling, currish, churlish, frantick, supercilious, puft, rsie, tyrannizing, soaring, boasting, frothy, skie-owring, self∣onceited, adventurous, bragging, attemptive, vaunting, flanting, amelesse, unblushing, big, burning, high-swoln, dating, unconfi∣ed, unbrideled, contemptuous, high-ooft.
Priest. Sacred, aged, chast, long-gouned, holy, learned, devout, zealous, shriving, confessing, absolving, attoning, pious, sacrificing, reverend, venerable, religious, studious, contemplating, musing, retired, me∣ditating. Prince. Generous, illustrious, magnificent, wise, vertuous, puissant, mag∣nanimous, undaunted, warlick, valiant, couragiou, courteous, just, renowned, redoubted, valorous, ambitious, noble. Prior. v. Abbot. Prison. Loathsome, nasty, noysome, fulsome, dark, darksome, filthy' te∣dious, loathed, hollow, vaulty, dusty, lowsie, doleful, musty, futy, dankish, unwholsome, unhealthy, airelesse, penning, stinking, ob∣scure, ugly, careful, anxious, graty, sad, pensive, melancholy. Prisoner. Suppliant, crowching, fearful, trembling, nasty, needy, straved, hungry, comfortlesse, sad, cold, pensive, melancholy, anxious, sigh∣ing, careful, lowsie, tatterd, fulsome, chained, swallow, discoloured, pale, slavish, fettered, desolate, afflicted, hoping, despairing, weary, swarthy, lean, oppressed. Privie. Stinking, filthy, nasty, loathsome, fulsome, durty, dungie, cor∣nered, dark, obscure, choaking, darksome, secret. Prodigal. Prodigality. Profuse, lavish, expensive, costly, excessive, sumptuous, unthrifty, luxurious, pompous, soft, voluptuous, spendthrift, wastful, regard∣lesse, melting, consuming, profusive, wealth-eating, unbridled, swallowing, fearlesse, devouring, dissolute, disordered, intemperate, revelling, superfluous, needlesse, unnecessary, squandering, gadding wandering, street-wearing, pavement-beating, pot-hunting, wen∣ing, whoring. Profit. Gainful, advantageous, alluring, inticing, commodious, large-abundant, increasing, growing, welcome, wealthy, fruitful, expe∣cted, desired, large, ample▪ contenting, satisfying, pleasing, hear-enchanting. Prophecie. Prophet. Predictious, fore-telling, fore-knowing, deepe, austere, profoun haven-prompted, holy, inspired, ancient, Enthusiastick, sacred, my∣sterious, spirit-prompted. Proportion. Beauteous, graceful, equal, just, comely, handsome, measur'd, squar'd
Prose. Untrust, loose, creeping, undrest, homely, unkneaded, dough-bakt, free-footed, unshackled, ragged, grovling, low, humble. Proserpine. Infernal, imperious, chast, cruel, Sicilian, ravisht, inexorable, impartial, duskie, dreadful, unpitying, remorselesse, unrelenting, grim, gastly, stern-visaged, rigorous, frowning, lowring, scouling, sad pouing, sullen. Prosperity. Happy, joyful, flowry, peaceful, perfect, wished, coveted, desired, smiling, chearful, gleesome, gladsome, fat, Prostitute. Flinty, brazen, shamelesse, unblushing, unchast, uncivil, lescivi∣ous, wanton, lustful, rampant, salacious, dissolute, immodest, rot∣ten, alluring, enticing, tempting, perjured, mercenary, obscene, fil∣thy, perfidious, impudent, dissembling, infamous, dallying, notori∣ous, baudy, flearing, gadding, infectious, pockie, loahsome, painted, cancred, training, itchie, goatish, rammish. Proteus. Changing, turning, varying, shape-changing, predictious, fore-telling, azure, jugling, blue, ambiguous. Proverb. Sententious, ancient, grave, succinct, old, noted, common, known, famous, received, usual, vulgar, facetious, witty memorable. Gods Providence. Observing, overshadowing, al-commanding, eternal, undeceived, unchanged, al-working, al-contriving, al-disposing, al-ruling, al-pricing. Providence. Prudence. Sagacious, sage, wise, grave, mature, deliberate, discreeter, fore-seeing, fore-casting, projecting wary, cautious, cautelous, consulting, careful, aduised, watchful, vigilant, circumspect, experienc't, quick∣eyed, clear-sighted, eagle-eyed, contriving, plotting, studious, indu∣strious, active. Prowesse. Hardy, attemptive, martial, warlick, valiant, valorous, exploitful, atchieving, couragious, victorious, conquering, triumphant, un∣daunted, vertuous, stout, redoubted glorious, renowned, daring, adventurous, masculine constant, unmooved, unshaken, active, ma∣jestick, undejected, manly, haughty. Publican. Greedy, griping, avaritious, exacting, odious, detested, hateful, op∣pressing, extorring, injurious, tyrannizng, crafty, subtle' promoting,
evesdropping, pick-thank, cruel, unpittying, grim, sterne, surly, col∣lecting, uvercharging, afflcting, crushing, rigorous. Pulse. Sprightful, activ, nimble, panting, drumming, trembling, lea∣ping, dancing, subtile, industrious, beating. Pumice. Hollow, dry, smoothing, pouncing, porous, rough, mossie. Punishment. Just, deserved, severe, cruel, sad, heavie, revengeful, avenging, bitter, rigorous. Punk. v. Prostitute. Puppet. Toyish sportive, gamesome, nimble, gay, gallant, dapper, jolly, wanton, frigging, frisking, fond, silly, spruce, quaint, tricksie. Purchase. Rich, wealthy, gainful, advantagious, commodious. Pargatory. Flaming, cleansing, expiating, purse-milking, painful. Purple. Blushing, shining, pompous, glittering, royal, princely, ruddy, bloody, vermillion, Tyrian, Persian, costly, rich, sumtuous, migni∣ficent. Purse. Well-cram'd, swelling, strouting, ful-stuft, well-monied, speaking, lanke, hollow, empty, dumbe. Pursevant. Officious, attaching, sword-bearing, subtile, crafty, rigorous, suit-loving, severe, grim, odious, sterne-visaged, unwelcome, unpi∣tying, inquiring, dogging. Pygmie. Dwarfish, low, little, short-statured, Crane-opposing, Crane-conte∣sting. Pyramid. Aspiring, tall, star-pointing, proud, skie-braving, skie-threatning, heaven-piercing, heaven-boring, exalted, lofty, mounting, soating, towring, prodigious, cloud-bearing, cloud-cleaving, lasting, mo∣numental. Q. Quaile. LOw-flying, wheat-loving, hot, cold-fearing.
Qualm. Sodain, unexpected, surprizing, overcoming, oppressing. Quarrel. Litigious, tumultuous, bloody, jingling, jarring, contentious, froward, peevish, pettish, inveterate, mortal, infamous, brawling, angry, hell-nourisht, snakie, unfriendly, seditious, factious, dissen∣tious, blood-thirsty, grumbling, war-breeding, scoulding, uncha∣ritable, wrangling, brabling, harsh. Queen. Stately, portly, majestick, awful, scepter-bearing, scepter-sway∣ing, sacred, glorious, imperious, commanding, glittering, vertuous, Question, Thorny, doubtful, puzling, perplexing, anxious, debated, obscure, contentious, discoursive, disputed, controverted, jangling, wrang∣ling, brawling, diffentious, argued discussed. Quick-silver. Active, nimble, stirring, skipping, coy, squeamish. Quiet. Peaceful, restful, silken, calme, smooth-fac't, still, silent, flowry, smiling, friendly soft, mild, harmonious, silver-winged, pleasing, lulling, sleepy, drowsie, sacred, untroubled, undisturbed, harmlesse, sleek, pleasant, smooth-cheekt, reposed, retired, lonely, melancholy, downy, solitary, sedentary, slumbering Quill. Slender, limber, pliant, moving, waving, feathered, plumie, lear∣ned, industrious, studious. Quince. Downy, woolly, soft-skin'd, beaded, yellow, strong-sented. Quintessence. Subtile, extracted, sublimated, drained, purged, diviner, refined. Quire. Quirister. Learned, artful, skilful, wel-tuned, harmonious, melodious, ful∣voic't, shrill, chanting, chearful, sweet-voic't, sweet-singing, Sera∣phick, soul-mooving, soul-raping, sence-bereaving, ravishing. Quiver. Clashing, clattering, ratling, painted, sounding, hanging, ding∣ling, arrow-bearing, gilded. R. Rabbat. FEarful, sucking, timorous, tender, frigging, frisking, tender.
Rabbie. Rabbin, Learned, lettered, knowing, honoured, majestick, imperious, ly∣ing, calculating, obscure, mysterious, studious. Race. Speedy, panting, puffing, blowing, breathlesse, sweating, conten∣tious, posting, industrious, laborious, nimble, active, short-winded. Radish. VVatry, biring, seeded, rooted, lurking, salt. Rage. Stormie, furious, impetuous, tumultuous, heated, angry, chasing, offensive, transporting, high-wrought, swelling, burning, boyling, tempestuous, disordered, unadvised, ungoverned, unruly, unbridled, untamed, inconsiderate, staring, tyger-footed, rash, unscan'd, flame-eyed, moody, distempered, hot, head-strong, frantick, trembling, hot-mouth'd, surly, sullen, lawlesse, lavish, misguided, uncollected, ireful, tyrannizing, wilful, self-wild, blundering, pernicious, dis∣quiet, surprizing, impatient, blind, judgment-perverting, giddie, stern-visaged, grim, revengeful, gastly, dizzy-eyed, barbarous, pas∣sionate, frothy, distracted, incensed, foaming, blustering, presump∣tuous, sparkling, witlesse. Ragge. Tattered, patched, lowsie beggarly, nasty, filthy, loathsome, ful∣some, rejected, despised, scorned, contemned, flouted. Raie. Sparkling, thirsty, parching, buning, exalted, refulgent, instru∣ctive, thawing, melting, dissolving, uncertain, scattered, dispersed, disheveld, transpiercing, victorious, supping, licking, aire-gilding, glowing, majestick, glorious, golden, gilded, garish, flaring, gaudy, dzlng, chearful, life-enfusing, bright, shining, glittering, glist∣ring, resplendent, flamie, scorching, enlightned, waving, streaming, painted, checkered, embroidered, enameled, subtile, limber, wan∣dering, ravelled, ragged, blushing, conquering, jagged. Raine. Falling, showry, descending, soaking, river-swelling, refreshing, fatning, fruitful, gentle, sweeping, quickning, drizling, weepng, well-seasoned, timely, stormy, wealthy, growing, balmy, tempstu∣ous, impetuous, soucing, scouring, washing, cleansing, cold, gush∣ing, dropping, plentious, dispersed, scattered, watry, bedewing, grass-mpearling, bleak, dabling. Rainbow. Arched, painted, various, checkered, embroidered, purple, many-co∣loured, moist, presaging prophetick, gaudy, crooked, sun-confronting, sun-opposing, showy, cloudy, eye-pleasing, streaked.
Rake. Sharp-fang'd, long-tooth'd, scraping, gathering, crooked. hoo∣king, tenacious. Ram. Fleecy, ramping, salacious, butting, recoyling, shaggie, warlick, warring, fighting, wanton, lascivious, jurring, joulting, pushng, scuffling, browsing, horned, back-forc't, batering, impetuous, as∣saulting, eager, violent. Rampier. Defensive, thick-rib'd, strong, assaulted, battered, resisting, shiel∣ding, guarding, warding, skreening. Rancour. v. Malice. Spightful, malicious, deadly, canker'd, revengeful, secret, sub∣tile, sullen, fork-tongued, poysonous, viperous, black-mouthed, en∣vious, swelling, blew-eyed, squint-eyed, snakie, censorious, boyling, heart-gnawing, heart-fretting, biting, unappeased, calumnious, flint-hearted, inexorable. Kape. Enforcing impetuous, violent, secret, nightly, sad, unwelcome, unwilling, resistlesse, deflowring. Rapier. Courtly, dangling, fantastick, gilded, thrusting, stabbing, gaudy, fatal generous. Rapine. Greedy, griping, injurious, avaritious, impetuous, despoiling, in∣famous, theevish, adventurous, audacious, wrongful, impious, un∣just, tyrannous, devouring, cruel, pittilesse, violent, remorselesse. Raptures. Enthusiastick, flaming, resining, lofty, intrancing, enchanting, encharming, soul-moving, melting, pleasing, glorious, transporting, inspired, Poetick, raving, high-bred. Raskal. Vilainous. mischievous, unblushing, impudent, brazen fac'd, rope-ripe, desperate, audacious, daring, cheating, cozening, delu∣ding, over-reaching, circumventing, sly, crafty, subtile, knavish, saucy, paltry, surly, jugling, pilfering, malapert, impious, injuious, abusive, ungoverned, unruly, lawlesse, crack-rope, lubberly, boyste∣rous, branded, infamous, notorious. Rashnesse. Heady, head-strong, unruly, ungoverned, unadvised, indeliberate, wilful, selfwild, hasty, impetuous, improvident, unwary, adventurous, audacious, blind, furious, foolish, idiscreet, inconsiderate, bold,
saucy, fearlesse, presumptuous, il-advised, peremptory, preposterous, blustering. Rat. Nimble, subtile, slie, crafty, harmful, gnawing, odious, loath∣some, nasty, mischievous. Rattle. Noysesul, crackling, stilling, toyish, sportive, pleasing, Raven. Black, sable, croaking, greedy, cramming, ravenous, gluttonous, ill-boding, presaging, predictious, ominous, unluckie▪ hoarse, crack-voic', long-liv'd, old, prating, twatling, aged, coaly, fatal. Readinesse. Willing, chearful, nimble, active, officious, serviceable, obsequi∣ous, attentive, quick, respective, industrious, obedient, speedy, lively, sprightly. Reaper Sweaty, scorched, sun-burnt, sun-bakt, broyled, laborious, indu∣strious, toylesom, thirsty, weary, stooping, crooked, panting. Reason. Imperious, controlling, commanding, guiding, moving, enfor∣cing, directing, consulting, wise, sage, understanding, urgent, pru∣dent, wary, cautious, conclusive, excusing, teaching, tutoring, schooling. Rebell. Rebellion. Insolen, lawlesse, unruly, ungoverned, untamed, fearlesse, aw∣lesse, bold, saucy, audacious, adventurous, unblushing, confronting, opposing, unquelled, disloyal, undaunted, malepart, impudent, mu∣tinous, furious, seditious, disturbing, state troubling, tumultuous, impetuous, stat-changing, factious, discontented. Rebuke. Just, unjust, deserved, undeserved, sharp, smart, angry. Recompence. Joyful, expected, desired, wished, contenting, large, ample, fruit∣ful, grateful, thankful, satisfying, hopd, deserved, earnd, equitable, proportioned. Records. Antick, antient, sage, registring, eternal, lasting, memorable, im∣mortal, deathlesse, historious, truth-preserving, truth-treasuring, truth-storing, annalzing, immortalizing, time-worme. Recreation. v. Play. Gamesome, sportive, toyish, time-stealing, mirthful, harmlesse, lavish, unthrifty, fruitlesse, solacing, heart-chearing.
Redemption. Gracious, merciful, powerful, victorious. Reede. Shivering, plash-loving, quivering, pliant, bristling, whis∣ering, foggy, fenny, wavering, waving, bending, shaking, limber, rembling, whistling, ratling, marish-loving, tender, slender, incon∣ant, moist, dancing, vocal. Refreshment. v. Play. Refuge. Assured, propitious, defensive, protecting, comforting, happy, successful. Register. Recording, treasuring, historious, eternal, eternizing, immortal, mmortalizing, truth-preserving, lasting, truth-storing. Reins. v. Kidneyes. Secret, hidden, concealed, hot, chafed, lustful, liver-draining, gra∣velly. Reins of a Bridle. Curbing, ruling, guiding, turning, waving, loosned, foamy, stub∣born, staying, slavered, gingling. Relief. Charitable, merciful, courteous, kind, pious, gracious, pitying, tender. Relicks. Sacred, pious, antient, antick, religious, adored, superstitious, ve∣nerable, worshipt, honoured, choice, pretious, dear, gilded, dusty, mu∣sty, worm-eaten, holy, devotious, mouldy, maggot-eaten, time-worn, solemne. Religion. Sacred, holy, pure, sincere, zealous, fervent, solemn, faithful, Ca∣tholick, Apostolick, conscientious, ceremonious. Remedy. Preserving, preventing, soveraign, present, powerful, approved, health-giving, wholesome, vertuous, applied, healthful, joyous, joy∣ful, singular, pain easing, strong, useful, commodious, cordial, com∣forting, efficacious. Remembrance. Sad, glad, heavy, pensive, busie, joyful, mindfull. Remorse. Checking, curbing, awing, conscientious, sharp, sad, shaming, prick∣ing, penitential, secret, pale, scrupulous. Renegado. Apostate, damn'd, curst, hellish, impious, perfidious, false, faithless, perjur'd, revolting, unruly, irregular, infamous, branded, rebellious, wretched.
Renown. v. Fame. Winged, deathless, immortalized, famous, glorious, spreading, ¦sting, incredible, unexprest. Repentance. Sad, pensive, ashie, mournful, weeping, late, slow, tardy, hea sowre, sharp, sober. Repining. Querulous, seditious, factious, grumbling, sowre, frowning, gri stern, threatful, impious, secret. Reply. Sharp, short, smart, acute, rational, arguing. Report. v. Fame Rumour Swift-wing'd▪ fleet-wing'd, spreading, tatling, twatling, babli flitting, lavish, swelling, long-tongued, tell-tale, gossipping, gaddi winged, light-heeld, glib-tongu'd, wide-mouth'd, sleek-wing'd, Ea¦gle-wing'd, posting, spurring. Repose. v. Quiet. Secure, soft, calm, quiet, peaceful, easie, retired, silken, happy, desire lazy, warm. Reproach. Taunting, flouting, oprobrious, injurious, harsh, contumelious, ¦just, shameful, biting, girding, stinging, twitching, infamous, noto¦ous, saucy, bold. Reproof. Just, unjust, deserved, undeserved, merited, unmerited, sh smart, harsh, bold, couragious, angery, stern, sowre, grimme, cho¦lerick. Repulse. Sharp, sowre, stern, valiant, couragious, stout, manly, obstina impetuous, strong, angry, cholerick, churlish, sullen, surly, sturdy, brave, glorious, victorious. Request. Humble, suppliant, earnest, solicitous, importunate, bold, ea crowching, fawning, inconstant, urgent, pressing, reasonable, fair, ho¦nest, pertinent, impertinent, seasonable, unseasonable. Resistance. v. Repulse. Rest. v. Quiet. Peaceful, foft, quiet, silent, lazie, lither, downy, untroubled, ∣disturbed. Resurrection. Joyful, joyous, chearful, wished, blessed, glorious, reuniting, fin happy, reviving, quickning.
Restorative. Vertuous, rigorous, soveraign, efficacious, cordial, healthful, ngthning, comforting, reviving. Revenge. Black, dismal, furious, rageing, chafing, boyling, bloody, insatiate, appeased, implacable, sad, flame-eyed, snake-haired, desperate, cru∣, stern, grimme, frowning, rageful, wrathful, threathing, mena∣g, hellish, stinging, just, rash, barbarous, thirsty, fiery, hot, flaming, petuous, stormy, swelling, burning, hot-mouthed, sullen, bluster∣g, self-will'd, impatient, passionate, sparkling, foaming, fro∣. Reverence. Obsequious, auspicious, submissive, solemne, holy, pious, ceremo∣us, aweful, fearful, dreadful, silent, crouching, adoring, prostrating, ee-crooking. Reward. v. Recompence. Rhadamanthus. v. Judge. Grimme, stern-visaged, inexorable, impartial, severe, austere, el, unsparing, unpittying, just, grave, wise, even-handed, brow-ting, frowning. Rhetorick. v. Eloquence. Heart-stealing, soul-moving, soul-raping, perswasive, smooth, ly, courtly, varnisht, quaint, painted, glozing, insinuating, victo∣ous, overcoming, delicious, sweet-lipt, soul-invading, bewitching, chanting, encharming, Nectareous, ambrosian, ear-captivating, cy-tickling. Riddle. Dark, knotty, perplexing, puzling, posing, subtle, hard, profound, ob∣re, doubtful, ambiguous, secret, grave, scrupulous, mysterious, con∣led. Rigour. Cruel, hard-hearted, flint-hearted, marble-hearted, strict, re∣orseless, unrelenting, unpitying, merciless, tyrannous, angry, bit∣, odious, obstinate, obdurate, bloody, blood-thirsty, stern, savage, ious, impetuous. Rimes. Laurel-worthy, wel-trickt, wel-drest, smooth, flowing, Nectar∣opping, melodious, harmonious, wel-tun'd, delicious, smooth-pac't, ighly, gleesome, joyful, ear-enamouring, soul-raping, soul-mo∣g, soul-invading, joyous, mirthful, numerous, pleasant, measured, ll-proportioned. Rinde. Rugged, coating, clothing, tender, sleek, smooth, shly, writheld, mpled, frumpled, wrapping, imbracing, knotty, porous, wrinckled, low, weather-beaten, casing, pimpled, mossie.
Ring. Burnisht, gilded, enamelld, hining, impearled, nuptiall, g generous, finger-hooping, gracefull, costly, pompous, pearly. Riot. Headie, luxurious, lascivious, loose, dissolute, vnruly, vngov disorder'd, distemper'd, lawlesse, wanton, licentious, tumultu Rites. Mysterious, solemne, ceremonious, sacred, pious, holy, relig devotious, venerable, ancienr, received. Rivall. Jealous, suspicious, fearful, ambitious, careful, industrious, env malicious, spightful, revengeful, calumnious, heart-wounded, ¦ing, eying, wary, cautious, circumspect, amorous. Rivar. River. v. Flood. Winding, whispering, gulphy, uxorious, bank-kissing, bank-¦ing, Chrystal, amorous, swelling, silver, silver-breasted, rustling, ¦bling, dancing, gliding, purling, snaky, rolling, hurrying, shower, censed, vaulting, leaping, glassie, whirling, wandering, strag wheeling, smooth-sliding, wrigling, floating, swan-imbroided, Roade. Common, beaten, frequented, hoof-beaten, stamped, foot-ram travaild. Robber. High-way, treacherous, insidious, impetuous, assalted, inj subtle, vigilant, crafty, sly, secret, ambusht, murdering, cruel, blo surprizing, pitiless, watchful, greedy, preying, expecting, way-la pestering, purse-taking. Robe. Rich, wealthy, pompous, stately, gallant, magnficent, g costly, sumptuous, decent, grave, comely, graceful, becoming,  spruce, handsome, attiring, adorning, fashionable. Rock. Craggie, justling, solid, crushing, rooted, ragged, hanging, l¦vaulty, ratling, aged, hollow-vaulted, high-browd, sea-survey froth-girt, sea-outfacing, knaggie, sea-confronting, sea-orehang sea-outlooking, sea-daring, ship-threatning, wave-breaking, repell churlish, solitary, towring, aspiring, obdurate, ruthlesse, steepe,  cliffie, barren, burly, froathy, foamy, massie, guttered, unfreque melancholy, impregnable, dull, horned, beaten, dashing, splitt sea-girt, supercilious, skie-braving, skie-towring, skie-inva skie-threatning, desert, uncouth, forsaken, inhospitable, crump-¦dered, shrubbie, mosse-thrumd, deaf, unfruitfull, proud, ambi
dreadful, exalted, bushie, wave-spurning, crannied, slippery. Rod. wful, dreadful, scourging, lashing, awing, schooling, tutoring, aining, curbing, ruling, jerking, smarting, Roe. kipping, leaping, dancing, vaulting, tripping, wanton, frisking, ging, gamesome, sportive, light-foot, nimble, timorous, fearful, bling. Rogue. v. Rascal. otorious, crack-rope, rope-ripe, vilanous, bold, mischievous, dent, shamelesse, unblushing, saucy, malapert, cheating, coze∣g, jugling, brazen-fac't. Roofe. Losty, stately, hanging, vaulty, arched, airy. Roote. ervie, sinewie, fibrous, bearded, spreading, mssie, sinking, ing, moist, watry, thirsty, earth-bound, sappy, jucie, the plants r, attractive, tender, branched, dispersing, scattered, wrigling, y, stringed, knaggy, knotty vigorous, enterlaced, creeping, craw∣, groveling. Rope. Corded, twisted, dangling, knotty, twined, binding, hanging, hed. Rose. lushing, stamme, fragrant, dew-dropping, odorous, vermilli∣ carnation, perfumed, smiling, maiden, virgin, blowing, fading, t-lived, withering, muskie, velvet, purple-plusht, budding, amo∣s, bearded, thorny, prickly, dew-empearled, painted, delicious, ly, sweet-lipt. Rosemary Flowry, odorous, fragrant, genial, nuptial, branching, shooting, ggie, tufted, posied. Ruby. Glittering, blushing, orient, wealthy, precious, beaming, flaming, iant, Indian, inestimable. Rue. itter, wild, mountainous, sharp-sented, cold-fearing, wet-fea∣g, dung-hating: Russian. Whoring, wenching, roaring, swearing, cursing, swaggering, ga∣g, quarrelling, debaucht, dissolute, unruly, ungoverned, bicke∣g, brabling, rapier-wearing▪
Ruine. Pitied, dusty, dismal, dreadful, undoing, sodain, tempestuous, mented, bewailed, woful, bemoaned, deplored, sad, miserable, unh black, mourned, fatal, reproachful, shameful, ignominious, hide gastly, affrightful. Ruler Directive, instructing, guiding, teaching, tutoring, authen squaring. Ruler. Imperious, commanding, controlling, awful, dreadful. Rumour. v. Fame. Report. Busie, medling, saucy, licentious, lawless, winged, light-heeld, l▪tongued, swifi-winged, glib-tongue. Rush. Pithie, knotless, bearded, piked, tufted, waving, smooth-s sleek, quivering, wavering, trembling, limber, slender, muddy, ¦loving, plash-loving, thirsty, sharp-pointed, spungy, pithy, ¦rooted. Russian. Cold, freezing, frost-bit, frost-nipt, bleak, chill, furr'd, quivering Rusticitie. Rude, sawcy, clownish, lubberly, nasty, loathsome, noysome, odi fulsome, slovenly, sluttish, rough, harsh, absurd, boysterous, blustr blundering, simple, plain, untaught, barbarous, ignorant. S. Sabaean. SPicie, soft, effeminate, delicate, rich, wealthy, plump, pre¦ctious, remote. Sabbath. Sacred, ceremonious, religious, honoured, solemn, restie. Sabines. Ancient, severe, rigid, strictliv'd, chaste, temperate, sober, in¦strious. Sacrament. Mysterious, ceremonious, solemne, reverend, venerable, gr¦conferring, grace-conveying, devout, uncomprehended.
Sacrifice. Plous, religious, devotious, solemn, humble, appeasing, bloody, oaking, censed, burning. Sacriledge. Accursed, impious, audacious, execrable, odious, detested, ab∣rred, godless. Saffran. Yellow, gilded, flowry, trampled, golden, ruddy, blushing, sweet-eathing, fragrant. Sailes. Flagging, unfulled, winged, wind-stuft, ful-spead, whistling, welling, hollow, unfoulded, great-bellied, ambitious, ruffling, trem∣ling, spreading, buffing, hoysted, pregnant, limber, portly, rufled, oaing waving, gathered, speedy, hanging, stooping, paunched, gor∣ellied, strouting, weather-beaten, rustling, ratling. Sailer. v. Mariner. Fearful, timorous, trembling, watchful, storm-beaten, Sea-scour∣ed, tempest-driven, industrious, adventurous, Sea-fairing, Sea-utting, Sea-tracing, wind-observing, star-gazing. Saint. Honoured, adored, enshrined, triumphant, blessed, canonized, glo∣ified, exalted, immortal. Salamander. Unburnt, cold, unschorcht, spotted, speckled, fire-quenching, star∣ed, star-powdered, venemous, poysonous, icie. Sallow. Limber, verdant, branching, spreading, sprouting, bank-loving, pliant, plash-loving, moist, shadie, tender, bitter, short-lived, twiggy, ruitless. Salt. Savoury, quickning, sharpening, stomack-whetting, frothy, corro∣ding, preserving, clotting, melting, relish-giving. Salve. Curing, healing, powerful, efficacious, health-restoring, pain∣easing, applied, plaistered, pain-allaying, unctious. Sanctuary. Sacred, holy, reverend, venerable, frequented, honoured, reve∣encing, protecting, sequestred, unprophaned. Sand. Flitting, barren, yielding, golden, beachy, yellow, thirsty, sucking, purling, silver, straw-colourd, dusty, wavy, gravelly, loose, moving, flood-driven, hurried, cold, dry, unfruitful, rolling, wandering, pearly, queachy, shifting, sliding, numerous, unnumbred, flowing, muddy, glittering, floating.
Saphyr, Devout, pious, azure, purple, speckled, shining, glittering, h uncarved. Sarmatian. Swift-foot, cruel, wandring, stragling, sallow, unshorne, lo-haired, stout, valiant, cold, freezing, shaggie, blood-quffing, flitti Sattin. Sleeke, smooth, glittering, shining, pompous, rich, wealthy, sp briske, rustling, whistling. Saturne. Cold, dull, heavy, lumpish, doltish, leaden, melancholy, sull sallow, aged, long-bearded, mowing, sickle-bearing, deposed, s old, pensive. Satyrs. Shaggy, rough-hewn, sportiue, lusty, wanton, salacious, lasci∣ous, salvage, frolick, light-foot, wild, unruly, lust-spurd, amoro, clamorous, jolly, tripping, nimble, horned, goat-footed, shouting, noyseful, blundering, harsh, impetuous, boisterous, blustering, ∣civil, wood-haunting, frisking, swift-footed, churlish, sullen, surly, burly, tumultuous, gamesome, gleesome, unfashioned, rural, rob∣stious, naked, listning, prick-ear'd, leaping, skipping, vaulting, d∣cing, saucie, flouting, jeering, venerous. Satyre. Girding, biting, snarling, scourging, jerking, lashing, smarting, sharp, tart, rough, invective, censorious, currish, snappish, captio, barking, brawling, carping, fanged, sharp-tooth'd, quipping, jeering, flouting, sullen, rigid, impartial, whipping, thorny, pricking, sting∣ing, sharp-fanged, injurious, reproachful, libellous, harsh, rough-hewne, odious, opprobrious, contumelious, defaming, calumnious. Sauce. Poynant, stomach-whetting, povoking, relish-giving, slpping, superfluous, luxurious, costly, sumptuous, expensive, excessive, un¦thrifty, sharp, soure, tart, lickerous, piercing, stinging, seasoning, savoury. Saw. Toothed, grating, reciprocated, cutting, cleaving, dividing, shrill, noyseful. Scab. Loathsome, nasty, fulsome, odious, infectious, contagious, dis∣easeful, unwholsome, spreading, scaly, scurfie, shelly, putrid, noysome, Scabbard. Peaceful, drowsie, rusty, gilded, shielding, coating, hollow, resty.
Scaffold. Spatious, capacious, frequented, exalted, advanced, lofty, thron∣d, crowded, swarming. Scales. Weighing, poising, equal, just, hanging, dangling, even-dealing, eaing, jugling, turning. Scandal. Injurious, harmeful, pernicious, dangerous, infamous, defaming, pprobrious, offensive, calumnious, vile, black-mouthed, envious, alitious, squint-eyed, long-tongued. Scarecrow. Affrighting, dreadful, bug-bear, ugly, hideous, ghastly, awing, owing, awful, empty, silly, simple. Scarlet. Blushing, flaming, deep-hiewd, rich, wealthy, pompous, magni∣cent, stately, worshipful, honoured, aw-infusing. Scavenger. Filthy, nasty, fulsome, noysome, loathsome, durty, base, poor, tat∣er'd, stinking, dung-farming, gold-fining. Scepter. Pearly, awsul, proud, desired, ambitious, courted, enamelled, stud∣ed, royal, regal, princely, stately, portly, majestick, honoured, swey∣ng, ruling, shining, commanding, imperious, controlling, quelling, hreatning, envied, glittering, graceful, aw-infusing, dreadful, ivo∣y, golden, glorious, grave, victorious, massie, weighty, venerable, ompous. Shisme. Shismatick. Seditious, renting, peace-disturbing, tumultuous, war-engende∣ing, libellous, factious, siding, malecontented, state-troubling, tur∣bulent, fiery, bloody, furious, haire-braind, giddy-headed, brain-sick, ruth-perverting, Scripture-wresting, unlettered, misguided, seduced, rroneous, fantastick, audacious, pernicious, state-molesting, Church-ounding, self-conceited, self-opinioned, obstinate, self-will'd, wil∣full. Scholler. Painful, careful studious, submissive, obedient, pliant, attentive, ssiduous, industrious, vigilant, laborious, meager, bookish, preg∣nant, ingenious, sharp-witted, blockish, dull, carelesse, dull-witted. Shoole. Learned, lettered, industrious, educating, instructive, feared, ha∣ed, painful, laborious, toylesome, nurturing. Schooleman. Subtile, knotty, quick-conceited, plodding, wity, discoursive, arguing,
industrious, studious, knowing, sifting, bandying, disputing, thorny, acute, sharp-witted, discussing. Schoolmaster. Pedant. Pedantick, severe, grim harsh, stern-visag'd, austere, angry, su∣len, hasty cholerick, waspish, impatient, lashing, jerking, scourgin furious, tyrannous, tyrannizing, tutoring, instructing, painful, la∣borious, careful industrious, inculeating, soure, peevish, pettish, lea∣ned, skilful, knowing, cruel, grave, imperious, majestick, domineerin Science. Sacred, industrious, gainful, useful, graceful, subtile, famous, ∣ble, ingenious, studious divine. Scoffe. Geering flanting, wry-mouh'd, taunting, gibing▪ girding, wipi disdainful, flouting, deriding, contemptuous, abusive, secret, wry-nos'd. Scorne. Disdainful, proud, insolent, squint-eyed, sullen, wry-mouth' deriding, contemptuous, arrogant, sowre-eyed, peevish, haugh swelling, surly, currish, churlish, spightful, angry, despising, unde∣valuing, disesteeming, unbecoming. Scorpion. Writhed, stinging, knotty, curled, folded, poysonous, venemo, dreadful, crooked, bowed, cruel, deadly, mortal, fatal, burning: Scourge. Lashing, jeking, smarting, painful, revengeful, sharp, knot, twisted, awing, dreadful, feared, hated, loathed, curbing, restrain∣ing, tutoring, cruel, bloody, schooling, fleaing, severe, rigoro, ratling, threatning. Screen. Fencing, warding, shielding, sheltering, defending, hiding, co¦cealing, protecting. Scribe. Scrivener. Painful, industrious, laborious, inkie, pen-wearing, paper-bl∣ring, intentive, assiduous, ready, nimble, quick-fingred, dispatch skilful, artful, hand-commanding, posting, hand-running. Scum. Frothy, foamy, superficial, floating, sweaty, swelling, bublin boyling, hoary, swimming. Scot. Hardy, valiant, ficrce, forward, adventurous, warlick, active, ∣ry, waspish, peevish, angry, cholerick, hasty. Scruple. Picking, anxious, vexing, perplexing, conscientious, curio doubtful, grubby, molesting, jealous, fearful, suspitious.
Scythian. Barbarous, warlick, bloody, rude, cruel, savage, untamed, free∣ing, wandering, Sea. Working, boyling, floating, wavie, angry, raging, swelling, diffu∣ed, licentious, curled, insulting, swallowing, awful, dreadful, gul∣hy, toyling, pathlesse, drenching, thirsty, ever-drinking, floody, a∣ure, ireful, stormy, surgy, ebbing, flowing, glassie, tumbling, pine∣loughed, dropsie, unbottomed, unpath'd, unsounded, breaking, un∣easured, unfathomed, vasty, impetuous, resulting, giddy, wrathful, rinish, blew-wav'd, wrackful, tumultuous, resounding, brackish, ray, yeelding, aged, hoary, rugged, rufled, wind-hew'd, vaulting, retting, bigh-wav'd, fishy, troubled, foamy, belching, untamed, ocky, billowie, tossing, frothy, soundlesse, green-fac'd, swelling, ncing, roaring, bellowing, infatiate, wealthy, shelfie, tide-raised, ngry, boundlesse, devouring, ravenous, gluttonous, unconfined, ngorging, earth-incircling, earth-girdling, engulphing, pearly, im∣atient, furious, inexorable, hollow, winding, grumbling, sail-bea∣ing, greedy, a varitious, capacious, unfrozen, water-crashing, earth∣urrounding, hydropick. Seaman. Wandering, fearful, weather-beaten, storm-fearing, trembling, ad∣enturous, vowing, greedy, avaritious, wind-observing, star-gazing, wave-cutting, wave-tost. Search. Industrious, careful, diligent, curious, laborious, piercing, assiduous, ttentive, watchful, active, hunting, painful, prosperous, successeful, ishing. Secret. Concealed, hidden, sequestred, undivulged, mysterious, private, nclosed, enchested, reserved, covered, murmured, deep, profound, lent, lurking, pensive, treasured. Sectary. v. Schismatick. Siding, partial, prejudicial, sequestring, obstinate, self-will'd, self∣onceited, self-opinioned, seditious, tumultuous, peace-disturbing, Church-renting, factious, giddy, hair-braind, brain-sick, male-con∣ented, insolent, jangling, wrangling disagreeing, jarring, unfriendly. Security. Easie, sluggish, sleepy, drowsie, audacious, quiet, soft, insolent, prejudi∣ial, indammaging, carelesse, fearlesse, bold, blind, incautelous, credu∣us, dreaming, supine, regardlesse, negligent, yawning loose, pernici∣us Sedge. Intangling, muddy, weedy, plashy, marish, loving.
Sedition. Tumultuous, turbulent, siding, partial, unfriendly, factious, brain∣sick, rebellious, mutinous, pernicious, novel, brawling, barking wrangling, jangling, jarring, impious, wicked, unpeaceable, confe-confederate, conspired, combind, lawlesse. Seede, Fruitful, growing, increasing, propagated, sprouting, pregna, masculine, powerful, vigorous, rooting, springing, scatterd, ingendring, procreative, genial. Seminarie. Fruitful, pregnant, teeming, happy, successful. Semiramis. Babylonian, masculine, manly, couragious, valiant, famous, w∣ton, Iascivious, luxurious, unchaste, profuse. Senate. Purple, grave, reverend, aged, honoured, prudent, authentick, sage, wise, deliberate, consulting, advising, decreeing, law-making, assen∣bled, judicious. Sence. Voluptuous, seducing, erroneous, active, nimble, industrious, spo∣tive, gamesome, wanton. Sensualitie. v. Lust, Luxurie. Barbarous, brutish, beastly, bestial, luxurious, ungovern'd, volup∣ous, swinish, wallowing, unramed, unbridled. Sentence. Learned, wise, grave, judicious, pithy, useful, obscure, profound, ¦morable, ingenious, facetious, wittie, golden, divine, subtle. Sentinel. Watchful, careful, waking, industrious, attentive, vigilant, wac∣ing, wary, cautious, circumspect. Sepulcher. Forsaken, oblivious, forgotten, mournful, pompous, honour'd, glo∣rious, sable, marble, sumptuous, cold, magnificent, shady, darksome obscure, proud, silent, dumb, black, fatal, hollow, vaultie, yawning, quiet, peaceful, devouring, time-worn, loathsome, corrupting, nasta▪ fulsome, dustie, musty, fusty, jaw-stretcht, gaping, wide-mouthed, da∣kish, unfrequented, comely, decent, graceful. Sepulture. Honest, decent, comely, befitting, solemn, ceremonious, obsequio mournful, pensive, lamenting, graceful. Seraphin. Smooth-fac't, beauteous, sweet-voic't, swift-wing'd, silver-wing' golden-feather'd, smooth-cheet, rose-lipt, glorious, blessed, holy, hp∣py, celestial, joy-ravisht, sworded.
Sergeant. Officious, law-executing, crafty, fly, subtle, willing, ready, employ∣ed, busie, sword-bearing, odious, detested, hateful, suit-loving, merci∣less, pitiless, unpittying, remorseless, unrelenting, grim, harsh, austere, cruel, feared, dreadful, bug-bear, hated, stern-visaged, sullen, soure, haling, frowning, brow-kntting, supercilious, imperiou, ogh∣dealing, dogging. Serpent. Slimy, speckled, folded, winding, crawling, killing, stinging, wreath∣ing, writhing, wrigling, twining, knotty-nowed, subtle, craftie, groveling, doubling, creeping, lurking, crouching, damaskt, wily, scaly, checkerd, venemous, poysonous, baneful, forked, fork-tongued, deceit∣ful, slie, spotted, freckled, basking, hissing, enameld, swelling, biting, deadly, dreadful, glittering, glistering, crested, azure, blew-skind, quick-sighted, slipperie, noxious, gluttinous, gliding, assaulting, vaulting. Servant. Industrious, quick, stirring, active, nimble, willing, ready, officious, obsequious, obedient, pliant, diligent, laborious, toyling, tugging, moyling, careful, painful, watchful, assiduous, faithful, honest, idle, lazie, lither, dronish, sleepie, drowsie, rebellious, murmuring, grum∣bling, repining, saucy, uncivil, sordid, regardless, careless, deceitful, thievish, unfaithful, dishonest, disobedient, proud, insolent, negligent, sow, freezing. Service. Hard, cruel, rigorous, laborious, toylsome, drudging, easie, honou∣rable, happy. Servitude. Rigorous, cruel, oppressing, slavish, gauling, groaning, restaining, heavy, crushing, bruising, wretched, constrained, odious, infamous, la∣borious, tugging, toylesome, tyrannous, shameful, ignominious, in∣tolerable, unsupported, detested, abhorred, hated, burdenous, loading soul-dejecting, tormenting, vexing, drudging, loathed, grating. Sessions. Dreadful, grim, sad, severe, austere, awful. Severitie. Grim, sad, austere, cruel, awful, hateful, odious, rigorous, bloodie, rigid, imperious, frowning, supercilious, tyrannous. Shacles. Bnding, fettering, pressing, gauling, wringing, slavish, restraining, servile, infamous. Shade. Shadow. Fleeting, Sylvane, spreading-gloomy, darksome, delightsome, faint, foggy, cooling, refreshing, sullen, scowling, whispering, leavie, obscu∣ring, kind, courteous, friendly, befriending, cool, chil, sad, dark, doleful,
empty, dank, griesly, covert, ghastly, unfrequented, silent, Ebon, de∣formed, glimpsing, dreadful, flitting, unsubstantial, dusky, brow, pale, learing, feeble, hungry, dogging, faint, thinne, sable, meager, hol∣low, unfathomed, ungrasped, lean, glaring, gliding, wandering fan∣tastick, bloodless, drowsie, trembling, sliding, glancing, flying, wi∣ming, deceitful, genial, hospitable, verdant, melancholly, blood∣ess. Shaft. Darted, wingy, whirling, whistling, singing, Cretian, light-winged, forked, thrilling, trembling flying, pointed, fluttering, quiveri, wounding, killing, bearded, fatal, poysoned, piercing, deathful, dig∣ging, swift-paced, light-foot, Thessalian, Scythian, Thracian, P∣thian, Sidonian, cruel, revengeful, Armenian, impetuous, bloody, blood-thirsty. Shambles. Fleshy, bloody, greasie, swearing, cheating, fat, murdering, killin, but cherly, bleeding, nasty, sluttish, fulsome. Shame. Blushing bashful, disgraceful, infamous, dishonest, ugly, lasting, burning, opprobrious, fearful, modest, trembling, reproachful, ingen∣ous, concealing, pale, ignominious, betraying, towardly. Sheafe. Ripened, weighty, pregnant, bundled, bristled, fruitful, joyfull. Sheep. Harmless, fleecy, silly, wealthy, wandering, straying, rambling, stragling, nibling, browsing, flocking, curled, bleating, grazing, game∣some, sportive, woolly, fruitful, gainful, fleece-bearing, fearful, weak∣headed, seduced, rambling, broad-taild. Sheet. Nuptial, genial, infolding, wanton, conscious, nightly, silent, se∣cret, venereous, lecherous. Shell. Hollow, pearly, Chrystal, casing, housing, sounding, crispy, curled, radiant, shining, glittering, bright, crooked, arched, vaulty, painted, enameld, writhed, scaly, streaked, frothy, foamie, wrinkled, knag∣gie. Shelter. Defensive, protecting, securing, safe, warm, happy, joyful, shady, screening, covering, hiding, fencing, concealing, shielding. Shepherd. v. Swain. Silly, lusty, jolly, gamesome, sportive, gleesome, piping, mirthful, gladsome, merry jovial, un-envied, honest, blithe, buxome, jocund,
rude, rural, rustick, clowuish, boorish, robustious, active, careful, labo∣ious, industrious, ill-favoured, unfashioned, whistling, sallow, sun∣burnt, swarthy. Shield. Plated, batterd, clattering, clashing, fencing, warding, guarding, re∣pulsing, belaboured, securing, protecting, defending, saving, screening, trusty, glittering, gilded, flashed, wounded, gashed, bloody, hollow, brazen, shining, desensive, massie, dazling. Shine. Scattered, glaring, trembling, dazling, glimsing, dispersed, spread∣ing, radiant, beaming, glorious, gaudy, gorgeous, graceful, beauteous, darted, reflected, flaming▪ starry. glittering, eye-conquering, pompous, resplendent, victorious, enlightned, gilded. Ship. Winged, bras-beakt, sayl-winged, stately, portly, labouring, hol∣low, many-joynted, thin-ribd, well-rigg'd, adventurous, swift-pac't, sea-plowing, crooked, vaulty, floating, posting, flying, corded, pitched, sea-tracing, sea-cuting, storm-beaten, reeling. Shipwrack. Dreadful, fearful, miserable, splitting, lamented, sad, unhappy, com∣fortless, tempestuous, stormy, black, dismal. Shop. Busie, trafficking, merchandizing, thronged, well-stored, well-sort∣ed, wealthy; open, cozening, cheating, bartering, bargaining, exchang∣ing, storing. Shore. Wavy, solid, winding, beachy, ratled, sandy, foamy, frothy, goan∣ing, rugged, calm, rocky, craggy, broken, flowing, sucking, wished, long-desired, mossie, grassie, weedy, bounding, shelly, shl-strewed, pearly, pibly flmy, naked, unpeopled, confining, bounding, crooked, desert, forsaken, unfrequented, barren, pratling, murmuring, hoarle, recoyling, repulsing, wave-spurning, enameld, wave-courted, scarterd jagged, hollow, shrubby, resounding, drumming, bellowing, flushing, wave-dashing, coy, squeamish angry, chulish, froward, beachy. Shoulder. Strong, massie, able, robustious, supporting, bearing, pack-bearing, upholding, sustaining, propping, loadned. Shout. Noyseful, chearful, clamorous, joyful, applausive, voice-uniting, confused, tumultuous, deafning, pierceing, Air-rending, Skie-tea∣ing, amazing, astounding. Shower. Drizling, weeping, balmy, refreshing, corn-lodging, impetuous,
falling, soucing, soaking, dropping, plenteous, tempestuous, gushi fruitful, stormy, pearly, silver, threatining, river-swelling, fatnin, sweeping, quickning, washing, drenching rensing, wel-seasond, balmy, scouring, cleansing, scattered, grass-impearling, frothy, windy, r∣ling, dabling, honeyed. Shrew. Curst, froward, pievish, scolding, angry, frowning, brow-pursing, brow-knitting, sullen, furious, brawling, way-ward, soul-lookt. Shrine. Sacred, honoured, adored, gilded, superstitious, worshipt, devotious, religious, garnisht. Shrub. Humble, bushie, prickly, thorny, bristly, idle, barren, unfruitful, mossie, grovie. Shuttle. Gliding, speedy, quicke-returning, weaving, swift-pac't, recipro∣cated, bandied. Sibyl. Aged, prophetick, sacred, Virgin, chaste, long-liv'd, predictious, presaging, foretelling, inspired, enthusiastick. Sicambrian. Fierce, yellow, bloody, untam'd, stormy, cruel, warlick, grim, stern, crisp-haird. Sicilia. Sicilian. Trinacrian, fruitful, fabulous, ingenious, subtle, crasty, slie, dissem∣bling, politick. Sickle. Crooked, keen-edg'd, sharp-tooth'd, biting, cutting, reaping, bend∣ing, wheeling, sweeping, mouing, rusty. Sickness. v. Maladie. Wasting, consuming, decaying, infectious, diseaseful, disquiet, pie∣vish, pettish, waspish, angry, fretting, eating, oppressing, painful, dull, pining, whining, plaintful, querulous, complaining, pale, grievous, tor¦turing, vexing, wearing, griping, twitching, girding, sad, pinching, nip∣ping, pulling, wringing, cutting, gauling, doleful, bitter, gnawing, racking, smarting, lingering, noysome, tedious, loathsome, weary, im∣patient, wasting, blood-sucking, puling, soaking, bleak, wan, duskie, dis∣colou'd, sallow, crabbed, sour-lookt, powting, appalling, bed-rid, way∣ward, froward, grumbling, groaning, grunting, pensive, unhealthful, tormenting, crasie, decrepit, dolorous. Sigh. Blood-drinking, thirsty, blood-consuming, blood-sucking, Airy, heart-rending, scalding, burning, smotherd, rising, blasting, fiery, deep
fetcht, melting, broken, fervent, stormy, winged, restless, hearty, pity∣g, compassionate, affectionate, easie, groaning, careful, anxious, erplexed, heart-fretting, mournful, sad, pensive, melancholy, pene∣ntial, repentant, lamenting, bewayling, pious, remorseful, conscien∣ous, weeping, repeated, heart-breaking, languishing, fainting, in∣errupted, sweet-breathing, inclosed, dissembled, concealed, secret, hispering, amorous, pious, religious, zealous. Sign. Betraying, directing, instructve, apparent, evident, presaging, pre∣dictious, fore-telling, representing, resembling, speaking. Silence. Hollow, dull, concealing, dumb, peaceful, reposed, slumbering, patient, shady, still, calm, appeased, listening, attentive, secret, Py∣thagorick, forced, willing, yielding, faithful, trustie, timorous, fear∣ful, Monasticke, Reverend, aweful, squeamish, blinde, self-de∣vouring. Silenus. Aged, old, Asse-bestriding, drunken, reeling, foamy, spuing, blech∣ing, slaggering. Silk. Rustling, whistling, shining, glistering, wealthy, pompous. Silk-worm. Industrious, laborious, cunning, nimble, active, working. Silver. Shining, glittering, glancing, massie, solid, burnish, refined, weal∣thy, desired, coveted, inchested, hoarded. Simonie. Sacrilegious, impious, god-selling, unlawful, odious, infamous, secret, accursed, damned. Simplicitie. Credulous, incautelous, indiscreet, unwise, naked, open, ru∣sticke, clownish, pure, devour, religious, honest, harme∣lesse, innocent, downe-right, homely, rude, raw, plain, un∣disguized. Sinceritie. Hearty, cordial, down-right, simple, honest, true, pious; devout, zealous, religious. Sink. Filthie, noysome, nastie, fulsome, loathsome, puddle, mddie, dirtie. Sinew. Binding, supple, knitting, knotty, able, strong, lustie, fibrous, ner∣vous, swelling, trembling.
Sinne. Leprous, charming, inchanting, alluring, inticing, ugly, filt spotted, odious, crying, pernicious, displeasing, soul-tainting, sou¦killing, mortal, venial, damning, accursed, prevaricating, soul-woun¦ing, soul-stabbing, impious, vengeance-provoking, infamous, defa¦ing, scandalous, wilful, obstinate, presumptuous, enormous, execrable loathed, detested, malicious, hard-hearted, dissolute, riotous, exorb¦tant, incorrigible, depraving, rebellious, prodigious, haynous. Siring. Squirting, injecting. Sirrup. Delicious, slpping, taste-pleasing, delightful, lickerous, swee-tasting. Sisyphus. Tugging, toyling, sweating, stone-rolling, subtle, crafty, unhappy, weary. Sith. Keenedged, sharp-edged, sweeping, mowing, cutting, reaping, crooked. Sive. Hole-checkerd, unretaining, scattering, windowy, Magick, Skeleton. Bony, scraggy, meager, lean, starved, fleshless. Skie. v. Aire, Firmament. Azure, lofty, brazen, flitting, glorious, chrystal, glystering, enameld, aeched, vaulty, vastie, wide-skirted, starry, star-powdered, star--broidered, transparent, marble, dusky, empty, lofty, beamy, spangled, sweltring. Skill. Artful, learned, knowing, active, painful, industrious, laborious, charming, admired, cunning, experienc'd, subtle, ingenious, witty, powerful, judicious, piercing, quick-sighted, famous, honoured, po∣tentuous, amazing, prodigious, praiseful, deviceful, contriving, curi∣rious, inventive. Skin. Ivory, alabaster, sheathing, smooth, sleek, delicious. Skirmish. Bickering, hot, bloody, conflicting, furious, dreadful, cruel, murder∣ing, dangerous, impetuous, doubtful, fierc, angry, rugged, tumultuous, unhappy. Slander. Rank-mouth'd, injurious, squint-eyed, calumnious, black-mouth'd,
defaming, detracting, scandalous, biting, malicious, wounding, forge∣ng, devising, false, fame-stabbing, reproachful, envious. Slave. Branded, servile, infamous, earboared, oppressed, groaning, tugging; oyling, weary, wronged, abused, scourged, dejected, burdned, ignomi∣ious, scourged, dejected, burdned, ignominious, scorned, drudging. Slavery. v. Servitude. Rigorous, cruel, oppressing, gauling, groaning, bruising, crushing, eart-killing, detested, tormenting, laborious, toylsome, tugging, ig∣omioious, drudging. Slaughter. Bloody, murderous, eruel, furious, massacring, fierce, impetuous, gastly, hideous, dreadful. Sleep. Dark, urgent, leaden, soft-fingered, healthful, peaceful, reposed, uiet silent, arresting, downy, gentle, calm, forgetful, silken, golden, drowsie, yawning, surprizing, delicious, refreshing, all-subduing, death-counterfeiting, death-imitating, senseless, benimming, sying, deceitful, nuzling, curtaind, balmie, soft, care-charming, heavie, pale. Slime. Foamy, frothy, muddy, viscous, glutinous, flat, clammy. Sling. Impetuous, violent, bullet-melting, warlick. Sloath. v. Idleness. Drowsie, lazie, yawning, gaping, nasty, bedded, resty, lethergick, dronish, unactive, careless, vice-nursing. Sloven. Nasty, noysome, fulsome, loathsome, careless, uncurious, negle∣ctfull, regardless, sordid. Slut. Nasty, loathsome, fulsome, noysome, sordid, filthy, dowdy, ugly, de∣formed. Smell. v. Odour. Wholesome, unwholsome, sweet, breathing, delicious, pleasant, head-affcting, spicy, aromatick, delightful, balmy, Aire-perfuming, ambrosian, genial, musky, noysome, loathsome, fulsome, infectious, contagious, stinking, sence-overcoming. Smile. Sweet, pleasing, peaceful, easie, chearful, wanton, fleting, courte∣ous, bewitching, cordial, dimpled, simpering, pliant, boxome, gladsome, deceitful, traiterous, attractve, becoming, graceful. Smith. Swarthy, sooty, grimie. industrious, laborious, hammering, knock∣ing, broyled, sweating, dusty, coaly, smudged, sallow.
Smock: Baudie, wanton, lecherous, venereous, body-sheathing, embraci Smoake. Curled, infestive, pestering, stifling, smothering, choaking, mi foggy, cloudy empty, gliding, vaporous, eye-pricking, wavie, aspiri tear-wringing, floating. Snail. Slow-pac't tardie, dull, sleepy, drowsie, sluggish, lazy, slow, un¦ous, cloyster'd, soft-pac'd, creeping, house-bearing, cockeld, ¦mie, wrigling, foamy, frothy slavering, nasty, sluttish, trace-leari folded. Snake. Folded, speckled, slimie, winding, crawling, subtle, groveli, doubling, craftie, creeping, stinging, writhing, wreathing, wrigl twining, twisted, lurking, scaly, damaskt, checkered, venemous, poy¦nous, baneful, forked, fore-tongu'd, deceitful, wily, slie, spotted, b¦ing, freckled, hissing, enameld, swelling, crested, glittering, clam rolling, glutinous, gliding, slippery. Snare. Intangling, subtle, deceitful, treacherous, fly, surprizing, catchi intrapping, imprisoning, hampering, unexpected, griping, detaining captivating, inthralling, sence-beguiling. Snivel. Snot. Filthy, nastie, noysome, loathsome, dropping, cold. Snow. Untroden, soft, driven, falling, winter, downy flecie, flakie, wooll curled, bleached, ragged, shivering, drizling, scattered, mounta watrie, melting, thawing icie, freezing, hoary, plumy, feathered, d∣ling, Alpine, Scythian, Thracian, Sarmatian. Sobrietie. Wise, temperate, discreet, sparing abstemious, modest, healthfull, thriftie, frugal. Sodomie. Beastly, bestial, brutish, barbarous, base, nasty, infamous, ugly, odious, execrable, abominable, detested, hateful, loathsome, un∣manly. Solace. Comfortable, refreshing, sweet, life-giving, chearing, life-preser∣ving, appeasing, allaying, encouraging. Solemnitie. Ceremonious, busie, thronged, sacred, exact, famous, superstitious, religious, venerable.
Song. Wel-tuned, intrancing, lulling, inchanting, delicious, harmonious, nce-bearing, melodious, warbling, soul-raping, pleasant, rural, glad∣me, gleesome, sprightful, ear-enamouring, sweet-flowing, sweet-aind. Son. Obedient, loving, affectionate, dutious, obsequious. Sorcerer. Black, dark, working, guiltie, hellish, inchanting, accursed, execra∣le, detested, ghastly, wonder-causing, portentuous, prodigious, charm∣g, mumbling, ceremonious, mysterious, mystick, exercising, hell-toured. Sore. Smarting, painful, dolourous,, angrie, swelling, putrid, putrifiing, ipening, nastie, filthie, noysome, loathsome, running, gathering, estering. Sorrow. v. Grief. Wrinkling, drooping, griping, lumpish, brinish, eye-wringing, heart-rending, heart-tearing, killing, contracting, wounding. crush∣ing, bruising, whining, puling, sullen, dumpish, sable, mournful, chum∣pish, discontented, pensive, melting, swarthy, pinching, oppressing, fretting, gnawing, eating, impatient, gauling, disquiet, grating. Sot. Simple, dull, ignorant, unconceiving, doltish, blockish, fat-headed, shallow, beetle-braind. Souldier. Bloody, painful, daring, valiant, couragious, wastful, rough-hewed, uncivll, adventurous, valorous, insolent, lousie, pillaging, impetu∣ous, murdering, slaughtering, dusty, mercenary, injurious, ravenous, undaunted, furious, greedy, hungry, preying, tumultuous, thievish, de∣vouring, rummaging. Soul. Immortal, deathless, diviner, untouched, subtle, active, lively, moving, un-eyed, undiscerned, celestial, ready, nimble, winged, eter∣nal, unbodied, uncaged, dislodged, clearer, drained, apprehensive, un∣derstanding, unfathomed, sprightly, sparkling. Soyl. Fruitful, fertle, barren, unfruitful, fat, rich, wealthy, mellow, thirsty, sandy, native, foraign. Spangle. Shining, glittering, starry, radiant, beamy. Spaniard. Haughty, statele, portly, slow-pac'd, proud, arrogant, sober, wealthy, abstemious, warlick, tawny, lofty.
Spaniel. Loving, shaggy, fawning, ranging, questing. Spark. Lurking, fierie, flying, catching, kindling, ruddy, glittering, ski¦ping, wanton, frisking, twinckling. Sparrow. Russet, hot, fallacious, wanton, venereous, leacherous, chirpin shrill, short-lived, frisking. Spawn. Fruitful, ingendering, procreative, increasing. Spear. Warlick, martial, fatal, bloody, wovnding, trembling, thrillin brandisht, tall, threatning, pointed, victorious, iron-headed, piercin glittering. Spectator. Courteous, gracious, pleased, smiling, frowning, attentive, patien, impatient, weary, applauding, hissing, amazed, admiring, gazing, be∣nevolous, carping, censorious. Speech. Learned, rational, wittie, well-coucht, taking, winning, popula, pleasing, applausive, fawning, facetious, sharp, tart, ear-enamouring, heart-captivating, tedious, cart-rope, ingenious. Speed. Hasty, posting, timely, convenient, laborious, winged, undiscerned, industrious, auspicious, successful, impatient, nimble, active, wil∣ling, Eagle-wing'd, swit-footed, undiscovered, expeditious, dis∣patchful. Spell. Magick, Thessalian, charming, inchanting, bewitching, mysterious, ceremonious, mumbled, muttered, powerful, exercising, perplexing imperious, commanding, mystck- Spheares. Harmonious, glorious, beauteous, raped, spangled, whirling, wheel∣ing, azure, tuneful, chiming, chrystal, loofty, moving, turning, rolling, star-embroiderd, enameld. Spice. Aromatick, Indian, Arabian, rich, wealthy, delicious, taste-pleasing, costly, Estern, balmie, ambrosial. Spider. Ingenious, spinning, subtle, working, industrious, lahorious, active, artful, cunning, hanging, bellied, thrifty, poysonous, stirring, nimble,
odious, loathsome, baneful, busie, bottled, loftie, high-minded, pain∣l, poyson, sucking, toyling. Spie. Watchful, wary, cautious, attentive, observing, circumspect, indu∣rious, careful, prying, subtle, crafty, secret, treacherous, ambusht, dis∣uised, silent. Spight. Malitious, sullen, revengeful, rancorous, envious, cancred, accur∣ed, deadly, secret, fork-tong'd poysonous, vipereous, blew-eyed, quint-tyed, snaky, venemous, flint-hearted, inexorable, boyling, swel∣ing, heart-gnawing. Spindle. Twirling, rolling, turning, nimble, industrious, pregnant, whirled. Spire. Mounting, towring, shar-pointed, lofty, ambitious, cloud-kissing, Sky-braving, Air-invading, Sky-threatning. Spirit. Active, free, unbodied, noble, generous, discoursive, nimble, winged, oving, subtle, blessed, damned, bodiless, unfathomed, couragious, fan∣tastick, revengeful, malicious, envious. Spittle. Nasty, loathsome, noysome, foamie, frothy, contemned, sluttish, moistning. Spleen. Enraged, hasty, despightful, malicious, angry, wrathful, distemperd, chasing, itching, revengeful, envious, boyling, incensed, tempestuous, stormie. Splendor. Shining, radiant, beamie, glittering, glistering, flaming, sunny, fie∣ry, twinkling, dazling, Aire, gilding, enlightning, eye-conquering, glorious, victorious, triumphant, beauteous, graceful, reflecting, en∣envied, admired, amazing, pompous, varnisht. Spoyles. Rich, glorious, walthy, dear-bought, victorious, triumphant, la∣ding, purchast, bloody, ample, warlike. Sponge. Porous, drunken, thirsty, receiving, drie, muddy, slimy, soft, light, flaggy, yielding, wiping, cleansing, squeezed. Sport. Choicest, wanton, delightful, toyish, pleasant, gamesome, time be∣guiling, active, joyous, mirthfull. Spot. Sullying, defacing, infamous, disgraceing, defiling, fouling, floven∣ly,
sluttish, nasty, ugly, deforming, speckling, freckling, blotting, d∣figuring, soyling, staining, besmearing. Spouse. Modest, beauteous, graceful, bashful, nuptial, bridal, lovely, smi∣ling, stately, sprightly, comely, blushing, eye-attracting, handsome, amorous. Spring-time. Flowrie, smiling, youthful, teeming, wealthie, fragrant, pregnant, enflowred, fruitful, verdant, blooming, budding, quickning, jocund, lively, blithe, buxome, gleesome, merry, joyous, joyful, mirthful, wan∣ton, enamouring, bridal, dawning, infant, beaureous, lovely, painted, lustie, gladsome, dancing, leavie, gaudie, amorous, refreshing, reviving, Pearly, embroidered, enamelled, showrie, genial, jovial, earth-awakening. Springs. Silver, Chrystal, purling, fruitful, living, bubling, murmuring, m∣tering, skipping, dancing, saced, grass-fring'd, grass-margen'd, mosse-fring'd, moss-margen'd, trickling, running, rustling, gushing, so, delicious, gliding, Pearly, weeping, gurgling, chiding, whispering, swelling, flowing, rolling, rising, sparkling, tatling, pratling. Spur. Teaching, tatling, twatling, gingling, betraying, bloodie, babling, talking, commanding, piercing, instigating, inciting, exhorting, ∣toring, quickning, prompting, incensing, egging, poynant, sharp∣pointed, pricking, horse-awaking, biting, goading, boring. Squinzie. Choaking, breath-stopping, strangling. Squirrel. Nimble, light-foot, active, stirring, vaulting, leaping, skipping, bush-taild. Stable. Nastie, filthy, dungie, fulsome, litterd, sluttish. Staff. Supporting, upholding, sustaining, ayding, helpful, knottie, knaggie. Stage. Thronged, frequented, mirthful, facetious, ample, populous, sp∣tious, joyous, wel-peopled, applausive, hollow, vaultie, clamoro noyseful, lofty, publick. Stag. Stately, gallant, rich-attired, long-lived, swift-foot, weeping, fe∣ful, timorous, flying, aged, branch-hornd, basking, braying, sunning. Stair. Winding, ascending, mounting, turning, aspiring.
Stallion. Lustful, ramping, covering, breeding, ingendering. Standard. Advanced, warlick, victorious, triumphant, martial, painted, di∣played, threatning, waving, streaming. Star. Sparkling, lofty, heaven-embroydering, enamelling, spangling, glittering, radiant, beamy, gliding, burning, silver-tressed, rolling, shining flaming, twinkling, wandering, blazng, brisled, flame-hait'd bright, glorious, happy, unhappy, successeful, ill-boding, auspici∣ous, lucky, unlucky, inauspicious, malignant, smiling, frowning, gol∣den, waving, floating, swimming, Statesman. Politick, plodding, thoughtful, contriving, musing, projecting, casting, pondering. Statute. Dumbe, sencelesse, spechlesse, silent, breathlesse, painted, life-counterfeiting, artful, glded. Statutes. Strict, rigorous, coercive, restraining, paenal, austere, severe, bin∣ding, compelling, imperious, commanding, directing, just, whole∣some, controlling. Stealth. Cunning, crafty, sly, subrile, theevish, pilfering. Steed. v. Horse. Foaming, barbed, warlick, caprion'd, prancing, trapped, cuve∣ting, careering, high bounding, spur-obeying; bit-champing, swft-pac'd, metled, couragious. Steele; Solid, piercing, transpiercing, shining, bunisht, biting, quarte∣ring, wounding, warlick, flshing, murthering, cutting, sicing, re∣vengeful, dreadful, glistering, bloody, blood-thirsty, but hing, slaughtering, killing, martial. Stern. Guiding, ship-directing, shp▪bidlng. Steward. Dispensing, disbursing, receiving, just, faithful, careful, providing, provident, wise. Stewes. Bawdy, wanton, lustful, goatish, rami, echerous, loose, filthy, ob∣scene, brutish, dallying. Stie. Filthy, nasty, noysome, durty, loathsome, fulsome, wallowing, miry▪
Stile. Elegant, eloquent, curious, delicate, well-coucht, biting, stately lofty, humble, groveling, low, learned, grave. Still. Dropping, Chymick, extracting, quintessential, glowing. Stinge. Smarting, piercing, wounding, goading, poysonous, invenomed, sharp-pointed, bitter, cruel, boring, pricking, poinant. Stinke. Nasty, noysome, loathsome, filthy, fulsome, offensive, infectious▪ unwolesome. Stirrup. Mounting, resting, supporting, hanging, vaulting, dangling, gil∣ded, pendant. Stitch. Pulling, wringing, twitching, stinging, painful, dolorous, pinc∣ing, nipping, diseaseful, griping. Stock. Dumbe, dead, sencelesse, speechlesse, dull, breathlesse, unmoving. Stoick. Dull, flinty, obdurate, unmoved, unrelenting, rigid, marble-hearted, flint-brested, sad, sage, soure, strict, sterne, severe, austere, grave, grim. Stomach. v. Appetite. Barking, empty, concocting, digestive, boyling, hungry, hollow, devouring, engorging, ingulphing, queazie, nauseating, greedy, c∣ving, sharp-set, loathing. Stone. Hard, sencelesse, unfeeling, unrelenting, obdurate, massie, dumbe, deaf, callous, rocky, grinding, dashing, bruising, rigid, mossie. Store. Copious, wealthy, plenteous, abounding, swelling, flowing, fruit∣ful, smiling, joyful, lavish, profusive, excessive, ample, numerous, oreflowing. Story. Sad, mirthful, witty, amorous, pleasant, delightful, mournful, fa∣cetious, un-appettaining, tedious. Storke. Pious, loving, affectionate, grateful, chattering, loving, indul∣gent, slender-footed, serpent-killing. Storme. Hideous, angry, growing, gathering, tempestuous, dreadful, im∣petuous, roaring, rising, pelting, foggie, clowdy, showry, threatning,
rough-browed, black, sable, boysterous, fulmouthed, chasing, baw∣ling, loud-voic't, sullen, thundering, ratling, rufling, rustling, bust∣ling, blustering, dark, pitchy, howling, hurrying, swelling, surly, resistlesse, wreakful, justling. Straines. Harmonious, melodious, charming, warbling, tuneful, delicious, inchanting, intrancing, soul-raping, ravishing, soul-invading, sence-bereaving, ear-enamouring, lofty, stately, rural, homely, rustick, high-tun'd, high-bred, inspired, sprightly, Stranger. Unfriended, wandering, houselesse, unacquainted, unknown, tra∣vailing, disregarded, journeying, pilgrim, wary, observing, Strappado. Torturing, wringing, writhing, unjoynting, tormenting, painful, do∣lorous, pitied, killing. Stratagem. Cunning, politick, contrived, devised, subtile, artful, warlick, martial. Straw. Loose, scattered, shattered, rejected, withered, trampled, light, barren, fruitlesse, uselesse, littering, parched. Strawbery. Blushing, creeping, spreading, crawling, mountanous, cooling, crea∣my, soft. Streake. Near, curious, delightful, graceful, comely, beauteous, embroide∣ring, checkering, diapering, painted, stragling, wrigling, adorning, becoming, eye-pleasing. Stream. Winding, curled, purling, foaming, silver, christal, writhing, wrig∣ling, snaky, sweeping, hurrying, silent, chiding, impetuous, resistlesse, enraged, flowing, fruitful, fishie, gurgling, running, gliding, slip∣pery, soft, whispering, wandering, roaring, stragling, gushing, clean∣sing, drenching, whirling, rushing, glassie, pearly, silver-brested, rolling, swelling, wheeling, spreading, gently-sliding, glancing, raging, tumbling, incensed, shower-enhanced, dancing, vaulting, horned, careering, azure, wavie, rustling, amorous, angry, boyling, bustling, surgie, murmuring, muttering, rumbling, frothy, bank-courting, uxorious, sliding, hasty, swift-pac't, swan-embroydered. Street. Peopled, thronged, swarming, frequented, populous. Stength. Sinewie, resistlesse, impetuous, robustious, assaulting, victorious, brawny, unconquered, Herculean.
Strife. v. Discord. Jring, jangling, wrangling, litigious, disagreeing, unfriendly, se∣ditious, tumultuous, blood-thirsty, angry, harsh, hell-nourisht, dissenti∣ous. String. Quavering, twanging, stffe, trembling, high-tun'd, twisted, corded, melodious, harmonious, resounding. Stripe. Smarting, painful, dolorous, aking, blew, tormenting, soul-cuttng, lashing. Strumpet. Baudy, unblushing, shamelesse, impudent, notorious, lascivious, o∣scene, uncivil, wanton, lustful, ampant, salacious, dissolute, immode, rammish, goatish, rotten, alluring, inticing, insnaring, entangling, cap∣tivating, inhralling, peju'd, mercenary, perfidious, dissembling, in∣famous, dallying▪ flearing, gadding, night-walking, infectious, pockie, loathsome, painted, cancred, itchy. Stubble. Flaming, bristled, withered, parched, crackling, light, barren, flame-feeding. Student. Study. Ple, weary, industrious, laborious, watchful, poring, waking, pain∣ful, lamp-smelling, book-turning, plodding, solitary, sedentary, se∣questred, retired, silent, melancholy, musing, meagre, thoughtful, me∣ditaring, contemplative, bookish, ingenious, assiduous, constant, in∣tentive, brain-tasking, brain-beating. Styx. Old, aged, hoary, conjuring, attested, sulphureous, dreadful, awfu, sdy, obscure, dark, darksome, pale, thirsty, infernal, dusky, gloomy, va∣sty. Subject. Obedient, loyal, loving, affectionate, submissive, obsequious, obser∣vant, efficious. Subsidie. Needfull, ayding, supplying, willing, ample, seasonable. Substance. Real, wealthy, solid, massie, grosse, pure, diviner, refined. Subtilty. Crafty, wily, nice, deceitful, winding, fetching, double-dealing, ∣sembling, over-reaching sly, circumventing, cunning, snaky, underi∣ning, secret, under-handing, under-working, jugling, disguised. Successe. Happie, prosperous, luckie, auspicious, advantageous, desired, cro∣ning, wish, blest, coveted, propitious.
Succour. Helpful, ayding, timely, needful, propitious, auspitious, friendly, chearing, comforting, supplying. Sugar. Delitious, ambrosian, tast-pleasing, Indian, reedy, congealed, gummy. Sulphure. Quick, hot, flaming, unctious, liquid, melting, burning, stinking. Summer. Scalding, soultry, tanning, rosting, sweltering, broyling, parching, scorching, naked, flowry, swarthy, green-plusht, flower-enamel'd, flow∣er-embroidered, dusty, fiery, piercing, leavie, pleasant, joyful, lesome sluggish, lither, idle, thirsty, yawning, chapping, infectious, diseasful, pestilential, smothering, beamy, sweaty, panting. Sun. Broyling, scorching, tanning, parching, rosting, testing, chearful, dazling, glorious, lofty-going, quickning, reviving, impartial, all-di∣cerning, all-seeing, chearing, garish, gladsome, beamy, radiant, labori∣ous, restlesse, olling, unwearied, scalding, baking, burning, glowin, sparkling, speedy, posting, galloping, careering, wheeling, golden, glit∣tering, flamy, fiery, mired, gold-haired, fair-trest, flame-haired, jou∣neying, piercing, enlightning, life-infusing, horned, thirsty, drying, sucking, vapour-attractng, heaven-surrounding, far-beaming, gol∣den-tressed- Superfluity. Excessive, profusive, unthrsty, luxurious, unnecessary, needlesse, vo∣luptuous, uselesse, copious, abundant, costly, pmpous, overflowing, de∣licious, sumptuous, unconfined, boundless, limitless, wastful, money-squandering. Superstition. Fond, toyish, garish, gaudy, doting, brain-sick, zealous, blind, scru∣pulous, ceremonious, self-pleasing, nuzling, gulling, gay, pompous, e∣toneous, ignorant, obstinate, fearful, nice, conscientious. Supplication. v. Prayer. Humble, earnest, requesting, beseeching, weeping, pious, kneeling, bending, zealous, complaining, devout, religious. Surey. Obliged, engaged, securing, promising, faith-plighting. Surfet. Pompous, luxurious, engorging, cramming, drunken, gluttonous, excssive, intemperate, riotous baneful, unmeasured, wanton, dange∣rous, diseaseful, wastful, health-destroying, health-eating, bsoing, swell'd, spungie, noysome, loathsome, dstemperered, hot-mouth', fi∣ry.
Suspition. Jealous, groundlesse, probable, prying, squint-eyed, wakeful, vi∣gilant, causelesse, secret, lurking, goggle-eyed, pale, fearful, trem∣bling, wary, cautelous, frantick, dark. Swaggerer. Dunken, reeling, riotous, oath-rapping, wenching, lascivious, gaming, unthrifty, profusive, intemperate, godlesse, impious, disso∣lute, audacious, uncivil, luxurious, bawling, wrangling, quarrel∣some, rapierd, gallant, rustling, bustling, blustering, blundering, money-squandering, wastful, wealth-consuming, obscene, oath-bel∣ching, oath-mouthing, pot-tossing. Swain. Merry, lusty, boorish, youthful, mirthful, blythe, jocund, glee∣some, rough, wild, rude, rural, rustick, active, gamesome, sportive, industrious, laborious, tugging, toyling, home-bred, unconceiving, unfashioned, uncurious, uncombed, greasie, slovenly, saucy, frolick, whistling, clownish, rugged, sullen, sturdy, lubberly, lolling, robu∣stious, rough-hewn, swarthy, sallow, sun-burnt, hide-bound, low∣tish, ignorant, silly, untaught, unlearned, unlettered, untutor'd, simple, piping. Swallow. Winding, swift-winged, tender, gentle, spring-presaging, wan∣dering, lascivious, hot-dunged, shrill, chattering. Swan. Silver, snowie, chanting, silver-coated, silver-plumed, silver-fea∣thered, prophetick, death divining, jealous, death-presaging, downy, soft, gliding, bustling, stately, portly, shrill-voic't, sweet singing, long-neckt. greedy, stream-loving, stream-fed. Swarm. Cowdy, thronging, crowding, clustered, cluttering, preasing, po∣pulous, numerous, unnumbered, flocking, numberlesse, trooping. Swearer. Oath-rapping, oath-mouthing, oath-belching, swaggering, impi∣ous, godlesse, damned, execrable, odious, detested. Sweat. Laborious, industrious, toylesome, scalding, melting, clammy, weary, faint, cold, tedious, uncleanly, sluttish, nasty, flowing, officious, painful, dewie. Swine. Beastly, nasty, fulsome, noysome, loathsome, miry, dirty, uncleanly, sordid, wallowing, greedy, hungry, grunting, dull, bristled, wastful, rooting, tumbling, rolling, sluggish, lither, drowsie, gluttonous. Sword. Keen-edged, bloody, goary, blood-thirsty, flesht, raging, flaming,
brandisht, revengeful, smoaking, thirsty, reeking, wounding, shining, glittering, glistering, murthering, slaughtering, slicing, but chering, flashing, clashing, warlick, victorious, quartering, barbarous, cruel, mercilesse, impious, unrelenting, unpitying, dreadful, dazling, glan∣cing, waved, naked, unsheathed, sharp-pointed, devouring, killing. Sycophant. v. Parasite. Fawning, slanderous, calumnious, detracting, defaming, cogging, glozing, colloguing, pick-thank, cozening, cheating, jugling, inju∣rious, smooth-tongued, make-bate. Sylvans. v. Satyrs. Symmetry. Graceful, comely, beauteous, handsome, attractive, harmonious, eye-pleasing, becoming, proportioned, equal, measured, exact, ac∣curate, compleat, perfect, accomplisht, praiseful, laudable, com∣mendable. Sympathy. Agreeing, loving, natural, inbred, innate, friendly, mutual, a∣miable, unjarring, according, amorous, admired, secret, silent, af∣fectionate, uniting. Symptoms. Apparent, evident, discrying, betraying, manifest, certain, con∣vincing, conclusive. Synod. Learned, grave, sacred, assembled, convened, honoured, reve∣rend; venerable. Syrens. Subtle, crafty, floating, swimming, chanting, charming, be∣witching, pernicious, lulling, inticing, alluring, singing, sleep∣causing, delicious, green-haired, warbling. Syrian. Luxurious, voluptuous, inconstant, anointed, feastful, flouting, superstitious, garden-doting. T. Tobacco. Tobacconist. FUming, smoaky, spawling, spitting, cavaleering, swaggering, ge∣nerous, puffing, whiffing. Tabernacle. Mooving, tented, sacred, flitting.
Table. Luxurious, mirthful, feastful, ambrosian, nectarious, delicious, grea∣sie, crowded, groaning, thronged, free, liberal, dish-bearing, oppressed, frolick, well-furnisht, voluptuous, sumptuous, luxurious, hospirable, costly, genial, dainty, temperate, intemperate, sobe, dunken, glutto∣nous, frugal, thrifty, unthrifty, profusive, xpensive, marshal'd. Tables. Gaming, swearing, wrangling, brawling, bawling, cozening, chea∣ting, cogging, ratling. Tablet. Shining, hanging, danglng, pinted, pictured, varnisht, delightful, sacred, superstitiou, oyled, Apellean, artful, artificial. Tabour. Tabret. Sounding, drumming, dreadful, martial, hoarse, piping, hollow, light, murmuring. Taciturnity. Silent, peaceful, quiet, concealing, listening, still, modest, coy, squeamish, calme, attentive, fearful, Tackling. Corded, wisted, knotty, intangled, hamper'd. Taffety. Thin, limber, pliant, smooth, shining, glittering, tufted, pompous, rich, gallant, strouting, puffing, swelling. Tagus. Golden, wealthy, rich-sanded, gold-paved, glittering, bright, gold-rol∣ling, swift-streamed, gaudy. Taile. Hinging, dangling, pendant, wanton, frisking, frigging, whisking, tufted, wagging, forked, sawning, clawing, clapping, flapping, licke∣rous, scorned, venereous. Tailour. Devising, contriving, fashioning, spruce, nimble, tricking, long-bill'd, costly, expensive, shaping. Tale. Fabulous, merry, delightful, facetious, trifling, sad, amorous, doleful, pleasant, mournful, tedious, moldy, fictous, devised, facetious, apper∣taining, unconcerning, frivolous idle, time-beguiling, time-shortning. Talent. Massie, wealthy, hoarded, heaped, rich, yellow, golden, enabling, powrful. Tallies. Counting, numbring, compared, agreeing, reckoning.
Tallow. Melting, greasie, flaming, flame-feeding, unctious, congealed, rumbling. Talons. Griping, catching, clawing, oppressing, defending, armed, sharp, ough-handling, hooking, crooked, scratching, sweeping, raping, rave∣ous, thievish, preying, seising, pouncing, rending, tearing, greedy, wounding. Tamarisk. Humble, low slender, small-prigged, tender, fruitlesse, barren. Tankard. Weeping, drunken, thirsty, slavering, flapping, frothy, bellied, capa∣cious, swelling, engorged. Tansie. Green sweet, delicious, tastfull, tast-pleasing, sugred. Tantalus. Blabbing, tell-tale, unhappy, catching, greedy, hungry, thirsty, decei∣ved, nose-wiped, Phrygian-bloody, son-killing distrustfull, over-cu∣rious. Taper. Flaming, wasting, spending, slender, burning, consuming, decaying, shining, melting, watchfull, waxen, sacred, holy, religious, devotious, wind-blzing, winking, Tapestry. Industrious, hanging, gaudy, costly, sumptuous, magnificent, pom∣pous, stately, courtly, curious, wealthy. Tappe. Dropping, distilling, weeping, emptying, disgorging, pissing, spuing, gushing, noise-full. Tapster. Officious, nimble, quick-footed, jogging, jug-bearing, drunken, scraping, knee-crooking, saucy. Tares. Choaking, stifling, weedy, barren, unwelcome. Target. Plated, battered, clattering, clashing, fencing, warding, shielding, re∣pulsing, belaboured, securing, protecting, defending, saving, screening, trusty, glittering, gilded, slshed, wounded, gashed, bloody, hollow, brazen, shining, defensive, massie. Tarre. Ptchy, clammy, viscous, tenacious, healing, marking, liquid, gluti∣nous, roping, sticking, cleaving.
Tartar. Sallow, swarthy, tawny, bloody, cruell, furious, valiant. Taske. Laborious, industrious, hard, toylesome, studious, tedious, wea¦ry, burdenous, heavie, oppressing. Tassell. Tufted, pendant, hanging, dangling, jagged, silk-thrum'd. Tast. Judicious, delicious, exquisite, accurate, quick, pleasing, hars, offensive, nice, curious, unpleasant, savoury, unsavoury, insipid. Tatters. Ragged, lowsy, hanging, patched, clowted, scorned, poor, beg∣garly, contemned, nasty, loathsome, filthy, dropping, loose-hung, dancing, waving. Tatling. Noyseful, clamorous, tedous, prating, needlesse, unappertain∣ing, unconcerning, combrous. Tavern. Haunted, frequented, drunken, wnie, luxurious, intemperate, di¦stempering, riotus, intoxicating, quarrelsome, swearing, swaggering, spawling. Taunt. Bitter, reproachful, injurious, scoffing, biting, opprobrious, contu∣melious, flanting, gibing, girding, wrimouth'd, flouting, contemptu∣ous, scornful, disdainful, deriding, jeering, wry-nos'd. Taxe. Oppressing, heavie, burdening, loading, tyrannous, disabling, im∣poverishing, racking, imposed. Teacher. Instructive, painful, assiduous, diligent, careful, learned, lessoning, tutoring, guiding, schooling, famous, artful, honoured, grave, reverend, venerable, expert, experienc't, knowing, blameless, skilful, able. Tear. Pearly, chrystal, transparent, melting, trickling, numerous, flow∣ing, warm, moving, falling, descending, perswasive, victorious, over∣coming, wooing, bursting, instructed, forced, pleading, springing, bri∣nish, gushing, repentant, sad, pensive, penitential, dewie, scalding, passi∣onate, drowning, soft, salt, tributary, obsequious, fluent, tender, trou∣bled, careful, mournful, sable, complaining, silver-shedding, relenting, solemn, swelling, commanding▪ fluxive, obtaining, weeping, rolling, seigned, dissembling, pitied, annumbred, thronging, crowding seeking wayling, dumb.
Teate. Coral, cherry, vermillion, nippl'd, milky, gushing, tugged, milk-onveying, nursing, milk-springing: Teeth. Ivorie, pearly, impaling, grining, grinding, foaming, evenly-ranged, nowie, greedie, ravenous, devouring, frothy, wounding, mear-min∣ing, tongue-hedging, smooth, tongue-guarding, tongue-inclosing, gnawing, burnisht, envious, sharp-set, gnashing, poysonous, cancred, labaster, yellow, scurfie, shaking, chattering, marble. Tempest. Howling, stormy, pitchy, singing, cruel, angrie, chafing, ful-mouth'd, oud-voic', giddy, black, cloudy, threatning, gathering, growing, ideous, strugling, thundering, furious, brawling, ratling, impetuous, roaring, rising, yelling, bellowing, pelting, foggy, showrie, boysterous, esistless, ruffling, sullen, rustling, bustling, blustering, hurrying, surly, wreakeful, raging, devouring, unbridled, whirling, whiz∣zing, swelling, barking, dreadful, surprizing, unexpected. Temper. Quiet, peaceful, pleasing, ingratiating, mild, winning, loving, sullen, surly, angry, chasing, stormy, sweet. Temperance. Frugal, thrifty, sparing, abstenious, cleanly, healthful, quick-witted, sober, soon-contented, chaste, abstaining, forbearing, chaste, modest, grave, wise. Temple. Sacred, holy, reverend, dreadful, venerable, inviolate, unprofaned, consecrated, sequestred, divine, lofty, stately, magnificent, sumptuous, thronged, costly, garnisht, religious, pious, devotious, spatious, honou∣red, solemn, ceremonious, hallowed. Temporizer. Lip-holy, hypocritical, hollow-hearted, dissembling, cunning, crafty, masked, concealed, vizarded, gulling, glozing, cheating, jug∣ling, painted. Temptation. Secret, solliciting, spurring, inciting, egging, inticing, luring, baited, gilded, smiling, courting, wooing, treacherous, jugling, coze∣ning, seducing, sinful, pernicious, baneful, gaudy, gay, gallant, fallaci∣ous, cunning, crafty, wily, slie, subtle, urging, Tenant. Officious, obsequious, fearful, willing, humble, oppressed, groan∣ing. Tennis. Gamesome, sportive, banding, time-stealing, rackering.
Tent. Soft, stately, gilded, warlike, vaulty, martiall, pitched, moving flitting. Tenter. Racking, stretching, extending, widening. Term. Busie, thronging, wrangling, jangling, bawling, brawling, costly expensive, see-some, pleading, mooting. Terrour. Cold, pale, dreadfull, affrighting, sad, sudden, gastly, grisly, amazing, stounding, grim, stern. Testament. Dying, ordering, disposing, inviolable, solemn, settled, confirmed, wit∣nessed, sealed, holy, sacred, venerable. Testimonie. Large, ample, evident, apparent, assured, certain, confirming, unan∣swerable, plain, undeniable, convincing, deposing. Tetter. Eating, freting, spreading, infectious canckering. Text. Large, copious, narrow, open, plain, convincing, well-chosen, well-handled, discussed. Thanks Thankfulnesse. Duteous, officious, obesquious, hearty, lasting, obliged, engaged, immortall returned, humble, obedient, serviceable, bounden, unnum∣bred, unmeasured. Thatch. Loose, humble, countrey, homely, wihered, parched. Theam. Large, copious, amorous, mournfull, sad, joyfull, discoursive, bandi∣ed, discussed, disputed, tedious. Theater. Publick, spacious, thronged, crowded, open, populous, peopled, crammed, well-fill'd, mirthfull, joyous, noisefull, clamarous, applau∣sive, pompous, gorgeous. Thebes. Antient, famous Beotian, palm-bearing. Thief, Theft. Stealing, picking, pilfering, filching, private, secret, creeping, surpri∣sing, crafty, she, subtil, cunning, silent, raping, miching, fearfull, wary, prying, preying, conveying, nimming, purloning, slight handed, cor∣nered, felonious, nightly.
Theologie, Sacred, divine mysterious, profound, knotty, obscure. Theseus. Valiant, magnanimous, couragious, cruell, victorious, undaunted, valorous, attemprive, perjured, perfideous, disloyall faith-breaking, faithlesse, unfaithfull, ingratefull. Thetis. Sea-thrond, silver-footed, beauteous, azure, floating. Thicket. Bushy, shrubby, leavy, intangling, thronging, cumbrous, thorny, pickly, shdy, gloomy, darksome, branched, brierie, grovie. Thigh. Fleshie, musclie, solid, plump, fat, stradling, sinewie, smooth, ivory, ala-baster, marble, stalking, stately, portly, majestick, supporting, reboun∣ding, moving, shaking, fatned, delicate, gracefull, well-proportioned, twinne-born. Thimble. Maiden, virgin, sencing, sempstering, finger-arming, defensive, finger-casing, silver, gilded, posied. Thirst, Burning, spongie, raging, swelting, parched, scorching, greedy, in∣stiate, unstanched, fierie, dry, inflaming, panting, dropsied, unquench∣ed, Tantalean, molesting, torturing, tormenting, intollerable, un∣measured unsupported. Thisbe. Unhappy, constant, loving, faithfull, Babylonian. Thistle. Downy, prickly, dull, barren, fruitlesse, brifly, touchy, pointed prick∣ing, wild, savage, many-headed, biting, angrie. Thrn. Crooked, sharp-hookt, brisly, prickly, brierie, bushie, scratching, catching, holding, detaining, rough, tearing, rending, barren, fruit∣lesse, bloody, wounding, piercing, tufted, knotted, intangled, biting. Thought Discoursive, swift-winged, nimble, fltting, silent, roving, winged, wandring, ranging, running, scartered, confused, tumbling, rolling, contriving, devising, musing, studious, contemplating, roaming, work∣ing, teeming, plodding, casting. Thracian. Untamed, warlick, martiall, oblivious, drunken, cold, fierce, un∣daunted.
Thraldome. Sad, slavish, tyrannous, oppressing, captive, cruel, gauling, rigor groaning, restraining, heavie, crushing, bruising, toylsome, laborio odious, detested, abhorred, hated, dejecting, vexing, loathed, grati wretched, miserable, unsupportable, intolerable. Threats. Menacing, braving, awful, insulting, stormy, angry, insolent, swe¦ling, rigid, cruel, boysterous, proud, affrighting, terrifying, dread arrogant, supercilious, frowning, brow-beating, despiteful, reveng∣ful, malicious, injurious, outrageous, cholerick, enraged, chasing, i¦perious, lordly, domineering, presumptuous, over-weening, braggi boasting, vaunting, gnashing, grining, audacious. Thred. Slender, feeble, small, weak, dangling, twined, twisted, hempe silken. Treshold. Entering, creaking, sputned, frequented, dusty, humble, lowly, foot-worn. Thrift. Frugal, parcimonious, sparing, scraping, careful, anxious. Throat. Devouring, swallowing, gluttenous, greedy, meat-conveying gulping, ingorging, ingulphing, gurmandizing, luxurious, volup∣ous, hollow. Throne. Awful, dreadful, majestick, stately, glorious, pompous, gorgeous, in∣perial, lofty, glittering, princely, royal, regal, exalted, venerable, fear-infusing, honoured, bright. Throng. Crowding, preasing, numerous, unnumbred, thrusting, swarming, trooping, clusterd, cluttering, innumerable. Thrum. Shaggie, tufted, tassel'd, ravel'd. Thrush. Dappled, speckled, greedy, hungry, fat, deaf. Thumb. Pliant, active, nimble, industrious-useful, grasping. Thunder. Flame-winged, ratling, dreadful, noiseful, drumming, cracking, resistless, affrighting, amazing, imperuous, sulphurie, roaring, flashing, loud-voic't, bawling, loud, loud-mouted, skie-rending, bellowing, cloud-riving, sodain, tempestuous, swift-wing'd, barking, resounding,
re-ecchoing, cloud-crushing, squashing, squeezing, flame-belching, zzing, harmful, howling, yawling, rumbling. Thyme. Flowry, fragrant, loadning, honey-making, Bee-haunted, Hyblean, weet-smelling, odorous. Tide. v. Stream. Lavish, swelling, working, waxing, rolling▪ justling, hasty, vaulting, ancing, rising, luxurious, high-wrought, pregnant, impetuous, incon∣ant, wavie, billowie, streaming, flowing, high-swolln, roaring, resist∣esse, stormy, hushing, foamy, frothy, speedy, careering, swift-pac't, umming. Tiffany. Limber, thin, pliant, fine-spun, transparent. Tiger. Fierce, cruel, savage, furious, impetuous, bloody, ruthlesse, mercilesse, npitying, grim, grinning, Lybian, Hircanian, Midian, sported, rave∣ous, speedy, swift-footed, hungry, tusked, foaming, enraged, ireful, ffrican, Indian, speckled, poudred, Armenian, streaked. Tile-tree. Supple, limber, pliant, soft, tender, odorous. Timbrel. Hollow, shrill, sounding, hoarse, tinkling, brazen. Time. Aged, fleeting, unstaying, unrescued, unregained, light-foot, unre∣alled, irrecoverable, gray-headed, aged, crazie, growing, speedy, slut∣ish, wastful, restlesse, slippery, old, gliding, stealing, creeping, flying, ating, envious, journeying, feathered, winged, rolling, wheeling, post∣ng, succeeding, encroaching, assaulting, invading, running, galloping, evouring, swift-footed, swimming, light-heeld, swift-wing'd, mowing h-bearing, convenient, seasonable, commodious, all-gnawing, succes∣ive, ensuing, injurious, tyrannizing, domineering, waving, rusty, dusty, moldie, consuming, unreturning, all-ripening. Tinder. Catching, taking, firy, spark-embracing, spark-nursing, watchful, stu∣eous, burning. Tinker. Knocking, hammering, sooty, grimy, trugging, stragling, patching, udget-bearing. Tinne. White, English, sounding, limber, pliant, bending. Titan. v. Sun. Radiant, beam-crown'd, bright-hair'd, fair-crest, roseate, flaming, parkling, glowing, posting, golden, chearful, dazling, glorious, scorch∣ng, parching, reviving, quickening, unwearied, restlesse, rolling, all-eeing, all-viewing, all-discerning, light-infusing.
Tithonus. Old-aged, crazie, decrepit, gray-headed, weay, Mygdonian, Phy∣gian. Titles. Swelling, ambitious, honoured, honourable, proud, ancient, va empty, famous, pompous, puffing, magnificent, stately, bubling, winy fluttering, spreading. Toad. Croaking, crawling, spotted, speckled, freckled, ugly, nasty, noisome, loathsome, fullsome, sprawling, swelling, venemous, poysono heavy-paced, slow, slow-footed, broad-bellied, wadling, toothless muddy, slimy, foaming, frothy, shvering, driveling, fenny, sharp-lip, sharp-gumm'd. Toad stool. Spongy, swelling, porous, soft, hollow, unsavoury, cold, moist, , lumpish, poysonous, soon sprung, thunder-engendred, insipid, tastle, Teast. Swimmed, drunken, drowned, thirstie, souced, spungie, swelling sucking, dry, parched, cracklng, sailing. Tomb. Forgotten, forsaken, rotten, solitarie, mustie, moldering, dustie, age, mossie, sable, fatall, mournfull, quiet, silent, peacefull, vaultie, sttely, pompous, gaudie, garnisht, sumptuous, costly, magnificent, inscribed, speaking, glorious, marble, shadie, darksome, mounfull, nastie, full∣some, time-worn, unfrequented. Tone. Puling, whining, stately, gracefull, joyfull, sniveling, pleasant, ear-enamouring. Tongs. Pliant, ruddy, fiery, pinching, crooked, hooking, tenacious usefull, nimble. Tongue. Melodious, sweet-voic'd, harmoneous, nectareous, heavenly, angeli∣call, Seraphick, enamouring, victorious perswasive, conquering, capti∣vating, inticing, insnaring, alluting, bewitching, inchanting, charming, delicious, malicious, calumnious, detracting, reproachfull, bibbling, wagging, twatling, tatling, prating, noisefull, foul-mouth'd, fluen, pleasant, stammering, spongie, judicious, tastfull, liquotous, wanto, delicate, lavish, flattering, smooth, soothing, froward, clamoous, envious, unbrideled, treacherous, lying, deceitfull, glozing, coll∣ging, filed, gilded, venemous, harmfull, poysonous, invenommed, bitter, invective, lashing, scourging, Satyricall, rolling.
Toole. Busie, useful, industrious, pliant, sweaty, laborious, nimble, active, well-handled- Tooth. v. Teeth. Delicate, sweet, wanton, lickerous, invenomed, poisonous. Toppe. Gamesome, whirling, scourged, sleeping. Torch. Burning, blazing, sparkling, dropping, flming, smoakie, fiery, shi∣ing, pitchy, melting. Torment. Sharp, bitter, bloody, aflicting, vexing, grievous, unsupported, in∣upportable, intolerable, painful, dolorous, groaning, cruel, misera∣ble, violent, sad, dreadful, rigorous, eart-fretring, wringing, gnawing ating pinching, griping, unexpressed, unpattern'd, unxampled, np∣ing, killing, soul-wounding, soul-opressing, gauling, doleful, pitied, eart-breaking, impatient, insufferale, stabbing, smarting, racking, artyring, disquiet, heart-rending, heart-tearing, graing, tedious, un-welcome, uneasy, bruising, crushing. Torrent. v. Flood. Swelling, boyling, furious, impetuous, dreadful, noiseful, unruly, rothy, foaming, speedy, whirling, murmuring, silver, rumbling, gli∣ding, gushing, rolling, rustling, winding, weeping, wrigling, strag∣ing, floating, muttering, dancing, careering, posting. Tortoise. Shell-housed, slow-paced, tardy, crooked, vaulty, hollow, big-bellied. Torture. v. Torment. Touch. Easie, gentle, yeilding, rough, smooth, harmlesse. Tow. Flaming, burning, loose, scattered, light, ruffled. Tower. Lofty, exalted, sensive, mounting, aspiring ambitious, stately, cloud-kissing, skie-braving, cloud-cleaving, mosse-grown, proud, gorge∣us, skie-kissing, skie-threatning, cloud-inwrapped, skie-invading, tar-brushing, insolent, high-topt, impregnable, defensive, climbing, ostly, sumptuous, magnificent. Toy. Gaudy, boyish, childish, garish, wanton, lascicious, fanastick, gil∣den, fine, superfluous, pompous, girlish, worthless, trining, uselesse, un∣manly, empty, barren, painted, varnisht. Toyle. Tedious, laborious, industrious, weary, oppressing, sweating, bruising,
crushing, painful, careful, watchful, busie, incessant, officious, obseq¦ous assiduous. Trade. Ginful, thriving, successeful, prosperous, luckie, commodious, u∣thriving, barren, busie, industrious, laborious, tedious, weary, toyle¦some, painful. Tradesman. Industrious, laborious, swearing, toyling, painful, careful, nipping▪ cheating, cunning, crafty, cozening, glozing, deceiving, venting, s∣full, unlearned, unlettered, unconceiving, frugal, thrifty, wealthy. Traffick. Industrious, laborious, busie, gainful, wealthy, merchandizing, c∣ning, exchanging, contracting. Tragedy. Deary, sad, bloody, gloomy, sullen, black, woful, ruthful, dolel, pensive, sable mournful, buskind, swelling, high-stil'd, great-worded, grave, lofty, stately, weeping, sententious, thundering, severe, elaborate▪ heroick, pitied. Traitour. Black, ugly, subtle, viperous, poysonous, tainted, guilty, lurking, se∣cret, rugged, bloody, disloyal, conspiring, toad-spotted, unfaithful, per∣fidious, revolting, rebellious, wary, cautious, fearful, undermining, un∣der-working, under-handing, insidious, fawning, glozing, odious. Transgression. v. Sinne. Bold, foul, guilty, heynous, lawlesse, leprous, filthy, ugly, spotted, o∣dious, crying, exorbitant, enormous, wilful. Trappe. Surprizing, catching, unexpected, insnaring, secret, lurking, subtile, deceitful, trecherous, inthralling. Trappings. Gaudie, gay, gallant, gorgeous, rich, painted; gilded, barded, shining, glittering, costly, garish, sumptuous. Trash. Empty, rejected, refuse, base, dis▪regarded, dis-respected, cashieed, fruitlesse, uselesse, barren. Travel. Laborious, painful, careful, hard, thorny, combrous, weary, tedious, continual, watchful, assiduous, willing, toylesome, mercenary, inces∣sant, officious, obsequious, improving, enaging. Traveller. VVeary, sweating, painful, flitting, houselesse, sad, unfriended, wary,
observant, laborious, industrious, assiduous, diligent, wakeful, unac∣quainted, discoursive, trudging. Treachery. Subtile, lurking, secret, ambuscadoed, assaulting, surprizing, insna∣ing, intrapping, inveagling, alluring, inticing, training, luring, fair∣speaking, smooth, glozing, soothing, gilded, smooth tongued, smooth-worded, dissembling, concealed. Treason. v. Traitour. Treachery. Treasure. v. Gold. Rich, wealthy, unprizd, inestimable, unmeasured, unconfined, un∣fathomed, numerous, pretious, unsounded, abounding, flowing, secret, concealed, massie, moneyed, ambitious, proud, gorgeous, gaudy, desi∣ted, coveted, powerful, hidden, enchested, dark, inearthed, glittering, intered, buried, true, solid, substantial, friend-betraying. Treaty. Friendly, peaceful, parlying, discussing, disputing, reconciling. Tree. Tufted, leavie, spreading, branching, budding, pregnant, teeming, loadned, burthened, fruitful, shady, verdant, crooked, shrubby, skie-kissing, high-topt, high-waving, knotty, stately, lofty, vegetative, deep∣rooted, sappy, shaggy, curled, gloomy, bushie, wel-grown, ratling, bloo∣ming, arched, twisted, stooping, bending, fragrant, ambitious. Trembling. Fearful, amazed, affrighted, feavourish, cold, pale, dreadful, sodain, palsied, disquiet, paralytick. Trench. VVarlick, dreadfull, hollow, winding, snaky, turning, fensive, ditch∣ed, encompast, besieging. Tresses. v. Haire. VVaving, floating, crisped, curled, frizled, ruffled, braided, dang∣ling, twisted, wanton, shining, amber, radiant. Tribunal. Dreadful, awful, sad, feared sterne, severe. Trident. Forked, three-graind, awful, dreadful, sea-commanding, storm-quel∣ling, storm-raising, crooked, controlling, imperious, majestick, tempe∣stuous. Trifle. Vain, empty, fruitlesse, uselesse, light, gaudy, windy, toyish, unservice∣able, Trinity. Holy, sacred, immortal, glorious, undivided, adored, uncomprehen∣ded, knotty, unconceived, misterious.
Triton. Blue, resounding, piping, scaly, enamel'd, shrill, swift, moist, oc▪ loving. Triumph. Solemne, pompous, gallant, gaudy, gorgeous, magnificent, joyful joyous, gladsome, mirhful, jovial, feastful, glorious, victorious, sacre, honoured, peaceful, proud, swelling, crowned, noble, laureate, stately majstick. Troope. Flocking, swarming, numerous, numberlesse, unnumbered, inn∣merable, preasing, crowding, thronging, clustered, marching, furious, warlick, valiant, clashing, ratling, besieging. Trophy. Boasting, stately, proud, triumphant, victorious, insulting, lasting, memorable, never-dying, immortal, deathlesse, glorious, famous, pompous, joyful, gorgeous, warlick, lofty, honoured. Trouble. v. Affliction. Anxious, perplexing, tumultuous, vexing, puzling, molesting, e∣combering, combrous, pestering, turmoyling, Troy. Ancient, ruined, pitied, perjur'd, stately, magnificent, spatious, god-built. Truant. Gamesome, wanton, idle, lazie, loytering, dronish, guilty, fear∣full. Truce. Peaceful, friendly, according, releasing, refreshing. Trumpet. Martial, warlick, loud-voic't, shrill, hoarse, sterne, dreadful, threa∣ning, singing, roaring, braying, high-talking, writhed, bloody, crooke windy, barking, bnding, stounding, noyseful, loud-sounding, chek-puffing. Trust. Rposed, relying, assured, faithful, sacred, inviolate. Truth. Naked, unclothed, simple, undisguized, unmasked, light-loving corner-hating, unplaited, unpainted, certain, undoubted, unquestio∣ned, evident, apparent, confessed, granted, undenyed. Tumult. Confused, noyseful, impetuous, seditious, mutinous, tempest∣ous, dreadful, disordered, distempered, unruly, rebellious, furious, angry, enraged.
Tune. Intrancing, inchanting, delicious, ear-ravishing, warbling, harmo∣nious, melodious, enamouring, pleasant, soul-raping, lightsome, mer∣y, gieesome, sad, mournful, pensive, sprightly, melancholy, heavy. Turbot. Large, flat, delicious, tastful, crafty, subtile. Turke. Unbelieving, misbelieving, thrifty, abstemious, cruel, unpitying, mercilesse, unrelenting, inexorable, warlick, circumcized, superstit∣ous, bloody, wine-forbearing, turban'd, covetous, avaritious, erring. Turkie. Jealous, painted, gaudy, coral-chained, Indian, Turney. Turnament. Winding, wheeling, rolling, spatious, justing, dusty, delightful, plea∣sant, sportive. Turpentine. Syrian, liquid, odorous, sweating, dropping, subtile, drawing. Turret. v. Tower. Turtle. v. Dove. Chst, wanton, pensive, mourning, murmuring, whispering, swft∣wing'd, faithful, loving, constant, meeke, gentle, plaintive, coplain∣ing, querulous, sullen, billing, grizle, courteous, hoarse, amorous, ve∣nereous, salacious, fleet-wing'd, crooing. Tuske. Piercing, wounding, rending, tearing, crooked, bloody, goary, gnash∣ing foamy, frothy. Tutour. Careful, painful, faithful, observing, eying, guarding, instructing, diligent, assiduous, watchful, attentive, jealous, strict, severe, sterne-vi∣aged, austere. Twig. Leavy tender, bloomy, verdant, springing, budding, sprouting, dng∣ling, green-coated, hoary-headed, waving, bending, writhing, twining inter-woven, pliant, stragling. Twi-light. Goomy, doubtful, ambiguous, neutral, mongrel, late, darksome, dewy, dusky, grizzle, dappled, gray. Twins. Resembling, coaeval, contemporary, equal-aged. Tiber. . Flood. Yellow, old, aged, sandy, Ausonian, horned, Tuscan, swelling, enra∣ged, speedy, reed crown'd.
Tympany. Swelling, puffing, bigg-bellied, gor-bellied, strouting, windy, wa∣try, stretching, skin-tentering, ambitious. Type. Resembling, representing, prefiguring, predictious, declaring, ex∣emplifying. Tyrant. Tyranny. Impetuous, insulting, supercilious, insolent, sullen, ambitious, im∣perious, grim, stern-visag'd, waspish, angry, brow-beating, lawlesse, passionate, incroaching, oppressing, fearlesse, awlesse, bruising, crush∣ing, currish, churlish, surly, murtherous, usurping, high-looking, proud, stormy, self-will'd, self-law'd, savage, moody, odious, haughty, hated, detested, remorselesse, cruel, unrelenting, pompous, inexorable, inhu∣mane, bloody, blood-thirsty, rigorous, voluptuous, marble hearted, eye-sparkling, wrathful, flint-heared. V. Vagaboud. VVAndering, stragling, houselesse, restlesse, friendlesse. Vaile. Masking, hanging, dangling, shadowie, virgin, maiden, spreading, cloudy, hiding, concealing, saintly. Vale. Valley. v. Meadowes. Plains. Dusky, gloomy, narrow, humble, sportive, groveling, crowching, de∣lightsome, fruitful, green-plusht, low-coucht, dejected, solitary, under∣lying, shaded, over-looked, bushy, flower-enamell'd, motley, smiling, fragrant, hearby, grassie, flower-embroidered, tufred, dazied, level'd, gamesome, green-cloath'd, green-mantled, soft-coated, flower-spang∣led, resounding, ecchoing hollow, stooping, crooked, darksome, me∣lancholy, winding, green-breasted, stream-embroydered. Valour. Un-affrighted, undaunted, couragious, unshrinking, stout, unshkn daring, adventurous, undertaking, attemptive, audacious, untamed, unquelled, masculine, unmooved, presumptuous, free, active, majestick, undejected, manly, haughty, puissant, generous, warlick, triumphant, victorious, all-subduing, heroick. Vanity. Melting, empty, fleshing flaring, smoaky, frothy, pompous, ridicu∣lous, superfluous, lying, fruitlesse, speckled, swelling.
Vapour. Exhaled, smoaky, moist, cloudy, frothy, smothering, rainy, dusky sable, gloomy, foggy, misty, malignant, fat, oily, aspiring, earth-ingen∣dered, rising, mounting, towing, infectious, unhealthy, ascending. Variance. Jarring. disagreeing, dissentious, wrangling, brabling, jangling, un∣friendly, seditious, tumultuous, angry, harsh, hell-nourisht, blood-thir∣sty. Variety. Novel, changing, different, plenteous, copious, prodigious, incre∣dible. Varnish. Painted, shining, glittering, pompous, gaudy. Vassal. v. Slave. Groaning, tugging, toyling, weary, wronged, abused, drudging, ig∣nominious, laborious, burthened. Vault. Solitary, moldy, hollow, dankish, rocky, gloomy, darksome, forsaken unfrequented, musty, uncouth, sullen, arched, dark, obscure, mossie, hanging, blind, nasty, denny, doleful, lonely, concealed, secret. Ʋdder. Sagging, milky, nursing, soft, flowing, tender, fluent, hanging flag∣ing, lolling, veiny, strouting, luxurious. Vein. Fluent, azure, violet, purple, swelling, flowing, warme, winding, branched, bloody, dancing, enterlacing, trembling, boyling, seething, meandring. Velvet. Glittering, pompous, rich, shaggy, smooth. Vengeance, Sharp, hot, swift-wing'd, flaming, wreakful, black, fiery, secret, de∣serred, gnawing, pursuing, furious, raging, chafing, boyling, bloody, in∣satiate, unappeased, sad, flame-eyed, snake-haired, cruel, stern-visaged, grim, frowning, rageful. wrathful, threatning, hellish, stinging, ash impetuous, stormy, hot-mouth'd, sullen, blustering, impatient, passi∣onte, sparkling, foaming, frothy, hideous, slow-pac't. Venison. Delicious, tastful, tast-pleasing, well-seasoned, well-relish, larded, costly. Venome. Baneful, raging, subtile, working, piercing, spreading, swelling, eat∣ing, benumming, creeping, burning, drowsie, sleepy, stupefying. Venus. Froth-born, smiling, faire-hair'd, lovely, frolick, weeping, incestu∣ous, wanton, lustful, burning, raging, youthful, lascivious, unchast, joy∣ous, joyful, proud, toyish, sportive, gamesome, deceitful, fruitfull,
teeming, attractive, beauteous, enamouring, bewitching, inchanting, inticing, voluptuous, delicious, black-brow'd, luxurious, adulterous, ingenious, perfumed, pleasant, pernicious, harmeful, bashful, blushing subtile, crafty, curious, quaint, Idalian, Cytherean, Paphian, sea-born, salacious, powerful, commanding, controlling, imperious, golden-haird, smooth. Verdict. Just, unjust, malitious, injurious, honest, dishonest, severe, grim. Verdure. Flowry, smiling, youthful, gay, pleasant, gaudy, joyful, joyous, fresh springing, blooming, leavy. Varjuyce. Sharp, tart, poynant, stomach quickening, soure. Vermine. Nasty, filthy, loathsome, noysome, harmful, gnawing, mischevous, creeping, crawling. Verse. Smooth-swelling, tributary, exalted, lofty, harmonious, immortal, deathlesse, powerful, everlasting, well-laboured, well-trickt, wel-drest well-composed, eternal, embalming, numerous, fluent, sweet-flowing, sinewie, learned, pleasant, amorous, wanton, delicious, nectareous, facetious, immortalizing, prophetick, muse-inspired, ear-enamouring, fancy-tickling, sprightly, sacred, measured, sententious, buskin'd, char∣ming, inchanting, intrancing nectar-dropping. Vertue, Active, sacred, maiden, chast, white, cold, faire, bright, untainted, un-appeached, taintlesse, clear, thredbare, unregarded, disrespected, conspicuous, spotlesse, pretious, diviner, heroick, generous, glorious, deathlesse, immortal. Vesture. v. Garments. Sumptuous, magnificent, costly, pompous, gorgeous, neat, trim, spruce, handsome, delicate, rich, gay, gaudy, fashionable, becom∣ing. Vexation. Anxious, pressing, wringing, pinching, dolorous, painful, combrous, pestering. Ʋglinesse. Loathsome, deformed, foul, nasty, prodigious. Viands. Delicate, delicious, delightful, tastful, tast-pleasing, nectarean, am∣brosial, eye-glutting, feast-ful, costly, expensive, palat-pleasing, desired Vice. Infamous, execrable, light-flying, enormous, unruly, odious, defor∣med, ugly, detested, leprous, filthy, spotted, pernitious, soul-tainting, soul-killing, impious, soul-stabbing, soul-wounding, defaming, loath∣ing,
nsidious, rebellious, incorrigible, depraving, slipperie, alluring. Victor. Victory. Laureate, crowned, white, silver-winged, triumphant, delightfull, va∣liant, couragious, martiall, warlick, renowned, famous, imperious, in∣sulting, glorious, bright, subduing, conquering, happy, immortal, pui∣sant, insulting. Vigour. Manly, powerfull, nervous, sinewie, chearfull, active, lively, sprightly. Villain. Michievous, rude, roguish, fordid, erath-born, notorious, crackrope, rope-ripe, shamelesse, unblushing, saucy, bold, impudent, brazen fac'd. Vine. Spreading, winding, clasping, amorous, clustered, limber, sprightly, life-chearing, grape-charged, bleeding, humble, generous, lusty, swel∣ling, uxorious, fruitfull, youthfull, wanton, embracing, clinging, twining, encreasing, creeping, wrigling, writhing, knotty, brisled, leavy, ramping, bending, spriggie, branching, shadie, underpropped, enterlacing, tender, gadding, full-clustered. Vineger. Sharp, tart, sour, cold, vigorous, subtil, piercing, cooling, refrigera∣ting, poynant. Vintage. Fruitfull, teeming, wealthy, plenteous, prosperous, Violence. Harsh, rugged, rigid, enforcing, surious, raging, untamed, unresisted, impetuous, cruel, tumultuous, tempestuous, angry, disdainfull, proud, dreadfull, insolent, hurrying, oppressing, unpitying, unrelenting, au∣dacious, imperious, disordered, tyrannous, swelling, transporting, head-strong, frantick, wild, savage, ungovern'd, impatient, passionate, blustering, heady, surly, sullen. Violet. Nodding pale, purple, pale, azure, creeping, soft, steaked, beauteous, sweet-smelling, glowing. Viper. Poysonous, venemous, drunken, wine-loving, abortive, pernicious, birth-forcing. Virago. Stout, hardy, couragious, manly, masculine, heroick, valiant, valo∣rous, bold, audacious, adventurous, fearlesse, undaunted. Virgin. Chaste, modest, blushing, bashfull, sober, untainted, pure, un∣spotted▪
Virginity. Cold, barren, fruitlesse, chast, pure, taintlesse, modest, sober, bashf spotlesse, straight-lac'd, untoucht, maiden, white, pale. Visage. Deformed, beauteous, smiling, mild, joyful, sweet, pleasing, ang frowning, furious, rageful, stormy, imperious, graceful, lovely, disdai∣ful, moded, setled, sterne, grim, mournful, chearful, affected, murther∣ous, supercilious, haughty. Vision. Prophetick, sacred, enthusiastick, inspired, heaven-sent. Vizard. Masking, disguising, concealing, dissembling, deceiving, veiling. Ʋlcer. Putrid, diseaseful, nasty, loathsome, infectious, swelling, inflamed, uncured, corrupting, sordid, noysome, corroding, fretting, spreading, painful, putrifying. Ʋlisses. Prudent, famous, subtile, crafty, wary, perju'd, wandering, treache∣rous, warlick, lingering. Ʋnadvisednesse, Rash, peremptory, inconsiderate, heedlesse, blustering. Ʋncleanesse. Nasty, foul, loathsome, fulsome, sordid, sluttish. Ʋnconstancy. v. Inconstancy. Ʋnderling. Oppressed, groaning, inferiour, obedient, humble, dejected, yeilding, slavish, servile. Ʋnderstanding. Clear, quick, sharp, ingenious, apprehensive, deviseful, artful, inven∣tive, ready, subtile, active, nimble, ranging, roving, pregnant, teeming, busie, rich, wealthy, enriched, contriving. Ʋngratefulnesse. v. Ingratitude. Fowle, base, odious, shamelesse, detestable impious, proud, insolent, arrogant. Ʋnhandsomenesse. Deformed, ugly, loathsome, nasty. Ʋnhappinesse. Disastrous, pitied, killing, perplext, impatient. Ʋnicorne. Long-horn'd, warlick, virgin-loving, lyon-hating, Indian, savage, furious, pretious, rich-horned, yelling.
Ʋniformity. Gracefull, proportioned, agreeing, becomming, decent, beeauteous, e∣quall, even-squared, pleasant, handsome. Ʋnity, Ʋnion. Friendly, peaceful, loving, amorous, embracing, conjoyning, sociable, according, agreeing, calm, mutuall, unjarring. Ʋuniverse. Large, wide, wide-skirted, dispersed, extended, populous. Ʋniversity. Lettered, learned, studious, famous, populous, bookish, instructive, honoured, peopled, thronged. Voice. Sweet, harmonious, delicious, confused, suppliant, interrupted, in∣trancing, inchanting, well tuned, ear-ravishing, ear-enamouring, soul-raping, sprightly, mournfull, piteous, complaining, joyfull, mirthfull, puling, whining. Volume. I earned, studious, subtil, sacred, grave, industrious, instructive, e∣laborate. Vow. Religious, chaste, binding, fervent, pious, solemn, rash, inconside∣tate, unadvised, devotious, obliging, irrevocable. Votray, v. Hermit. Voyage. Dangerous, adventurous, successefull, successelesse, disasterous, happy, unhappy, tedious, prosperous, Ʋprore. Tumultuous, confused, seditious, mutinous, rebellious, lawlesse, un∣ruly, disordered, noyfull, furious, distempered. Ʋrn. Quiet, forgetfull, sacred, peacefull, forsaken, fatall, mournfull, sable-vaulty, shady, darksome, cold, silent, shrowding, Ashy. Ʋse. Frequent, commodious, profitable, gainfull. Ʋsury Ʋsurer. Oppressing, griping, exacting, avaritious, greedy, covetous, scra∣ping, odious, hatefull, cruel, crushing, squeezing, hoarding, pinch∣ing, stanchlesse, insatiate, heart enthralling, monied, pale, carefull, fearfull, rigorous, unpitying inexorable- Vulcan. Laborious, smudgy,, black, industrious, deformed, smoakie,
coali, grimie, polt-foot, fierie, dustie, slow-footed, tardie-pac'd, lame, halting, rusty, musty, horned, cornuted. Vulgar. v. Multitude. Low, bas, misjudging, misdeeming, rude, illiterate, unconceiving, unlearned, sottish, giddy-headed, brainlesse, hair-brain'd, moodie, humorous, frantick, shallow-headed, tumultuous, inconstant, sedi∣tious. Vulture. Greedy, ravenous, presaging, devouring, slow-wing'd, gluttonous, ill-boding, predictious, ominous, raping, carkasse-haunting. W. Wagon. Wain. CReaking, groaning, shreeking, burdened, wheeling, turning. Wall. Assaulted, scaled, inclosing, immuring, imprisoning, incircling, proud, lofty, mounting, towring, aspiring, ambitious, spatious, entow∣ed, silent, mosse-thrun'd, aged, crazie, defensive, stubborn, stone com∣pacted. Want. Griping, pinching, oppressing, penurious, needy, crushing, brui∣sing, meager, soul-squeezing, gauling, freezing, heart-dejecting, in∣forcing, importuning, necessirating, tugging, laborious, industrious, toiling, down-looking, grinding, urging, lank-bellied, thin-gutted. Wanton. Wantonnesse. Lascivious, obscene, dallying, toyish, sportive, lewd, rude, ungover∣ned, unruly, unreined, uncurbed, jolly, frolick, frantick, hair-brain'd unbrideled, tempting, luxurious, heady, disordered, intemperate, re∣gardlesse, revelling, saucy, full-fed, insatiate, fearlesse. Wardrobe. Rich, wealthy, pompous, go geous, gaudy, tumbled, ruffled, rifled ransacked. Warinesse. Cautious, cautelous, timerous, fearfull, perplexed, doubtfull, advised, considerate, deliberate, pondering, tardy, slow-pac'd. War. Rugged, blood-thirsty, rude, remorslesse. angry, hungry, stein,
surly, sullen, bloody, dreary, gloomy, strifefull, litigious, stormy, empestuous, blustering, rustling, impetuous, wastfull, terrour-breathing, active, tumultuous, smoaky, all-abhorred, cormorant, distressefull, devouring, blood-sucking, all-consuming, confused, murdering, furious, sacrilegious, impartial, inexorable, outragious, dreadfull, inhumane, savage, ruinating, brutish, feral, enraged, mis∣chievous, cruell, mortall, adventurous, attemptive, couragious, vi∣ctorious, doubtfull, uncertain, insolent, disastrous, successefull, blood-streaming, pitilesse, mercilesse, hell-nouisht. Warriour v. Souldier. VVasp. Angry, peevish, pettish, testy, touchy, stinging, injurious, humming, harmfull, pestering, noysefull, thievish, fellonious, pilfering, robbing, preying, raping, purloynig filching. VVast. Lavish, profusive, expensive, unthrifty, luxurious, prodigall, improvi∣dent, fruitlesse, causelesse, riotous, excessive, wealth-eating, devouring, wealthy, consuming, needlesse, superfluous, unnecessary, swallowing, dissolute. Wast. v. Wildernesse. VVatch. Observant, careful, svigilant, attentive, listening, night-walking, strict. VVater. v. Springs VVave. Pliant, crisped, flowing, cleansing, plashie, streaming, clear, bright, Chrystall, glassie, running, deep, shallow, fishie, boiling, bubling, gushing, muttering, unruly, rolling, muddie, healthfull, floating, gli∣ding, scattered, foaming, froathy. Wave. Angry, enraged, boyling, swelling, rolling, foaming, crisped, cur∣led, purled, stormie, azure, writhing, wrigling, winding, fltting, floa∣ting, wilder, dancing, tumbling, straggling, fretting, sparkling, trou∣bled, shattered, swallowing, engulphing, ingorging, chasing, impetu∣ous, tempestuous, wandering, encroaching, invading, assailing, roaring, noysefull, drumming, rocking, rising, giddie, frothy, foamy, yielding, justling, stooping, yawning, sweeping, silver, Christall, trembling, brackish, surly, sullen, sliding, mounting, breaking, ruffled, wrinckled, churlish, brisied, imperious, tumultuous, vaulting, leaping, furious, careering, arched, gliding, posting, bustling, tossing, murmuring, mut∣tering, self-drowning, proud, big-belled, climbing, yesty, contenti∣ous, wreakfull weltring.
Wavering. Unconstant, uncertain, doubtfull, unsettled, unsteady, windy, insta∣ble, perplexed, anxious, distacted, ambiguous, giddy, faint, cold, heart∣lesse, fearfull jealous, suspitious, carefull. Wax. Soft, pliant, relenting, yielding, melting, limber, supple, obedient, clammie. Wealth. v. Gold. Envied, desired, unmeasured, unconfined, unfathomed, abounding, unprised, inestimable, proud, gorgeous, gaudy, commanding, imperi∣ous, glittering, pompous, unexhausted, sullen, treasured. Weapons. Offensive, defensive, clashing, sharp-edged, fatall, mortall, bloody, thirsty, gory, keen-edged, flaming, revengefull, reeking, wounding murdering, barbarous, victorious, glancing, brandished, sharp∣pointed. Wearinesse. Fainting, tedious, vexing, tired, toilsome, jaded, irksome. Weathor. Fair, foul, delicate, dull, healthful, unhealthfull, diseasefull, tem∣pestuous, sad, heavy, chearfull, seasonable, unseasonable, cloudy, showry, hot, cold, nipping, freezing, soultry, sweltring, freezing, sharp, mild, pleasant, drowsie. Weathercock. Turning, windy, wind-turn'd, unconstant, lofty, moving. Wedding. v. Marriage. Mirthfull, feastfull, joyfull, joyous, ceremonious, stoln, amorous, peacefull, geniall. VVeeds. Choaking, fruitlesse, cumbrous, encumbering, unwelcome, barren, marish, rank, presumptuous, uselsse, plashie, shallow-rooted, pernici∣ous, harmfull, noysome. VVeesell. Slender, fearfull, lurking, egge-sucking, lank-bellied. VVelcome. Gracious, cheatfull, loving, smiling, chearing, kind, bounteous, jol∣ly, loving, courteous. Welkin. v. Firmament. VVelshman. Valiant, furious, generous, genealogicall. VVest. Sober, red-cheek'd, blushing, Sun-inning, gloomy.
Whale. Storm-boding, massie, prodigious, storm-presaging, sea-oppres∣sing, sea-tyrannising. VVheat. Yellow, bearded, golden-eared. Wheel. Turning, rolling, creaking, swift-pac'd, speedy, crooked, rushing. Whip. Lashing, scourging, smarting, painfull, correcting, revengefull, sharp, knotty, twisted, awing, dreadfull, fearing, hated, loathed, curb∣ing, restraining, tutoring, cruell, blooody, schooling, severe, rigo∣rous, threatning, torturing. Whirlpool. v. Gulph. Devouring, swallowing, frothy, deep, yawning, wide-mouth'd, jaw∣stretch'd. Whirlwind. v. Wind. Dusty, impetuous, flaming, sweeping, sudden, resistlesse, tempestuous, cloudy, boysterous. VVhisper. Soft, warm, glowing, guilty, secret, close, hollow, silent, fearfull, pleasing, magick, drowsie. VVhore. v. Harlot Lascivious, wanton, lustfull, obscene, leprous, infamous, rammish, strumpeting, dallying, rampant, callet, baudy, brothel'd, uncivill, rotten, salacious, dissolute, immodest, mercenary, shamelesse, impudent, notorious, filthy, painted, canckered, itchie, goatish, unblushing, loath∣some, musty, nasty, pocky. VVidow. Comfortlesse, desolate, sad, pensive, melancholy, lnely, jolly, lusty, frolick, bounsing, distressed, mournfull, wofull, afflicted, op∣pressed. Wife. Loving, carefull, sollicitous, embracing, indulgent, chearing, loyall, disloyall, brawling, contentious, litigious, unquiet, scolding, happy, unhappy, delicious. VVildernesse. Unpeopled, uncouh, shaggy, desart, solitary, lonely, devious, sa∣vage, melancholy, silent, unfrequented, sandy, dreadfull, sullen, gloomie, rockie, hoary, pathlesse, shrubby bushy, unfruitful, barren, inhospitable, wastful. VVile Crafty, cunning, treacherous, insidious, cheating, deceitful, beguiling, subtill, juggling, ingenious, artificial, secret, slie▪ working, circumventing.
Will. Unforced, free-working, uncontrolled, active. Willow. Pliant, limber, branching, spreading, sprouting, bank-loving, plash-loving, shadie, tender. Wind. Howling, bellowing, drumming, incaved, sweeping, ruffling, prat∣ling, tatling, twatling, talking, saucy, uncivill, tyrannising, loud voi∣ced, churlish, hollow, barking, wandering, amorous, courting, whiz∣zing, whirling, mutinous, whistling, whisking, active, singing, dancing, flitting, unruly, rustling, inconstant, swinging, curled, chiding, post∣ing, busling, whiffing, whispering, fanning, murmuring, impetuous-creeping, bleak, hurrying, licentious, insulting, swelling, straggling, scattering, shattering, rocking, chafing, incensed, struggling, flying, just∣ling, rapefull, rising, jangling, jarring, ranging, blustering, surly, ca∣reering, ratling, sturdy, puffing, stern, stormy, high-rais'd, sporting, dallying, gamesome, chattering, audacious, muttering, sullen, tan∣ning, angry, nimble, quarrelling, fantastick, resistlesse, wrestling, la∣bouring, loudly-storming. Windings. Slipperie, snakie, spatious, crooked, doubled, intricate. Window. Lofty, hollow, Chrystall, trall'st, stately. Wine. Costly, brisk, rich, generous, spruce, neat, choice, odorous, spirit-prompting, care-drowning, sparkling, heating, delicious, massick, Caerubian, Chian, Lesbian, Candian, joyous, smiling, nectareous, fu∣ming, forgetful, raging, wit-expelling, rebellious, reason-deposing, sprightly, lusty. Wing. Supporting, roosting, fluttering, swooping, gliding, sweeping, brush∣ing, towring, scaling, nimble, active, industrious, soaring, mounting, moving, wandering, plumie, well-feathered, fanning, panting, beat∣ing, brooding, downy, ruffled, trembling, waving, swimming floating, flagging, slicing, hatcihng, hovering, subtil, ready, easie, soft, restlesse, busie, swift, balanc'd tosed, airie, air-cutting, Winter. Bleak, blasting, irksome, pinching, barren, stormy, shivering, trem∣bling, frosty, fruitlesse, foggy, rugged, leavelesse, chil, frost-starved, drizling, dull, hoary, old, gray, hideous, blustering, nipping, sap-consu∣ming, rude, sluggish, drowsie, sullen, icie, keen; sharp, defor∣med, decrepit, rainie, windie, showrie, dirty, mirie, fierce, snowie,
cruel, injurious, devouring, angry, churlish, crabbed, tempestuous, melancholy, grim, sterne-visaged, discoloured. Wire. Pliant, slender, limber, twisted, twining. Wish. Hungry, covetous, desirous, longing, greedy, cherisht, avaritious, ardent, ambitious, passionate, hearty, sollicitous, insatiate. Wit. Active, pregnant, piercing, quick, sagacious, plotting, contriving, inventing, mature, nimble, stirring, happy, enriched, penetrating. Witch. Thessalian, blew-eyed, freckled, mumbling, withered, unhal∣lowed, hellish, ugly, nasty, fulsome, hideous, furious, malitious, mishapen, cruel, mischeevous, il-looking, gumbling, charming, muttering, hateful, spightful, dreadful, revengeful, affrightful, sive∣turning, image-pricking, bloody. Woe. v. Griefe. Doleful, mournful, plaintful, pensive, sad, cruel, unexpressed, heart-rending-tearing-contracting-killing-pinching-wringing-fret¦ting-oppressing-gnawing-gauling-grating-breaking-squeezing, dis∣contented, impatient, intolerable, unsupported, pitied, disquiet. Wolfe. Rapeful, ravening, curst, Thracian, hungry, greedy, devouring, raping, howling, Appulian, mountain, insatiate, bloody, preying, foaming, grinning, night-stragling, gluttonous, furious, salvage. Women. Beauteous, soft, wanton, crafty, deceitful, inconstant, weak, frail, pityful, tender, compassionate, pratling, passionate, delicate, mel∣ting, jealous, impatient, weeping, puling, whining, war-detesting, revengeful, smooth-faced, rash, inconsiderate. Wombe. Pregnant, teeming, fruitful, barren, painful, swelling. Wonder. Attractive, unwonted, stupendious, prodigious, silent, unbelee∣ved, faih-surpassing, unaccustomed, amazing, intrancing. Wood. Silent, shaggy, pathlesse, leavy, shady, lofty, bushy, ecchoing, hgh∣waving, arched, stately, sullen, wel-grown, unfrequented, solitary, mossy, culed, shrubby, desart, gloomy, devious, darksome, verdant, beast-haunted, unpeopled, Wooll. Curled, thirsty, fleecy, twined, rough, drinking, frizled, furled, ravelled,
Word. Winged, flying, irrevocable, unrecalled, gilded, oyly, sententious, sugred, forced, strained. Worke. Laborious, tedious, toylesome, stirring, active, busie painful, in∣dustrious, unimitable, unpatterned, unexampled. Worme. Crawling, wrigling, gnawing, impartial, devouring, saucy. Wormwood. Biter, distastful, gray, hoary, medicinal. Wound. Gaping, reeking, gushing, gastly, gasping, yawning, smarting, lanched, sharp, rankling, bleeding, festered, painful, cruel, gashing, hollow, trembling, killing, murthering, fatal, bloody, griezly. Wrack. Doleful, woful, pitied, sad, unhappy, disastrous. Wrath. v. Anger. Fury. Burning, baneful, hot, inflaming, wal-eyed, brutish, blustering, fierce, fiery, bloody, revengeful, impetuous, tempestuous, furious. Wrinkle. Aged. hanging, deformed, curled, folded, frowning, gathered, Wrist. Sinewie, snowie, ivory, veiny, azure-streaked. Wreath. Pleited, braided, knotty, curled, leavy, laurel, flowry, triumphant, victorious, brow-incircling, joyful. X. Xanthus. v. River. Speedy, crooked, yellow, golden-streamed, Phrygian. Xenophon. Learned, studious, industrious. Xerxes. Haughty, Persian, ambitious, voluptuous, proud, sea-scourging, luxurious.
Y Yeare. TArdy, sliding, turning, increasing, fleeting, lingring, tedious, swift, wheeling, flying, unrecalled, wasting, declining, passant, rolling, succeeding, gliding, snakie, creeping, running, posting, winged, reviving, surviving, hasty, speedy, swift-paced, un-returning. Yeast. Frothy, foamy, swelling, rising. Yew. Warlick, dismal, fatal, mortal, venmous, unhappy, verdant, deadly, dreadful, Yoke. Galling, pressing curbing, wringing, restraining, heavy, crushing, bruising, uneasie, hateful, slavish, servile, detested, crooked, odious, painful, displeasing, tyrannous. Youth. Unbrideled, wild, hot, fresh, loose, manly, blooming, vigorous, ungoverned, unruly, amotous, giddy, immoderate, flowing, waxie, pliant, budding, green, rude, raw, unexperienced, untutor'd, active, stirring, unreined, lustful, smiling, downy, wanton, vernant, bur∣ning, coltish, able, intemperate, dissolute, untamed, proud, ambiti∣ous, voluptuous, luxurious, unwary, rash, haire-braind, inconside∣rate, flowry, lascivious, soft, tender, free▪boyling, impatient, furi∣ous, hardy, unwise, lively, quick-headed, impetuous, audacious, da∣ring, couragious, sprightful, active, generous, chearful, merry, inge∣nious, witty, briske, neat, inconstant, sportive, gamesome, frolick, jovial, cholerick, uncontrolled, unmellow, unripe unfledge, sleeke, smooth, unsifted, unreclaimed, indiscreet, riotous. Z. Zeal. COouragious, industrious, religious, affectionate, passionate, vertuous, fervent, hot, burning, ardent, officious, pious, sacred, inflaming, flamy, devoted, superstitious, ravisht, intemperate,
wel-tempered, careful, cordial, hearty, hot-mouthed, frantick. Zephirus Balmy, spicy, flowry, cooling, life-breathing, life-infusing, cour∣teous, mild, kind, odorous, winged, warme, swift-winged, wanton, enamoured. Zodiak. Crooked, painted, starry, heaven-girdling, sparkling, star-ena∣meld, star-embossed. Zoylus. Envious, calumniating, backbiting, babling, biting, injurious, detracting, convitious, barking, carping, reproachful, snarling, su∣percilious, disdainful, lashing, captious, censorious, exceptious, cur∣rish, capricious, invective, sharp-toothed, tongue-wounding, quip∣ping, girding, jeering, snapping, condemning, reviling, unknow∣ing, ignorant, fantastick, grinning. Who with condemning eyes doth on me look, Is that which gives a period to my book. FINIS.
The ENGLISH PARNASSUS. A. Abel. DEaths first fruits, Deaths handsel, who first did lead That way which all succeeding men must tread, Envies first object, who first did feel the hand of fate In a short life, and cursed brothers hate. The first of martyrs, The worlds proto-marryr. Murthers first essay, who first bedew'd the ground With drops of blood, show'd from his gushing wound, whose blood doth cry, And with revengeful language pierce the skie. Abortive. v. Embrion. whom untimely birth Excus'd from all the sorrowes of the earth. Imperfect Embrion, Half-made man. that from the wombe Took but his rise, to leap into the tombe, Finding a night before they see a morne. The wombe Is both his crable and his tombe Abraham. That miracle of faith, abstract of obedience Great soul of faith who with unpalsied hands Can sacrifice his son, when God commands; Whose countless issue did in number vse With all those lights that twinkle in the skie; whose pious prayer Hid sav'd five Cities if ten had been there.
As righteous as he—Isaacs old fire, Sarah's loyal mate, Great Terah's faithful son. Absolom. Davids rebellious son; That piece of ill plac'd beauty, Whose chiefest ornament bee The instrument of death and shame; That double Rebel who at once did do What were too much of crime, though shar'd to two. Whom neither civil nor domestick law, Neither a father nor a king can aw And keep from, treasonable acts— Who in incestious pleasures bathing lay, And made the blushing sun close up the day Amaz'd to see such acts as those were done At once both by a subject and a son, Envying his father should enjoy alone By him unrival'd, either bed or throne. Abstemious. v. Temperate. One that in wine tasts water, in water wine, As if he had drunk of the Clytorian fount, which who so tasts nere after relish wine. One that can slake His thirst with waters of the running lake, Whose drink's of natures brewing, Who if his drink but a cold moysture have No other qualities doth in it crave, And with a rich contentment can resigne To others all the pleasures of the vine. Absurd things indecently joyned. So have I seene the pride of Natures store, The orient pearl chaind to the sooty Moore, So hath the diamonds bright ray been set In night, and wedded to the Nigro jet, Like Delphins ranging in the wood, Whilst boars are swimming on the flood, Heaven and hell together lie With reconcil'd antipathie. Acheron. The joyless lake, the flaming torrent, gloomy water dismal wave. Where never fish were seen to play, Nor water Nymphs to keepe their holy-day. The sad infernal streame, the moate of hell, Where the sad Furies bath their ugly limbs.
Achilles. Faire Thetis godlike son. Chirons stour pupil. The Trojans fear and hate. Unvanquisht mortal that from Thetis sprang, He whom the silver footed goddess bore, That brave attemprive spirit that could feele Deaths wounding stroke at no place but his heele; Swift as the dart he cast, as arrowes fleete, Who though he best could, laest did use his feete. He for whose armes such sterne debate did rise That Ajax would not live without the prize. Actaeon. Unhappy hunter, who became To his own dogs th'unlucky game, By whom was naked in the fountain seene The beauty of the quiver-bearing Queen. whom his own dogs did teare Transform'd into the figure of a deare, who as he flies Wonders at the new swiftness of his thighes. Adam. The highest pitch of perfect nature, The lively image of the great Creatour, In whom comprized was, what ever can Belong to the perfection of a man. Reasons eldest master. Gods eldest son. That Universal father▪ The general kinsman. That spring of men. Manhood without foregoing infancy. Adamant. The unrelenting stone, Which nought can break but the warm blood of Goats. Which fire cannot warme, nor hammer bruise. Poyson hating stone, cut with nothing but it selfe. Admire. v. Wonder. Admiration strikes mine eyes, And all my apprehensive faculties. To view with wondering amazed, admiring eies. With adoration to admire. I'me ravisht with just wonder. To scatter the spirits in admiration. Intranc'r with wonder. Struck with admiring wonderment. All eies that saw their lids with wonder raised.
Admirable. v. Incredible. Transcending the power of a strong belief. The greaeest miracle that ever challenged wonder. Each thing we see did yeeld-subject for admiration. Where art and miracle draw equal breath. The amazed beholders wondering eyes Were taken captive with the sight, So much of miracle it hath. Adonis. Venus fair minion. He whom his sister bore, his grandsires son. Faire but unhappy hunter—in whom the foamie boare Sheath'd his sharp tushes, wounded late before. Adorne. To grace, embellish, enamel, beautifie, fringe, lace edge, em∣broyder, embosse, enchase inlay, spangle, sleeke, smooth, file, en∣rich, varnish. Adultery. Adulterer. The beast with two backs. Adulterate mixture. Stoln pleasures of the lustful bed. Loves felony. Venus theft. That unrepaired injury. Hymens high treason, disloyal traitor to the marriage bed Stoln meetings in unlawful sheetes, Whose longing eyes wait for the twilight. Adversity. v. Miserable. The spight of srowning fortune. Fortunes storme. Fortunes clowdy brow. The melice of the angry fates. Heavens sowre and most malignant influence. The schoole of patience. Unstppy opportunity to try a friend. The souls night clothes. Aeacus. Grim Judge of trembling ghosts. Inzorable shade. Hells sterne trium. Witty inventor of sad punishment. Aeneas Anchyses pious son. Cytherean Heroe. Venus loved darling. That truest Trojan. The Trojans glory, and their hope. More valour mix with greater piety Then was in him the world could nere discrie. Who on his shoulders with triumphant joy Bore his old father from the flames of Troy. Dido's unhappy and unthankful guest. Loves pious brother. The pious root of Roman families. The beauteous fugitive of Troy That did the Carthage Queen enjoy.
Aeolus. v. Wind. That strugling winds, in rockie cavernes keepes, And at his pleasure calmes the raging deepes, Great guardian of the hollow windes. Storme fettering God. The bubcheekt steward of the winds. The windy Monarchies imperious King. who can appease The angry waves, and swell them when he please. Blustering Hippotades. The storm commanding tyrant of the aire. Aetna. The vast Sicilian hill, whose jawes exspire Thick clouds of dust, and vomits flakes of fire v. Sandys Metam. lib. 5. p 191. The hill that burneth with embowelled flames Vomiting stones, and darkening showers of dust The mount which smokes in curied darkness rolls, Whence a black cloud sometimes is belched out, Whose pitchy fume, and fiery sparks about, Vent flakes of flame, which seeme the stars to lick, Vomiting up unbowelled, mount-mold thick. Working up rocks to heaven, and heaps of stones, Venting from his vast paunch his fiery groanes, Encelad's lightning half-burnt, corps 'tis said Under this mighty pressing grave-stones laid, Who through those chimney breaches breaths out fire And when that weight his weary limbs doth tire Sicilia shakes with rumbling noyse and cries, And pitchie fogges muffle the frighted skies, the urging flames come from Sicilian Aetna's over-burthened wombe, As great Typhaeus throwes his stones abroad Prest with Inarim's eternal load. The Cyclops forge. Affection. v. Love. Africa. The torrid clime more hot, Then which for men the Gods created not. The scorched fields, Where neither river, nor the fountain yeelds Water enough, where Titans heat abounds, And killing serpents smear the parched grounds, where the sun doth brole Upon the hot sands of the Lybian soyle,
Where the Sun. v. Hot Summer. With neighbouring rayes bakes the divided earth, And drinks the rivers up. That fourth part of the world, Graspt in the clutches of the salding crab. Ajax. The master of the seven-fold shield, Whom ambitious charms, Conjur'd to madness for Achilles armes, Whom ambitious strife Deprived first of sence, and then of life. He who alone, Jove, Hector, sword and fire So oft sustain'd, yields to one stroke of ire Th' unconquer'd sorrow conquers; Whose blood engendered on the ground The flower, first made by Hyacinthus wound. Aire. The host of Mists, the bounding tennis Ball That stormy tempests toss and play withall, Of winged Clouds, the wide unconstant house The unsetled Kingdome of great Aeolus; The ware-house, shop, mint, treasure-house of winds, The throne of night and day, the wardrobe of the rain, The birds Sea, the Airy main, whose traffick gives Motion of life to every thing that lives Unmeasur'd-Welkin, the dish we feed on every minute. Alchymist. v. Chymist. Alecto. v. Fury. Alexander. The Macedonian Philippis mad-braind son, The prosperous thief. He that the world subdued That all the Sky encompast Globe did gain. Thine was both night and day, the starres would shine, And Planets wander o're no lands but thine That little world to whom the greater seemd but little Ambitious Monarch, whose unconfin'd desire Found not, a limit with the world. The fiery youth of Macedon. The Macedonian youth who knew No work so full of ease as to subdue, Who scarce beleeved his conquests worthy fame, Since others thought his fortune overcame.
Ambitious. Ambition. ke Phaeton, or that ambitious crew, hose towring thoughts, no less than heaven pursue hat with disdain look at their narrow fate; Who have ambitious ayme, o build tall Pyramids in the Court of fame hose boundless hopes earth cannot satisfie, hat with Caligula court the Moon. nd with Eudoxus, doe aspire, to kiss the Sun High-rooft, exalted-aspring unconfined thoughts, patious minds, desires that know no limits but the poles owring hopes, honour thirsting minds, Thinking no face so beautifull as that Which looks under a crown of a large-striding mind; A mind having no limits of hope, and not knowing why To fear. A brain beating for honour, Whose towring thoughts presume so high Swell'd with a vain ambitious, tympany, Ambition like the circle on the stream Which never ceaseth to inlarge it self Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought The souldiers vertue. Vertues disease Bred like surfets from an undigested fulness. Whose avaritious thoughts would teach them run, As long continued journeyes as the Sun, And make the Title of their strength, not right As known and universall as his light; Whose desires know no Horizon Who had thoughts so hie They humble seem'd, when th' aymd at victorie. Amaz'd. I more amaz'd than Circe's, prisoners, when They felt themselves turn beasts— Amaz'd they stand, as when Joves tresses shake And make the earth and stars though fixed, quake, Mankind and all the worlds affrighted frame Astonisht shook. So amazed stood Deucalion, when he saw the swallowing flood, Or when he heard the ambiguous oracle. So amazed were The sad Heliades, when they behold The creeping Bark their tender limmes infold.
Amazement seiz'd him. As if his soul did in his body sleep. So in the seas stood the Phaenician ship That brought Ulysses home. As if he had lookt on the Gogans face, Struck with a deep amazement Like a man gone a far journey from himself. transform'd with wonder Senceless he stood, as one struck down by thunder. More amaz'd, than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven, Figur'd all o're with meteors. Stands like a breathing stone Recovered from amazement. Time and reason had reduc'd His flying sences to some certain stand, Recollected from his extasie. Amorous. v. Love Anchorite. That entertains, the rising day With Prayer and holy Mditation, That is as well Contented with his homely cell As they that glitter in the courts of Kings; One that hath bid the world good night Before his time to go to bed, Whose sleep wants onely length to prove him dead. Sitting like patience on a monument, Smiling at grief, uninterested in the worlds affairs▪ That onely lives, to learn well how to die. That in religious melancholly, Sits and smiles at all the folly, All the pleasures, all the toyes That the worldlings stile their joyes, And doth make the silent aire Chariot up his pious prayer. Anchyses. That welcome burden to his pious son. With whom the queen of love in sportive play Upon the leavy tops of Ida lay Aeneas aged Syre. Anger. v. Rage. Fury. That burning feaver of the soul, enraged blood, The tempest of the troubled thoughts, souls combustion, Valours whetstone. That shorter madness. The souls torrid zone.
That heat which chaps the soul, and lets the devil creep in at the ranies, Angry. Having all his thoughts bound up in choler The icie current of his frozen blood s kndled up in agonies as hot As flames of burning Sulphur The ashy paleness of his cheeks. s scarlated in ruddy flakes of wrath, And like a bearded Meteor doth suck up With swiftest terrour all the dusky mists That over-cloud compassion in the brest, mpatience lowreth in his face, a February face, All full of frosts, and storms and cloudiness, And were his eye balls into bullets turn'd He would in rage have shot them at his face. Their eyes sparkling like the beaten flint Like Ajax Telamonius, When he on sheep and oxen spent his fury, Nor can he buckle his distemperd passion Within the belt of reason▪ Like a tyled house on fire, no coming near to quench it. Had Narcissus lookt so when he was angry, and seen his own face, he could never have been in love with himself. Fierce anger makes▪ the blood grow hot, Even as a fire-brand doth the seething pot; And then thy flaming eyes sparkling forth fire, Thou sayest and dost so in thy furious ire, That mad Orestes dares swear such a fact None but a man stark mad ere durst to act. All his flegm is turned into choler. If God should have then armed him with thunder in 24. houres, there had neither been tent nor pavillion. As if all his humours had turnd choller, His heart too great too great for his strait bosome grew Transported with his rage. Like to the chafed bore, whom eager hounds Have at a bay and terrifie with sounds. With eyes confessing rage, and eye-browes knit Her face as much as rage would suffer, fair. She stops, and shaking her dishevelld hair, So boyled Progne when she knew, Her sisters rape. His eyes blaze blood and fire, He frowns with eyes that sparkle fire,
In whose red eyes two darted flames appeard, The curses lighten from his lip, So lookt great Agamemnon, when he heard Calchas unwelcome prophecy. Within his eyes a burning furnace glowes, Death and destruction muster in his face, Fretting like a piece of gumm'd velvet. Who like the roaring of the furious wind, Vents out the wild distempers of his mind. v. Frown. Angels The glorious Hosts of Heaven. Nimble postes Immortall beings, glorious essences, wing'd wartiours, Heavens harbengers, and swiftest pursivants, The sacred Tutors, Guardians of the Saints, Heavens-nobles, courtiers, Embassadours, flaming powers Lofty, exalted, unspotted spirits, glittering ranks. The heavenly warders, silver winged Legions, That soar above heavens bright star, spangled regions, Wing'd intelligences, winged heraulds, watchmen, legats, Celestiall hierarchies, Diviner Mercuries, Heavens winged choristers, carollers that warble out A silver ditty; That spread their golden pinions, Quick Postes, that with a speedy expedition, Fly to accomplish their divine Commission, Twixt heaven and earth the true Interpreters Wing'd messengers of heaven, radiant sons of light That can bestride the lazy puffing wind, And sayle upon the bosome of the Aire, fiery essences. Answer. v. to speak. Hee did divide The portalls of his lips, and thus replide; To shape an answer. Answerable. Correspondent, suting with, ecchoing to, holding proportion with, v. Sandys. Ovid. Me∣tam. lib. 7. pag. 262. Keeping pace with. Ants. Industrious grain supporting crue, which by troops haste from their hollow cells To get in harvest, graving where they gone Their diligence, even in a path of stone The lustiest swarms for their provision range The sick and old, wait at their thrifty grange
'unload the burthens, and lay up the store their great garner, biting yet before f every grain, lest kept so warm below mid the world, it after sprout and grow. The little pattern of great pain, Lugs in her mouth her load of grain; the thrifty Ant In plenty hoards for time of want. Antiquary. That finds all the ruines of wit in the rubbish of old Authours.  man strangely thrifty of time past, and hath an unnaturall disease o be enamoured of old age and wrinckles, and loves all things as utchmen do cheese for beeing moldie, a broken Statue would al∣most make him an idolater. His estate consists most in shekles, and Roman coynes: printed books he contemns as a novelty of this ater age, bur dotes on a manuscript, and would give all his wealth for a Book of the old Romane binding, or six lines of Tully in his own hand. His chamber is commonly hung with strange beasts skins, and is a kind of charnell-house of bones extraordinary. Res∣cuing the prey from the teeth of time, making an Hue and Cry, for Cities that are run away; and by certain marks and tokens, pur∣suing to find them. If he meet with an old manuscript which hath the mark worn out of its mouth, and hath lost the date, yet he can tell the age thereof either by the Phrase or Character. Apollo. v. Phoebus. Latona's bright-haird son. The laureat God. Unshorn deity. The Delian God. The Lycian, Delphian, Clarian, Leucadian, deity. The master of the Delphian oracle. Sacred Soract's God. The Roseate God. President of verse; By whose instructive rayes are seen What is, what shall be, or hath ever been Immortall verse from his invention springs, And how to strike the well concording strings, With all the use of hearbs. The Patron of that Spring, Where in calm peace the sacred Virgins sing. April. v. Spring. When first the Spring dissolves the mountain snow. And Western winds upon the waters blow, When with his golden horn bright Taurus opes The chearfull year. Venus blith moneth.
when temperate breath Gives to the glad field fruitful birth, When proud pide April drest in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing, That heavy Saturn laughs and leaps with him. The summers front; When Nightingales do hush the silent night, And a wild musick burthens every bough. Arabia. Natures great shop of spices Where sweet Panachan gums, and choice perfumes Of unctious nard, which with their spicie smoake Perfume the neighbour aire, till it doth choke. v. Sweet smelling. The greedy sence. Where the Sabean vapours as they fly, v. Phenix. Perfume with sweets the mornings majesty. The glowing East, Where the rare Phaenix builds her spicy nest, And burnes her self, making one narrow roome Her urne, her nest, her cradle and her tombe. Arbour. v. Shade. Shady screene, leavie shade, leavy coverture, A place to shun The scorching fury of the sun, Leavy bulwark, from the suns invasion. Leavy vaile. The shelter from the suns offensive rage. Shady rampier. Where shadowes seem to wooe The lovesick passenger to come and sit And view the beauties Nature stroes on it. Arachne. To whom Minerva gave a fatal doome For her contending at the skilful loome. The Nymphes of Tmolus oft their vines forsook The fleek Pactolian Nymphes their streams to look On her rare works, nor more delight in viewing v. Sandys transl. Ovid Metam. l. 6. The done (done with such grace) then when a doing, The bold Maeonian maid that durst compare With Pallas at the weaving trade. Argonautes. Those daring Heroes that brought back to Greece The wealthy purchase of the golden fleece, Whose glittering Argo sayles amongst the stars. Jasons bold mates.
Argus. Ios jealous guard Whose hundred eyes his heads large circuit star'd Whereof at once by turns two only slept, The others watcht and still their stations kept. Ariadne. By whose directing clue Theseus the Cretan monster slue, Unhappy bride of perjur'd Theseus, Whom Bacchus graced with the Cnossian crown, Minos faire daughter. Aristorle. v. Learned. Atlas of learning. Magazin of arts. That walking library. Great Alexanders Tutors The learned Stagyrite. Monarch of sciences. That ruled as he thought fit. The whole monopoly of wit. Soul of philosophy. Natures great torch. Plate's great scholler. Great Register of Natures secrets. Armes. Delicious armes, In whose white circle love writ all his charmes, Faire Cynthia wisht his armes might be her sphere, Grief makes her pale because she moves not there, Sweet fleshy prison. Whose sweet embraces might quicken death. Whiter than Juno's were sufiduing charmes. The ivory prison of her armes. Loves swathing bands. Happy bondage. Cupids shkles. Armes. Armour. Harness, habilaments, greaves, guyses, van-brasse, pouldron, coselet, gantlet, curasse, shield, helmet, sallet, target, burgane▪ urions, tates. Enclosed about With glittering walls of steele. Hous'd in steele, cas'd, box'd in armes, coated in mayle. Arrow. v. Swift. The feathered wood outruns the hunting eye, And cuts a passage through the yeelding skie, Whose sharpned point cleaves the divided aire, The bows swift messenger with an angry errand:
Artificial. That net of brasse which Vulcan did bestow About the guilty bed, could never show Such art.—Natures ape Here went beyond her copy in the shape; Where art and miracle draw equal breath, Others men wonder at, but this adore. VVhere art it self might go to schoole, And all her skill taught hence, to this referre. Asse. That slow dull creature, which doth learn far more By punishments than precepts. That beast which old Silenus doth bestride VVhen he amongst his Nimphs and Satyrs rides. Assent. VVith glad alowance gave his counsel eare, To give a yeelding obedient eare. Astonisht. v. Amazed. VVhose soul is gone upon some serious etrand, And left the corps in pawn till it come back, Amated, stupified. To stand like stags at gaze. Stand as with ghosts affrighted, The understandings extasie. Intranced soul. Astraea. VVhich, when the other goddesses were gone, Remained in the hated earth alone, The glittering Virgin of the Zodiack. Just Virgin goddesse. That bears the equal sword. Astronomer. Register of heaven, privie counsellour to the planets. A breathing almanack. The heavens notary. Star-cleark. Star-divine. That walks along the lofty stars. And backs the clouds sitting on Atlas crown. That stars prophtick language understand. That know aright The Gods and all the orbes, to whom for fight Of planets and the motions of each star. Not great Egyptian Memphis might compare, That wisely studious are To trace the motions of each star, How swift they travel, and how far.
That with their Jacobs staffe can walk to heaven. VVhose eyes dismount the highest spheare, That bores And threads the sphears with his quick piercing mind, He views their stations, walks from doore to doore. Surveyes as if he had design'd To make a purchase there, he sees their dances, Their full-eyed aspects and their secret glances. That search the courses of the rolling spheares. That audit of the stars have made, Have measured heaven, conceived how earths thick shade Eclypst the silver browes of Cynthia bright, And her browne shadow quencht her brothers light, The true Endymions that embrace above, Upon mount Latmos their imperial love, Great Queen of heaven, about whose bed for guard Millions of archers with gold shields do ward, True Atlasses, the pillars of the poles Empyreal pallace—that send Their spies to see what's done in every spheare. Keeping their state intelligences there. The hungry star-fed tribe, well skil'd in heavens Physiognomy. Talmud, Albumazer, and Erra Pater That know the heavens as if they had been there, And helpt each Angel turn about his spheare The earthly Godfathers of heavenly lights, And give a name to every fixed star. That to the heavens direct their curious eyes, And send their minds to walke the sparious skies, That walk by Cynthia's light and lift their eyes To view the ordered armies of the skies; The heavens they measure with imagin'd lines, And when the Northern Hemispheare declines New constellations in the south they find. Asswage. To calme, still, quiet, sing asleepe, to lullaby, slake, coole, compose, to give allay, pacifie. Atheist. v. Wicked. That knowes no God more mighty than his mischiefes; Whose wickednesse is grown to such an height, As makes the earth groane to support its weight;
That pursue Deeds after which no mischief can be new, To whom murthers are but resolute acts, and treasons matters of greater consequence, Doing such things as might the Devil shame, Which if in hell no other pains there were, Makes men fear hell, because they must be there▪ Replenisht villain. Abstract of all vice. Stigian quintessence, for whose sinful sake Schoolemen new tenements in hell must make; Whom neither law Of God or man can keepe in aw. Fearing that God he flouts at, and dreading that deity which he denies. Athens. The city nam'd by Pallas. Minerva's sacred city. The learned, noursery of Greece. Mopsopian, Gecropian University. Erecthaean towers. Pallas beloved city. Atlas. Whose brawny shoulders boulster up the stars. Where Titans panting steeds his chariot steepe, And bathe their fiery felocks in the deepe, Knocking his browes against heavens brazen doore, Whose lofty pillars tack Heaven to the earth. Which shrouds His airy head in hanging clouds. He that the noble burthen bears, And on his back supports the sphears. Attend. Attentive. To hear with such attention As if they heard the inquired oracle Pronouncing of thair fare. As if the words they heare Were not received, but grafted in the eare, And with a greedy eare, Devoured up his discourse. To hear with sucking ears. Eare was al their sence. To drink with thirsty ears. The soul climbes up into the eare. With double ravishment She hung uppon his melting lips attent.
With greedy ear she hung Upon his words dropt from his melting tongue, With due attention lent a chained eare. The soul dwelt in the ears. A melting eare, Prepared for soft attention To tye, chain, linke, lock the eares unto the tongue. Still silence did enlarge the eare For quick attention. The soul is planted in the ear. Every sense made hast to be all ear. The greedy ear clings to the speakers lips. Avarice. v. Covetousness. Augurs. That lightnings motions understand, Birds flight, and entrals op't. Who divine by sight Of slain beasts entrals, and the various flight Of birds. Aurora. v. Morning. The blushing goddesse which doth sway The dewie confines of the night and day, Who fom the glowing East displaies Her purple doores, and odoriferous bed VVith plenty of dew-dropping roses spread, VVhich as she in her lightsome chariot rides, Scatters the light from off her saff on wheeles Aged Tithonus beaureous wife Memnons fair mother. The Muse patronesse. Autumn. Pomona loads her lap with delicates, Winter begins to chide away the flowers. Smeard with crusht Lyaeus blood. The sober mean twixt youth and age, more staid And temperate, in summers wain, repaires His reverent temples sprinckled with gray haires; The evening of the year—when the thresht sheae Looseth its grain, and every tree its leaf; When birds do cease their notes And stately forrests 'on their yellow coates When Ceres golden locks are nearly shorne, And mellow fruit from burdned trees are torne;
VVhen little lads sit on a bank to shale Their ripned nuts pluckt in the woody vale. That pales the red blush of the summers face, Tearing the leaves the summers covering, Three moneths in weaving by the curious spring The laden boughes VVith swelling pride crown Autumnes smiling browes, The year in childbed. The teeming year big with her rich increase, Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime, Like widowed wombes after their Lords decease. VVhen yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang Upon those boughs that shake against the cold, The twilight of the yeare. Vertumnus sits and courts his lov'd Pomona, The cold Autumnal dewes are seene To cobweb every greene, The saplesse branches do'ffe their summer suits, And wean their winter fruits, VVhen stormy blasts enforce the quaking trees To wrap their trembling limbes in mossie freeze, Fair summers pride begins to fade away, And night 'encroach upon the houres of day, The time of declination and decay. The flailes upon the floore begins to groane Autumne uprears his aged head VVith timely apples chaind. The Lyons flaming main Ripens the fruit, and the full year susteins Her burthened powers. The Autumne with fair Ceres crownd, Now paid the sweaty plowmans greediest prayer, And by the fall disrob'd the gaudy ground Of all her summer ornaments and faire attire. VVhen droope the sweetest flowers, And rivers swoll'n with pride oreflow their banks, Poore growes the day of summers golden houres And voyd of sap stand Ida's Cedar ranks. The pleasant meadowes sadly lay In chill and cooling sweats, By rising fountains, or as they Feard winters wastful threats.
The clustered grapes swell till their skin Can scarce contein the wine barrelled within, The year is in her pride, And the grape full with wine purples her side, VVhen the clear aire keeps a divided seat Affording sometimes cold, and sometimes hear, VVhen an unseen decay, And slow consumption steals the leaves away VVhen every wind in fury beats his stroke, Against the ribs of the broad spreading oake. Awake. VVith silken wings soft sleep flew from his eyes, Light doth divorce the low and upper lids, The eyes resume their charge. The wakened sences had unlockt the eyes. VViping the drowsie slumbers from his eyes. B. abe. v. Infant. Bacchus. THe juycie God. The God of grapes. Nysaeus, Bacchus, Lyaeus, Bromius, Even, great Jacchus. Vide Sands Ovids Met. lib. 3. page 107. The twice born God. Father Eloleus. Thyon never shorne. Lenaeus planter of life-chearing vines. Nyctelius. The God that holds in aw The spotted lynxes which his chariot draw. The leavy God of Naxus. The dimpled son Of Semele, that crownd upon his tun Sits with his grapie chaplets, VVhose chariot is by savage Tyges drawn. The genial planter of the vine. The fire-born God. Bacchanals. v. Orgies. Bald. That bears a bowling alley on his head. Bald as a gourd, not an hair betwixt him and heaven. Whose head doth want its native ornament. Unshadowed heads, an unthatcht head. v. Haire.
Whose head is bare, Wearing or none, or else some borrowed haire. Bald as old time behind. In the winter of his age when his leaves fall. Bankes. The rivers hem, lips, ledges, shelves, brewards. The margents of the rolling brook. The winding borders. The mossie fringes of the flood. The rivers grassie fringed skirs. Shelving borders. The Chrystal currents flowry brinks. The embroydered margins of the flood. The painted margins of the silver brook, Where thousand yellow flowers at fishes look, That Flora us'd to sit upon Curling her fair locks in the liquid glasse, When she her gems and rich attire put on. Whose trees fringe round the waters brink, And with their thirsty roots her moysture dink. Banners. Streamers, ancients, ensignes, flags, pennons. The curled flags dance in the waving , And with their crispy streamings heaen on To the approaching fight. Banquet. v. Feast. Baptism. The sacred fount. The holy aer. Soul-purging water. The healthful stream. Heavenly dew. Base, v. Voluptuous. Wicked. One of strange and ill contrived desires. One of a narrow yet intemperate mind. A son of earth, enthralled to the sence. Lethargick, Slumbering soules. Lanke souls, that in no other thing delight, But what may please the sensual appetite, Who all things in the earth amends By being worse tha Bastard. The wretched pledges of the wanton bed. The lucklesse issue of dishonest wobes The upbraiding burthen of a shameless crime, Where lust Impostumes for a birth of bastardie.
Hevens Image coyn'd with a forbidden stamp That comes saucily into the world, before he is sent for. The lusty stealth of nature. The common issue of the earth by channel. Accursed issue of unlawful sheets, Though unable to speak, yet at his birth, Tells a plain story to his mothers shame. Bat. v. Evening. The mungril bird. The winged neuter, The leather-winged mouse that never flies Till the ree evening curtain up the Skis. Bath. Like to a Lilly, sunk into a glass, Like soft loose Venus, as they paint the lass Born in the Seas; Or like an Ivory image of a grace Neatly inclosed in a thin Chrystal case; The water bea by her hands, made lines in his face, and seemed to smile at such beating, and with twenty bubbles not to be content to have the picture of her face in large upon him; but he would in each of these bubbles set forth her miniature. Battell. v. Warre. Beard. A well-thatcht-face, that hairy argument of age Naures manly bounty. Uneffeminated chinne Mans prerogative. Beasts. The stubborn droves That haunt the deserts and the shady groves The wild Burgesses of the Forrests; Forrest Citizens. Fierce walkers of the Wilderness, Wild Forresters. Beauie. The eyes Idol, a damask skin, Loves common stratagem, Natures Epistle. Natures best Orthography Natures silent Rherorick, dumb commendation, Natures Italian hand, Loves dumb Orator, Loves lure, call, day-net, bait, Loves artillery, Better colourd dirt, The eyes Musick, Natures Idea, The light Which ages cloud  soon benight
The Fort, which cannot long hold out The battery of time. The load-stone of desire, Chief object of delighted sence. Pseasing tyranny. May-game of time and sickness. Youths proud livery. Freedomes golden-hook. The Rose mixt Lilly. Loves Engineer, Factour. Captivating look. The bait of bestial delight. The work of pleased nature. Sweet silent Rhetorick of perswading eyes, Dumb Eloquence of the face. Attractive load-stone, Still harmony, whose diapason lies Within a face; The priviledge of Nature Dumb comment. Beautifull. Fairer than the morn. Natures proud Master-peece, Whom all grow rivals for A thousand Cupids, shoots she from her eyes, Fair, as the dawning morn; The Mine, the Magizin, the Common-wealth of Beanty, The first and best original Of all fair copies. Whose radiant look striks every gazing eye. Stark blind, and keeps th' amaz'd beholder under The stupid tyranny of love and wonder. Whose eyes let out more light, than they take in Whose rich beauty lent Mintage to other beauties, for they went But for so much as they were like to her Elixar of all Beauty, Zeuxes, his labour might have sav'd, And made her stand for all that he did view, When Venus beauteous pourtraiture he drew Beauty and Vertue have no other sphear, Whose rare composure doth abstract the Story Of true perfection, modellizing forth The height of beauty—in whose face, Nature, and curious Art had done their best To summe that rare perfection, which transcends The power of strong belief. Narcissus change, sure Ovid quite mistook, He died not, looking in a Chrystall brook; But, as those which with emulation gaze, He pin'd to death by looking on this face, When he stood fishing by some ivers brim,
The fish would leap, more for a sight of him Than for the fly—The Eagle, highest bred, Was taking him once up for Ganymed. Naure by some device Had to her face transplanted Paradise, A beauty that might free A ravisher, and make adulterie No crime at all. Nature did wondering stand At er own work. Eclipsing all other objects. The wealth she wore about her seemd to hide, Not to adorn her native beauties pride; Though there bright Pearls from Erythrean shores. From all the Assyrian lakes, the wealthy store Of silver Ganges, and Hydapses shore, And chearfull Emralds gathered from the green Arabian rocks were in full splendour seen, Pale Onyx; Jaspers of a various die, And Diamonds darkned by her brighter eie, The Saphyes blew, by her more azure veins Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains. The blushing Rubies, seemd to loose their dye, When her more Ruby lips were moving by, It seem'd, so well became her all she wore, She had not rob'd at all the creatures store, But had been natures self, there to have showed What she on creatures could or had bestowed; And Jupiter would revel in her bower, Were he to spend another golden shower: Whose eyes dart glowing raies, Would thaw the frozen Russian to lust, And parch the Negro's hotter blood to dust. So the loose Queen of love did dress her eyes In the most taking flame, to winne the prize At Ida. The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes, Whose bright eyes rain influence. Oft have we viewd In one heaven many stars, but never yet In one star many heavens till now were met; A breathing Star, His orient cheeks and lips exceeding his, That leapt into the water for a kiss Of his own shadow, and despising many
Dyde, ere he could enjoy the love of any. Had wild Hyppolity this beauty seen Pierc't with his darts he had enamourd been, Nature wept when she saw her, as undone, And rob'd of all her treasure Aurora took him for her Cephalus Phoebe mistook him for Endymion Venus, for her Adonis, Each wandering eye inflam'd that lookt upon her; A beauty, in whose radiant eye Love sate enthron'd, and full of Majesty Sent forth such glorious eye-surprizing rayes That she was thought the wonder of her dayes, Repress those flames that furnace from thine eye They ravish with too bright a yranny The Diapason of all symmetry. Incarnate Angel. Mortall Venus Nature seald her the Charter at her birth Mirrour of heaven, the wonder of the earth, Beauty hath no Exchequer now but him, And proud of many lives upon his gains, And him she stores, to shew what wealth she had In dayes long since: Fairest peece of well formd earth. As if she swaid an Empire in her face, Nature her self, did her own self admire, As oft as she were pleased to attire Her in her native lustre, and confess Her dressing, was her chiefest comeliness, Where every limb takes like a face, One accent from whose lips the blood more warms, Than all Medea's Exorcismes, and charms; He that since nature her great works began, She made to be the mirrour of a man; That when she meant to form some matchless limb, Still for a pattern took some part fom him; And jealous of her cunning, brake the mold In his proportion done the best she could. If he discourse, his lips such accents break; As love turnd aire, breaths from him, as he speaks. Makes Jove invent a new disguise, In spight of Juno's jealousies;
Whose every part doth re-invite he cold decayed appetite; hich shall be nurse, as Juno swears, o the next Cupid that she bear. The onely scope f mens affections, and their envied hope. If ever jewels had cause to be proud, it was with e wearing of them. hey took the vaile of which her face had hid, t which the very aire seemd to grow proud, s when the Sun new breaks out of a Cloud To shine with greater fulgence: Such the censorious Cynink might affect, Though he had promised abstinence, That beas the light about her, and strikes dead With flashes of her eye, Beautie, which might an Angels envie move Enough for all the exe; And make them proud to know 'tis part of hers, Whose fee print the farewell of all beauty; Beauty to teach beholders chastity. On others, Painters in their pictures bestow beauty; Her beauty bestowed skill on the Painter, The fair Embassadour of a fairer mind. . All that beheld her (and all that could, did behold her) made heir eyes quick messengers to their minds, to let them know they had seen the uttermost that could be seen, and despair of ever meet∣ing a fairer object. All eyes degenerate from their creation That do not honour and adore her beauty, She apparrel'd her apparrel. Modell of Heaven, triumph of Nature, life of Beauty. f there be any beauty left in others, it is in their Eyes, to whom her presence hath imparted it: Sometimes mine eyes would lay themselves open To receive all the darts she could throw; Sometimes close up with admiration, As if with a contrary fancy, they would preserve The riches of that sight they had gotten; Or cast my lids, as curtains over that image of beauty, Her presence ad printed in them. Beauty in which by all right, all hearts and eyes hould be inherited,
Which in a definite compass, sets forth infinite beautie. Dead beauties heir, Each night she impoverisheth her clothes, To enrich her bed, which might well scorn the shrine Of Venus, whose clothes proud to be worn by her Eclypse a sun of beauty. Beauty too much for patient ight Whose face carried such a lightning, As none could look on, nor would look off. Diana apparelld in the garments of Venus, Making each beholding eye A blinded mole, or else a burning flye. Beautie which pictured the curious eye, would repeat An imaginary rapture of some transported Conceit, ayming at in impossibility; Dumb eloquence commanding without authority, And perswading without speaking, Working unwitting effects of wonder. The red and white rose quarterd in her face. A face that bears a wanton modesty, and inticing Soberness. Beauty, not to be matcht, but by the fairness Of her mind. Where Nature doth with infinite agree The miracle of flesh and blood, Able to make Hercules to turn the spit, and Cleave his club to make the fire; The withered Hermit, fourscore winters worn, Might shake off fifty looking in her eye. Such beautie in her face, As once the daughter of Agenor had, That made great Jove humble him to her hand, When on is knees he kist the Cretan strand Fram'd in the prodigality of nature, Where every God did seem to set his seal, To give the full assurance of a beauty Beggering all description, Takes prisoner the wild motions of the eye A body so harmoniously composed And so divine a creature As nature seemd to have disclosed All her skill in her feature;
Whose form might call The world to warrs, and make it hazard all is valour for her beauty. The worlds ambition, no man deiring further Happiness. Beauty might from him copies take. Which might kindle youthful flames, In men of fourescore, and give fire Again, to their decayed desire Envy bursts, if she espies her, Venus his perfection findeth, And no more Adonis mindeth; Jupiter would court her did he know. To find a shape might tempt such chastity. A look to move The heart of cold Diogenes to love Her eye was such, whose every glance did show, To kindle flames upon the hills of snow, And by her powerfull piercings could imprint Or sparkle fire into an heart of flint. Quintessence of beauty—whose beauty might Attract all eyes, and center humane sight, Pandora without fiction, causing transcendent hea, And working such insinuaring fire; As stole into each reverend Sie When beauteous Hellen, show'd her cheeks Unto the Army of the Greeks. Beauty too rich to use, Whose outside had enough to satisfie The expectation of a curious eye. Self-lov'd Narcissus, in the mirrour Of her fair eyes doth see his errour, The Heliotrope which did pursue, Th' adored Sun converts to you Their tops, the Paphian myrtles move Saluting you the queen of love; The Phaenix from the glowing East, With sweets, here builds her tombe and nest: Another Phaenix seen she dies, Burnt into ashes by your eyes, She comes in rich array, Richer in beauty, so they use to say,
The stately Naides and Dryads so In Sylvan shades—So The naked Cupids lively painted show; But least their habits some distinction make A quiver give, or his from Cupid take The ambient aire's proud to embrace her lims, She might have Necter fill'd in Hebes stead, And he supli'de th' Idaean Ganymed His visage deckt With rofie rayes of youth and sweet aspect, So lookt Aeneas, from the breaking cloud deckt by his mother, in that dusky shroud; So Helen lookt, when on the Scaean towers, She did inflame the aged Councellours; Whilest Paris, and her Menelaus fight, And weary fetch new courage from her ight Whose beauty feasts the amorous eye. So beautified for form exact, That nature to a miracle was rackt In her perfection blaz'd with'th' eyes of men That made of all the countries heart a chain And drew them suitors to her, All the beauties of the Spring, Are but her oyles, Whose eyes wound there where Cupids shafts do miss So fair, and so divine a feature. That envies self could not but dote upon her, Heaven could not chuse but be enamourd on her When she was born, nature in sport began To learn the cunning of an Artizan. And did Vermillion with a white compose To mock her self, and paint a damask rose; But scorning Nature unto Art should seek, She spilt her coulours on this maydens cheeks; Whose lilly white, inshaded with the rose Had that man seen that sung th' Aeneidos Dido, had in oblivion, slept and she Given his Muse her best eternitie, Had brave Atrides who did erst employ His force to mixe his dead with those of Troy, Been proferd for a truce, her feigned peace Helen had staid, and that had gone to Greece.
Sweetnesse truth and every grace Which time and use are wont to teach, The eye may in a moment reach, And read distinctly in her face. whose chearful ray, Can turne the saddest night to day. More fair than she that fill'd the cup To the great thunderer, wounding with her eyes More hearts than all the troops of deities. As fair and lovely as a goddess, she If such, as hers a goddess beauty be, Had Venus past that way and seen him ly, She would have sworn, had she not seen him dead, It her Adonis were, or if there was The transmigration of Pythagoras, Of soules; for then certain her lost loves spirit, A faier body never could inherit. Fairr far Than he whose chastity made him a star, Hypolitus, To whom the Queen of love Serv'd for a foyle, and Cupid could no other Than fly to her mistaken for his mother, Whose body all the graces hath ingrost. Nature made And gave the damask rose its pleasant grace, That men might liken somewhat to her face, ove therefore blinded Cupid, lest that he Should see her, and so love mortality; The fairest creature ever eye Behld, or yet put on mortality The maiden lillies at her lovely sight Waxpale with envy, and from thence grew white, Aurora blusht at such a sight unknown, To see those cheeks were redder than her own. Videat plu∣ra cui libet Brownes Pastorals. 1 lib. §. 4. 2 lib. §. 1. Not the bright shield of Thetis son, For which such stern debate did rise, That the great Ajax Telamon Refus'd to live without the prize. Those Achive powers did more engage, Than she the gallants of our age.
Some other Nimphs with colours faint And pencil slow may Cupid paint, She hath a stamp and paints the boy; Can with a single look inslame The coldest breast, the rudest tame. v. Face Eyes. &c. Bees. Honey merchants, rraffickers for honey. Harmeless theeves. Honey flies▪ Hyblean Citizens. The courtiers of the waxen pallace. The winged commonwealth. Buzzing Armies. Sweeping their honey from perfumed flowres Which in the prime of May, By sunshine through the slowry meadowes stray, When they produce their young, or store their hive With liquid honey, or their cabins stive With pleasant Nectar, when they take the loads Which others bring, or chase from their aboads The lazy drone. The busie buzzing swarmes. Hot growes the waxie work, and sweet their smells From their mellfluous, odoriferous cells. Hony people. The busie buzzers with the Cypress wings. That fly ore painted fields with nimble wing, Deflowring the fresh virgins of the spring, That on mount Hybla ply their husbandry. The murmuring oopes within their waxen homes, Some with laden thighes Take charge to beare their waxi butthens home Others receive the wellcome load, and some Dispose the wax, others the plot contrive, Some build the curious combe, some guard the hive Like armed seninels, others distren The puret honey from the wax, some train, And discipline the young, whilst others drive The sluggish drones from their deserved hive. Thus in the commonwealth untaught by art, Each winged burger acts his busie part. The thrifty people that exact and earn Their sweet provision, and with laden thighes Bear home their weary burthens. Who th'Aristaean busie swarmes have seene On Hybla's top, whether with lancelets keen, Charging the drones which over near their home,
Come humming out to rob their fragrant combe, Whether collecting their delicious dew, From various thyme and other flowers not few Whether extending in rare symmetry With wondrous art their waxen canopy, And arching even, so many thousand cells, Whether conducting their too full supplies, Elsewhere to plant their goodly colonies. Creatures that by a rule in nature teach The act of order to a peopled kingdome Where some like Magistrates correct at home, Other like merchants venter trade abroad, Others like souldiers armed in their stings Make booty on the summers velvet buds, Which pillage they with merry march bring home To the tent royal of heir Emperour, Who buied in his majesties surveyes. The singing masons building roofes of gold. The civil citizens kneading up the honey. The poor mechanick porters crowding in Their heavie burthens at the narrow gae. The sad-eyed justice with his surly humme, Delivering ore to executioners. The lazie yawning drone. So painful bees with forward gladnesse strive To joyne themselves in throngs before the hive. And with obedience till that houre attend, When their commander shall his watch-word send, Then to the winds their tender sailes they yeeld, Distresse the flowers, depopulate the fields. Bed. Loves Altar. The voluntary grave. The dear repose for lims with travel tired. Pallet, couch. Warmer grave. Beggar, Whose hourly wants imploe Each meals relief, trudging from dore. That struggle with their strong necssities. And with afflicted language pity crave, That hear no dialect from churlish lips, But newes of beadles and their torturing whips. That wage against th'emnities of the aire.
Clad in windowed rags, pelting against the storme. v. Poore. Beginning. Blooming, dawning, infant, morning, portal, threshold, cradle, infancy, bud, bloome, blade, Gam-ut, Alphabet, Elements, youth, nonage, pupillage, minority, childhood, porch, front, entry, com∣mencement. Belides. The cursed daughters of fierce Danaus. Belus damn'd neeces, whose kinsmens blood accuse VVho ever draw the water, which they loose Those youthful sisters who in vain Still water poure into the fatal tun, Yet that as empty, as when they begun. Belerophon. He that the flame-breathing Chymera slew. He that the Muses winged horse bestrid. He that first bridled horse, And taught th'untamed beast an ordered course. The bearer of the fatal letters. Bellona. v. Pallas. To whom no sacrifice doth stand for good, Not mingled with the sacrificers blood. Mars grim-lookt sister. Jov's blew-eyed daughter. VVars triumphant maid. Eelly. Natures kitchen. Natures cook-shop. Insatiae beggar. Importuning craver. Birds. The aires nimble winged guests. Natures choristers, minstrels, minstrelsie. The summers waits. VVinged minstrels. Musitians. Sweet heralds of the spring. The winged conforts. The forrest Quire. The airy quire. Artless songsters. The free inhabitants of the pliant aire. The chirping choristers. The aires feathered parishioners. The quirisrs of May. The denizons of aire. The slitting pinionists of aire. The Sylvan quite. The feathered people of the skie. The feathered quiristers which on their spraies Chant to the mery spring, and wooe the flood,
Or with their musick court the sullen wood. Feathered Musitians of the spring. The airy people That with wild musick burthen every bough, And in the evening hush asleep the day. The aires Musitians sing And carol to the flowry spring. VVild inhabitants of the aire. The winged travellers that trace the skie. That with their chirping lullaby the day. That in their leavie cages sing A welcome to th'approaching spring. The wing'd Musitians that awake the morne That with their horny haut boyes musick make. The warbling chanters of the wood. VVinged crew, train, troope, chattering flocks. The airy passengers. The woods wild burgesses. The living ships with feathered sailes. Sylvanus winged songsters. The chirping consorts of the aire. The citizens of path-lesse woods. Bitter. As the gray wormwood. Hemlock, Gall, Hellbore. As coloquintida, or aspicks tongues. Black. Sable, ebon, jety, gloomy, dusky, pitchy, sooty, . Black as the sooty mcore or negro jet, As nights black mantle, as a starless night. Black as the sullen night, Or consciences where guilt and horrour dwell As Acheron, and the dark streams of hell. Black as Illytian pitch. Cover'd with a vaile of jet: Blew. Blew as the freezing skie, Or the bright colour in Bellona's eye. Azure. Blind. Rational moles, to whom even day is night, VVanting the common benefit of light; VVhose eyes ae muffled in eternal night. Beauties unfitting judge. To whom colours are uselesse. That sees but by his ear. Casting up his blind eye. to the sun, as if he would hunt for light. Blind as the beetle. Like Polypheme,
That makes no difference twixt the Sun and Stars, But by the heat. Midday groper. Blood. Crimson, flood, purple, deluge, blushing, ruby, nimph, Purple, crimson-sweat, streams, brooks, dew, With damak eyes, the ruby blood doth peep And ran in branches through het a zure veins, The ruby nimph within the crimson brooks Dissolved rubies, liquid coral. Vermillion spring, The red-sea of the lesser world, active torrent. Blush. The Virgin-die, the rosie-blush; ensign of modesty; And in her blushes Lies modesty, as in a bed of Coral; So blusht Calisto, and the Virgin crew, When in the fount Joves rape on her they knew. So blusht Diana, when Actaeon saw Her naked in the fount, to dy the cheeks in blushes. Such is the colour which the Clouds adorn, Shot by the Sun-beams, or the rosie-morn; Venus so blusht when she was found By all the gods in bed with Mars, and bound In Vulcans net. So apples shew upon the sunny side, So Ivory with rich Vermillion dide, So pure a red, the silver-moon doth stain, Then when the beaten brass do sound in vain Even so the purple morning paints the skies, Her face flsht with imbosomed flames. The rosie dye that decks the morns uprise Flusht in her face. Her vertuous blood. Struck with respective shame. So looks the Rose, When she her taintless beauty doth disclose, She lookt out And all the Air, she purpled round about. Clad all in Crimson, shame sits in her cheeks, Her cheeks struck with a rosie red, As setting Suns do give unto the west When morning tempests are preigured, Vermillion, signal in a guilty chek Warm blood upon the guilty cheek, Her cheeks a deaper scarlet were
Than the chaste mornings blush, Lifes blood, which from the heart is sent In beauteous field, pitcheth hie crimsome Tent In lovely sanguine suits, the Lilly cheek, Whilest it but for a resting place doh seek And changing oftentimes with sweet delight, Converts the white to red, the red to white, The lovely blush, the paleness doth distain; The paleness makes the bush more fair again. Have ye beheld when fresh Aurora's eye Sends forth her early bms, and by and by Withdrawes the glory of her face, and shrowds Her cheeks behind a ruddy mask of clouds, Such were her looks. Have you beheld when Titans lustful head Hath newly div'd into his sea-green bed With Thetis, how the bashful Horizon Enforc'd to see, what should be seen by none, Looks red for shame, and blusheth to discover, Th' incestuous pleasures of the heaven-born lover, A sweet Vermillion tincture staind The brides fair cheeks, the more that she restraind Her blush, the more her disobedient blood, Did over-flow, as if a second flood Had meant to rise, and for a little space, To drown that world of beauty, in her face; The ruby flames do flush Into their faces, with a modest blush, Cheeks with kindly clarret spread Aurora like, new out of bed. O like the fresh Queen-apples side, Blshing at sight of Phoebus pride, Her cheeks in red letters writ more, Then her tongue could speak. The modest evidence of inward vertue, A blush, modest as morning, when she coldly eyes, The youthful Phaebus. A scarlet blush, her guilty cheeks arraid, Such as a Rose mixt with a Lilly breeds Or when the Moon travels with charmed steeds, Or such wherewith, lest years should turn the die, Arachne stains, Assyrian Ivoy.
Body. The lay part of the man, cloud, shroud, robe of flesh, obe of clay, walls of better clay, fleshie cloud, fleshe shroud, fair prison of the soul, house of mooving clay. The fair shrine of a fairer saint. The fleshy vaile, case. The souls sheath. The fleshie lanthorne of a light divine. The souls clothes, garments, apparrel. The souls moving inne, house, closet, cloyster, chamber, study. Living charnel house. Sack of bones, gown of clay. The souls casket temple, shrine, boxe, case, pallace, shell, chest, cos∣fin, dark-lantorne. The living tombe. The souls dark prison. A province packt up in two yards of skin, Frail mansion of distempered clay. Boxe of flesh, clay. Frail mansion of mortalty. The clayie tenement. The soules ivory case. Stirring earth. The clay lodging of the soul. The souls huske. The souls uneasie clothing. The clothes of flesh and blood. Better compacted dust. The fleshie tabernacle. The narrow mansion of the soul. Walls, whose laths are plaistered ore with flesh and blood. Better motar. Natures first robe of home spun cloth. Bold. v. Impudent. Bold as that earth-born race, That bid Jove battel, and besieg'd the gods. Such boldnesse as those Gyants once possst. VVhen with the thunderer they did contest, As Phaeton th'audacious charioter. A brow where never came The least impresse of modesty or shame. Undaunted minds that know not how to fear. Books. Impartial tutors, dumb schollers, silent schoole masters, mute instructers, treasurers of knowledge. A part of mans prerogative, In formal inke they thoughts and voices hold, That we to them our solitude may give, And make time present travel, that of old, Our life ame pieceth larger at the end, And books it farther backward doth extend.
Boreas. v. Wind. rithia's love, Orithya's lustering husband. ongealing snow, beating the earth with hail, e thundering skies with his encounters rock, hich through the crannies of the earth doth fle, nd makes the ghosts there tremble. Whose airy motion strikes he earth with blasts, and makes the Ocean roar: rayling his dusky mantle on the floor, he earths besome, the earths windy barber. Born. y life I owe to—man, earth, &c. When his paind mother freed his root of man, oon as the womb entrusts him on the earth; When the womb unlades her shipping, The womb delivered of her fraight, Where I first breathed Air, and saw the light Where first I did salute the wold. To Bow. To congie, cringe, curtsie. Bracelets. Cpids swahing-bands which seen, enus then scornd her Cestos, and did swear This best became the Queen of Love to wear; The superstitious Saint, would court her shrine With prayers devouter, and far more divine, And would embolden them to challenge bliss, Were but her numbering beads once strung on this, Which by a private charm doth tie As well the heart, as strike the wondering eye. Braggadochio. v. Coward. Of war, that nere knew more Than the fine scabbard, and scarfe he wore; He talks of counter-scarfs, and asomates, Of parapets, courtneyes, and pallisadoes Of flanks, of ravelings, Gabions he pratks, And of false baits, of sallies and scaladoes; One that can take towns at table, and make forraign designs be∣tween his bed curtains, whose tongue is his best weapon. That talks of nothing but stoccadoes, and circumvallations, and studies hard words in other countries, to fright poor folks with them at home;
That hath got a dozen of dangerous words, How he might hurt his enemy if he durst; That brag to Stars, And tell to bushes, what they do in wars. Brain. The source of sence and motion, the sinews seed-plot, The seminary of the nerves, the souls register, The souls day-book, bed-chamber, closet The Well of sence, from whence Those sinewy strings, that do our bodies tie, Are ravel'd ou, and fast there by one end, Fountain of nerves, reasons cool seat The privy councel to the heart, The understandings rhrone. Breasts. Those swelling mounts of softer Ivory, The Ile of Cyprus, twixt two snowy hills; The snowy mountains, Which when loves warm sun doth thaw, Doth resolve in Nectar fountain, Twixt which mountains, lies a valley, Like Joves heavenly milking alley; Loves tents, pavillion. Paphos, Two little sphears Wherein such azure lines in view appear, Which were they obvious unto every eye, All liberal Arts would turn Astronomy, That solid snow, warmer Alps, Cupids nest, cradle, The valleys of desire, two milky ountains, That spring beneath two snowy mountains The liquid Ivory balls, two equal swelling sisters, Loves, Elysium. Tempe. Transplanted Paradise, Hillocks, between which thousand Cupids lie, Where Cytherea's doves, might billing sit While men and gods with envie look on i, Breasts softer far than tuts of unwrought silk; Soft breasts, where grow, Warm violets upon a bank of snow Twins of miracle, snowy breasts Whiter than new fallen flakes, the spicy nests And pillows from loves drowsie temples rest Loves delicious paradise. The Phaenix nest The snowy Hybla's, the ivory hills,
oves Hespeides, soft ivory, warm, snow. ottels of melted Manna. Venus Alpes, he box where sweets compacted lie, he hives of sweetness, yielding marble, he curious apples of her snowy brests, herein a Paradise of pleasure rests Whire silken pillowes, where ove sits in soft delights hat fleshy Acidalia, Cyprus, Paphos he chest of softer Ivory, here Violet veins in curious branches flow here Venus swans and milky doves are set pon the swelling mounts of driven snow, here love whilest he to sport himself doth get ath lost his course, nor finds which way to go, nclosed in a Labyrinth Where sweet delicious love ayes down the quiver, that he once did bear ince he that blessed Paradise did prove, He leaves his mothers lap to sport him there White Satten cabinets of love. Where Venus swans have built their nest The panting balls of snnw, Venus, springs, Venus Albion The happy valley, vale of Lillies, bower of bliss, There where the beauteous region doth divide nto two milky wayes; Loves swelling Apennine The spicy grove of Eglantine, Those sweetly rising hills, those mountains Hil'd with snow, where milky fountains Sugard sweets as syrrup berries, Must one day run, through pipes of cherries. Those downy mounts of never melting snow, The Lily mountains where dwells eternal spring Breasts more white Then their own milk. Eryx and Cytheron Loves promontories. Loves delicious bower, That pretty double hill Not the fairest Larda's swan, Nor the sleek est Mable, can Be so smooth, or white in show, As those Lillies, and that snow Delicious apples. The lively clusters of her brests.
Of Venus babe the wanton nest. Like pommels round of marble clear, Where azure veins well mixt appear With dearest tops of Porphytie, Betwixt which two a way doth lie; A way more worthy beauties fame, Than that which bears the milkie name, That leads into the joyous field, Which doth unspotted Lillies yield; But Lillies such, whose native smell All Indian odours doth excel. The Ivory paved way, Between two Ida's to the Elysian plain. Breath sweet. v. Sweet smelling. Comes stealingly out, as if it seemd loth to come forth from so delicious a mansion, but that it hoped to be drawn in again to that well closed Paradise. Which seem'd to purge the Aire of pestilence; The Aire respires the pure Elisian sweets, In which she breaths. Airie amber Making even Sryx breath balm, and Phlegethon, Exhale perfumes of Musk and Cynamon; And could she love the damned, might expell, The stench of Tartar, and make heaven in hell. Breath-stinking. v. Stinking. But for her breath, (Spectators come not igh) It layes about. God bless he company, The man in the Beares-skin, baited to death, Would choose the dogs much rather than her breath One kiss, and eighteen words of her alone, Puts down the Spanish Inquisition; Thrice blessed we (quoth ) when I think on The former dayes of Persecution; For were it free to kill this griesly elf, Would Martyrs make, in compass of her self, And were she not prevented by our prayer, By this time, she corrupted had the Air; Would she use a medicine for her teeth, She were the better to speak to in the morning. Bright. v. Shining. Brighter than the Moon, Then when sh spreads her Beams, and fills her Orb;
s when the Sun darts through his golden hair is gaudy beams, into the lightsome Aire, More faire Phoebus nere Chariots through the guilded Aire, And though the Sun did hold his light away, You might behold this gem by its own day, Bright as the deathless gods. Bright as the Sun doth rise, after the night He calls ' account, the Moon for all the light She ever borrowed, and hath all repaid, As Sol obscur'd in shrouds Of exhalations breaks through vanquisht clouds, As when the Sun subduing by his raies The muffling clouds, his golden brow displayes, So shone Aeneas golden tree, As makes a day of night. Bright as that star that last forsakes the skies That bears a light able to check the dark More bright Than is the starry senate of the night Brighter than the day Or new raisd Phoebus in his morning-ray The Sun holds down his head for shame, Dead with Eclipses, this when we but name, Shining as fair As Cynthia burnisht in her brothers hair, As may challenge the brightest day, the clearest Diamond. Brook. v. Spring. River. Brow. v. Fore-head. A brow where love may banquet royally, Where beauty rides in triumph Smoother than polisht marble, A front like Jove, that bank, that mount of Ivory, That Ivory plain, that comely field of snow. Building. v. astle. v. High. An Aedifice to outwrastle time, Those sports for ruine, and times bartery. The structure in brave beauty strove With what the height of fancy could express, v. Ovid. 2 Metam. v. Lucan. lib. 10. Or any pens most graceful happiness Describe aright. Like the Pallace of the Sun, Like that wherein Her Caesar Cleopatra entertaind,
When from Pharsalia, he in Aegypt gain'd A second victory, All showd the builders, cravd the seer's care Th'amazed beholders wondering eyes, Were taken captive at the sight. The Camfred pillars, plinths, and antick bosses, Medals, ascents, statues, and strange Colosses Which buss the clouds, kiss their own feet at last Buried in their own dust. And nod their drowsie heads unto the ground, Those lasting monuments, Where Mars with Venus dwells, Beutie with strength. Burden. Typhon bears not a greater load Who under all Trinacria's weight doth groane, Ovid. 5. Metam. Nor Hercules, when he did Atlas ease. A lighter burden makes old Atlas shrink His pressed shoulders That makes the earth grone to support its weight A load Liburnian porters could not bear, Such once Typhaeus bore when as he lay Under the weight of all Trinacria His burly legs set in the massie stocks, Of the great high-browd Lilybaean rocks. To bury. Whose bones Are raked up in a cold heap of stone. To tombe a corse with solemn obsequies, To lay them where they must Measure their cold proportion in the dust To make them lie In the hard loding of mortalitie, To bring them to their latest home, To lay them in their silent monument, That quiet closet of content Rak't up in deaths cold embers; To lay The liveless body in a bed of clay, Laid in his sable chest. To burn. v. Fire. To wrap in flames
The flames rear up their curled grymids To make to sink in flames, Spit forth their flame, like the Sicilian hill. Busie. By pressing actions call'd away, In debt to business. As busie as the industrious Bee Prest with occasions importunitie. O. Gacus. THe fear and shame of the Aventine wood Mulcibers thievish son, who stole away The beasts, which with their lowing him betray, The fire-breathing thief, that with the Aire Blcht from his mouth, burnt up the fruitful fields, Whose filthy face was in so black a plight, Sols radiance could never give it light; Fresh murthers still lay reeking on his floore, And heads of murtherd men besmeard in goare v. Virgil Aeneiad. 8. Vulcans great son, whom stout Alcides hands Slew, and squetzd out his fiery eyes. Cain. v. Cruel. Abel. The first that did embrue His hands in blood, and with one murther slew The fourth part of the world. He that gave Death his first handsel. He that the the first Martyr made. Calm. When not a wrinckle seen on Thetis face, And so much breath as with a gentle gaile, May cause an easie swelling of the saile Joves eg-born issue smile upon the flood; And with their milder aspect do appear, To be a warrant from all future fear Smooth as a Ladies glass, or what shines there, The Sea was now. As when the Alcyon harcheth on the sand
Neptune his trident layes aside, And Triton his loud soundng shell inspires, Giving the waves a signal to retire, The smoother waves glide slowly. Calmer far Than in their sleeps forgiven hermits are. The Halcion sits upon her floating nest Seven winter daies with peaceful calme possest, Then safely saile, then Aeolus incaves The justling winds, and smoothes the stooping waves. The drowsie winds do sleepe. All the sea prostrate in soft slumbers slept, A calme so gentle that no aire Breaths strong enough to stir a virgins haire. The courteous sea Did smooth his wrinkled brow, the winds did sleepe, And only whispered musick to the deep. VVhen seas and winds are silenc'd by a calme The seas flat face now all becalmed lies, Like standing pooles, no waves or billowes rise. The bridled sea stands, and observrs no more Her antient course, she had forgot to roare, No tides flow to and fro, nor seemes the sun To dance upon the waters motion, No winds then wrastled. Her waves the tired main, By the winds leave compos'd and smooth'd again. The heavens and seas put on their robes Of setled motions. VVhen Triton drives his blew steedes re the seas. Calme winds have smooth'd the seas rough brow. The waves were all at peace. The flagging mainsail flapt against her yard, The uselesse compasse and the idle card VVere both neglected upon every side, The gamesome Porpoyse tumbled on the tide, Grim Neptune wip'd his foamy mouth, Held his tridented Mce upon the south. The whispering winds do tell their tale In such a breath as may but fill a saile. No winds but such as rock the waves asleepe. The smooth ac'd Keptune with his gladder smiles
Visits the banks of his beloved Iss, The winds retire and sink into their sea, And sea-green Triton sounds a shrill retreat. When the ships glide upon the sleeping wave, The smiling Nimphes dance upon the rising wave, The wind courts the sails. The sea Wears browes as smooth as virgins be, Tempting the Marchant to invade his face. The winds were like a servant waiting on them, So just that they might fill the sailes as they listed. Old Nerees on his Dolphin rides, Presenting bridles to direct the tides. No wind rebells. The aire was calme, and on the level brine, Slick Panope with all her sisters plaid, As still as midnight were the sullen waves, And Neptunes silver-ever-shaking brest, As smooth as when the Halcion builds her nest, None other wrinkles on his face were seene Than on a fertile mead or sportive greene, Where never plow share ript his mothers wombe, To give an aged seed a living tombe. The winds with wonder whist Sweetly the waters kist, Whispering new joyes to the mild Ocean, Who now hath quite forgot to rave, Whilst birds of calme sit brooding on the charmed wave. Nor blinded Mole the batning earth ere stird, Nor boyes made pitfals for the hungry bird. The whistling reeds upon the waters side Shot up their sharp heads in a stately pide, And not a binding Osier bowd his head, But on his root him bravely carried, No dandling leaf plaid with the subtile aire, So smooth the Sea was, and the skie so faire. Cameleon. Those foodlesse creatures fed by aire alone, Which every colour that they touch put on. Cancer. The spreading cancer scorning helplesse art, Creeps from the infected to the sounder part.
Candles. On guilded yards light-bearing cressets hung, Which sullen night subdue with flaring beams, Domestick stars. Tallow stars. In golden lampes the lights are placed round, And make a forced day the night confound. The house stars. The candle sleepy grew and winkt. Care. Careful. Swarmes of perplexing care buzze in his brain. A studious care boyld in his zealous mind. The theefe of youth and beauty, tempest of the soul. Perplexing and enaging cares That without years can snow down silver haires. The Chaos of the mind, the noyse, the tumult of the thoughts, Tempest of the troubled mind. Unquiet thoughts. The journey of the head. Millions of cares Beats on the anvile of my poor weak head. My heart's an anvile hammerd by my thoughts. My head's a crazie hive for swarmes of thoughts Which have more sting than honey. Care seeks out wrinkled browes and hollow eyes, And builds himself caves to abide in them, Swarmes of buzzing cares hive in his head. Carrier. A man unlearned and yet a man of letters. His own hackney man, letting himself out to travel as well as his horses. The ordinary Embassadour betwixt friend and friend. A great afflcter of high wayes. To Cary away violently. To traile, hale, drag, hurry. To hurry with them like the spreading flood. Rpt as a ship upon the high wrought flood. By savage tempests chac't, which in despaire The Pilot leaveth to the Gods and praier, As when by Ganges flood, A Tyger draggs a fawne through silent woods. Castle. v. Building. Safe for defence, And sweetly wanton with magnificence. With all the cost and cunning beautifide That adds to state, where nothing wants but pride, Castor and Pollux. Joves egge-borne isue.
Leda's twin sons. Tyndarian brothers. The Amyclaean youths. The glistering brothers. Helens fair brothers, whome mariners invoke, When the victorious waves their ships have broke, The famous Argonautes. Caucasus. The Sythians snowie mountains on whose top Prometheus growing liver feeds the Crop Of Joves great bird. Inhospitable rock Whose craggie sides have oft endur'd the shock Of the fierce north. Which with lesse distance looks at heaven by far, And with more large proportion shewes the stars. Cave. Under the hollow hanging of this hill There was a cave cut out by natures skill, Or else it seemd the mount did ope his brest, That all might see what thoughts he there possest, Whose gloomy entrance was environd round With thick set trees, &c. In which no chearing light At all ere peep'd but sad and driery night, A squallid filth and moldinesse had made, From whence exhaled stenches did invade The upper aire,—There's bred by dreary night. Pale moldy filth, and darknesse sad, no light. But light by Magick made ere shined there A deep black cave low in the earth is found, Whose duskic entrance like pase Morpheus cell, With strange Meanders windeth under ground, Where sooty darknesse evermore doth dwell. With torches now attempting the sad cave, Which at their entrance seemeth in a fright At the reflexion, that the brightnesse gave, As till that time it never saw the light. Centaures. Wretched Ixions shaggie-footed race. The cloud born issue. Which first bestrid the horse. Cerberus. That scoulding cur who barking shakes About his tripple browes Medusa's snakes. The dreadful dog of hell. The viper curled dog. The tripple headed cut
that shakes His dreadful main curled with hissing snakes. His dreful head With hundred snakes encompssed. And noysome breath, whilst bloody drops Flow from his tripple tongued chaps. Grim porter of the Stygian hall. Ceres. The yellow goddesse. The gold haird mother of life-strengthening seed. The fair browd Queen that shakes her golden haires. And makes the fields to wave their golden ears. The grain-rich goddesse. The sheavie Queen, Who first instructed duller mortals how To make earths surface weare a furrowed brow, As if she frownd on them, and storm'd to feele Her bowels gashed by the ripping steele. Who causeth Aetna from her jawes expire Thick vapours lin'd with dust and wrapt in fire▪ Sad mother of fair Poserpine. The Elusinian Queen, that clothes the fields with grain, Whose yearly feast Grave matrons in long linnen stoles invest With sacred undivulged rites do, keepe, Offering garlands of their first ripe corne Forbidden Venus for nine nights forborne. And touch of man. Certain. Grown to a certainty, unto assurance grown Certain as the unchanged edicts of fate, As certain as the stroke of death, v. Destiny. Or the last judgment day. Changeable. Begot by Proteus on a Cameleon. Bgot in the change of the moon. Engendered by the wind and weather-cock. A Protus that can take What shape he please and in an instant make Hmslf to any thing, be that or this, By voluntary Metomorphosis. As Vertumnus. Waxing and waining an hundred times in a minute, As the mother of Talegonus.
Such Metra daughter to the hungry king, More unconstant than the giddy wave, As pliant wax still new impressions takes, Whose resolutions aire, So loose and easie that a ruffling wind Can blow away. More than Proteus or the subtile race Of Polypus, who roving, to rob more Transforme them hourely to the wavie shore; whose minds In various change strive to outvie the winds, That tread on globes and circles, The apes of fortune that desire to be Resolved on as ickle wheels as she. The planets at their birth which rulers were, Were all irregular, Whose mids change oftner than the Greek could dream. That made the Meempsychos'd soul his theam The tide of minds. I wonder his soul finds not some way to kill his body, to which it hath been so long united. Begot when the moon was in conjuction, and all the other panets drunk at a morris dance. A skittsh mind, as if their souls were made of changeable taffaty. Their mind is alwayes like the moon in her last quarter, ever upon the change. That may contend for varying shapes With the blew Proteus, or the horned flood. Chaos. v. Confused. That undigested lump, and barren load, Where jarring seeds of things ill-joyn'd aboad. v. Ovid. 1. Meam. The confused, jumble, medley. The worlds Embyon. The creatures noursery. The mingled lump of things. Natures gallimauphrey. Enough for to confound Unnumbeed wolds. Heaven was with earth confus'd, And stars with rocks together crush'd and bruis'd. Charmes. v. Ovid. 7. Metam. Medea. Ovid. Epist. Hipsipile to Jason. In words dark and perplexed nine times thrice, Inchantments mutters with her magick voice. Circe waves her magick wand, Thrice turns she to the east, twice to the west, Thrice touch him with her wand, three charmes exprest,
From Erebus and Chaos conjures night, With all her gods and Hecate intreates. Homer O∣dyss. 10. Virgil. Aen. 4. Dido. Lucan lib. 6. With tedious mumblings, The moon perplex't with tedious charmes below Till shee on under hearbs herjlly throwes. Charon. Hells grim botes-swain, hells scowling ferryman. The burning streams old ferriman That wafts pale ghosts over the stygian lake. Hells ugly untrim'd waterman. The stygian sculler. That plies the passage ore the filthy flood, With crabbed countenance, hoare haires which stood Ruggedly overgrown ore all his chin, His gogling eyes star'd as they flames had bin; Virg. Aen. 6. In ragged robes and tattered old attire, With a strong pole thrust in the pudly mire, He drives his boat, assisted with one sayle, And ore the black streams meager ghosts he hales. Charbdis. Whiling Charibd is with her sucking waves, Suppes up the seas and gives the ships their graves. With yawning swallow Sups up huge waves which broken in do follow, And thrice again disgorgeth them on high, Dashing its wavie vomit to the skie. Chast. As the sweet dew that loads the heads. Of drooping flowers. All her ksses do speak her virgin. The blushes of her cheekes speak innocence. Warmed with a bashful hea. Call snow unchast, and say the ice is wanton, if she be so. Chast as the maiden blossomes of a rose. Sweet as the spring it buds in. The Phoenix self although but one may sooner be no virgin. Chast as the Nuns first vow, as the cold hermits cell. Chast as the bashful morn. Chast as the vowes of Nuns or Anchorites prayer. Whose beauty is the shrine of chastity. Immu'd in snow, whose greatest hea is like to that faint light. The glow-worme shoores at the cold brest of night. Cloystered in ice. That in her lilly bosome weares The spotlesse flower of whie chastity, Whose coole thoughts feele no hot desires,
That serve not Venus flames but Vesta's fires. As chast as ice such as were never seene In wanton dalliance, such as until death Never smelt any but their husbands breath. ucrece, Diana, Penelope, Vestals, Sabine women. ato, Hippolitus, Curius. Jpiter would court her did he know A shape whereby to tempt such chastity. Her lips in pure and vestal modesty Still blush as thinking their own kisses sin. You may sooner tempt A votary, or move a Sythian rock, Than shoote a fire into her chaster brest. A Camphire constitution. Fit for the golden age and Saturnes raigne. Almost afraid to ly with her self. Chast as the hardned rock. Whose kisses were so chast, that love seemed to play there without darts. Chast as the eyes of turtles. Diana apparelled in the gr∣ments of Venus, such a wanton modesty she had, and inicing so∣bernesse. A breast as cold as hemlock. One whose blood is snow-broth, who never feeles The wanton stinges and motions of the sence. Chast as the unblowne bud. VVhose lips blush at their own sweet kisses. Chast as a picture cut in Alabaster. As Ysickles That curdled by the frost from purest snow, And hang in Diana's Temple. She was alwayes hidden either under a veile, or in her chamber, and all the world might suspect he to be faire, but there was scarce any knew it, bu her mother. In Chrystal chaines All love is bound within her icie veins, Like tapers on the altar shine her eyes, Her breath as the perfume of sacrifice. Chast as the aire, Holy Nuns breath in prayer. Cheeks. Two banks of fairest flowers Enricht with sweetnesse from the twilight showre VVhereon those jars which were so often bred, Composed are betwxt the white and red.
Those plots where half-ros'd lillies lie, Not one by art but natures industry. Each Indie in each cheek—where met Vermillion with a silver tincture set, Cheeks lightly staind with red, Like spotted marble newly polished, which enclose The smiling ulip, and carnation rose Beauty, times sterne rage to shun, In her cheeks lillies hid her fom the sun, When she meant to triumph in her May, Made that her Est, and there she broke her day, Cheeks in which two pits do lie, To bury those slain by her eye. Cheeks with kindly clarret spread Aurora like new out of bed. Either cheek discloses, Mingled bathes of milk and oses. Or like the fresh Queen apples side, Blushing at sight of Phaebus pride, Blushing lillies, where scarlet were a blot, Aurora blusht at such a sight unknown Seeing those cheeks were redder than her own. Transplanted Paradise. Beauties tempe. Elysium. Have you seen carnation grow Fresh blushing through new flakes of snow, Have you seen with more delight A red rose growing through a white, Have you seen the pretty gleam That the strawberry leaves in creame, Such was the tincture of her cheekes. Child. v. Infant. A man in a small letter. Natures short hand. Stenography. The best copie of Adam before he tasted Eve or the apple. Natures best picture newly drawn, which time and much handling dims and defaces. Whose souls white paper is yet unscribled with observations of the world, wherewith at length it becomes a blurd note-book. Who yet knowes no evil, nor hath made means by sin to be acquainted With misery. All the language he speakes is tears, and they serve well to ex∣presse his necessity. His hardest labour is his tongue, as if he were loth to use so de∣eitful,
an organ, and he is best company with it, when he can but rattle. His fathers little Sory, wherein he reads those dayes of his life, he cannot remember, and sighes to se what innocency he hath out-liv'd. In his purity, and simplicity, he is the Christians example, and the old mans relapse. Could he put off his body with his little coat, he had got eterni∣ty without a burthen, and exchanged one heaven for another. Like his first father, he is worse in his breeches. He wears his dagger mzzled, lest it should bite his master. With Child. The pregnant womb grows heavy, and requires Lucina's aid. A team of harnest Peacocks fiercely draw Her siery Chariot from the flitting skie, Wherein there sate the glorious Majesty Of great Saturnia, on whose train attended An Host of Goddesses; Juno descended From out the flaming Chariot and blest The painful womb. The plenteous womb, Expresseth her full tilth and husbandry, The ripe burthen stretcht the heavy womb. When nature quickens in the pregnant womb Her wishes past, and now her hope, to come. Children. The unprized treasure, Of the chast womb, the pledges of the loving bed, Those little models of our selves, The lesser volumes, Epitomies of their parents Strong knots of love. Natures common, but rarest blessing, Traduction of our selves. Chiron. Achilles two-shapt Tuour, He that taught stout Peleus son the way, How with delight upon the Harp to play, He that great Aesculapius Physick taught, And learnt Alcides his Astrology, The glittering Archer in the Zodiack. Christs-Cross. Dry leaveless trunk on Golgotha.
Cholerick. v. Angry. A man made out of fire. A wasp, Whose every humour is turned into choler; Choler lies in him like lees in wine, The least motion of the vessel makes them rise up, Like a thatcht house, quickly on fire, Like gumm'd velvet quickly fretted, Chaing, as if they were rub'd with sope. Chymick. Alchymist. The subrle Chymick doth devest, And strip the creature naked, till he find The sallow principles within their nest Admitted to Natures bed-chumber; The Alchymists that choke Themselves with fumes, & waste their time in smoak, That teach dull nature what her own forces are; The sooty tribe, whose ingenious itch Makes them grow poor, by studying to be rich. Close. v. Embrace. Close as the griping fist, or cherry lips Of happy lovers in their melting sips, Close as two Oisters, Cockles. Cloud. The waves, the surges, billowes of the Air, The suns dusky robes. The dropping wings, The watery curtains of the Heavens. The mistie cloak, Heavens mufler, maskie, vail, scarfe, wary, tiffany, Heavens mourning clothes, Heavens silk Cypress, Those rolling waves, floods, billowes of the skies; Such clouds Jove made when he Wrested from Jo, her virginitie. The duskie mufled skie, The pitchy shroud, heavens gloomy mask, Those waves of thickned Aire. The frowns of discontented Heaven, The thickned Aire that steals away the skie Thick Air doth chok the jarring heavens The gloomy bosome of the cloud, Whose gloomy darkness shroud Heavens lamps—the wave-embatteld shrouds Brought from the sea on Eurus wings, Blew curtains, mixt of Aire and Water;
The hoorders up of Rain, That in their melting bosomes hug the sun, And smother up the strugling light. The treasure-house of showers, The magizines of Snow and Rain. Cock. The watchful-bird, crest-people, featherd King, The peasants trusty clock, Aurora's trumpetter, The mornings watch. The feathered Bellman of the night The feathered Prophet of approaching light. The Bell-man of the morn Summoning, light up with his bugle horn, The native Bell-man of the night, Startles the Moon, and wakes the drowsie morn. The bird that warned Peter of his fall. The trumpet of the day, That with his lofty, and shrill-sounding throat Awakes the day, and makes the erring ghosts Hast to their confines, The husband Cock looks out, and strait is sped Meeting his wife, which brings her feather-bed, That wakes the morn, With bird of flesh, and mouth of horn. Cocke fight. The Cocks do fight Bistling their plumes, and red with fury smite With spurs, and beak-bounding at every blow, With fresh assauls, freshing their fury so, That desperate in their unyielding wrath Nothing can end their deadly fewd, but death. The Lords about, that on both sides do bet, Look partially, when one the field shall get, And trampling on his gaudy plumed pride, His prostrate o, with bloody spurs bestride, With clanging trumpets, and with clapping wing, Triumphantly his victory to sing: Cold. Frosty, frost-bit, chill, frozen, congealed, Northern, bleak, Where mens breath doth instantly congeal, And atom'd mists turn instantly to hail Colder than Salamanders. As cold as Alpin snow Cold as Lycaeus that Pne-bearing mount,
As snowy Haemus, or cold Rhodope. As mountain ice, which the North-winds, Congeal to purest Chrystall; Cold as the frozen zone, Whose hair with isickles are hung, And chattering teeth confound the useless tongue, Cold as the breath of winter; as Apennine Where the hills active coldness doth go near To freez the frosty sun within his spear, Cold as the top of snowy Algidus; Cold as the feet of rocks. Cold as the Gote, or rough Sarmatian, As Pindus frozen toppes, Cold as the frozen Muscovite. Coloured. Streaked, stained, smeared, speckled, feckled, tinctured, varnishe, pyde, which nature dyde, In more eye-pleasing hewes, and richer grain, Then Iris bow attending Aprils rain Nor can the Peacock in his spoted train, So many pleasing colours shew again, As in the Rain-bowes many-colured hiew Here we see watchet deepned with a blew, There a dark tawny with a puple mixt, Yellow, and flame, with streaks of green betwixt A bloody stream into a blushing run, And ends still with the colour, which begun, Drawing the deeper to a lighter stain Bringing the lightest, to the deep'st again, With such rare Art each mingleth with his fellow, The blew with watchet green, and red with yellow; Like to the changes which we dayly see About the Doves neck with varietie, Where none can say, although it strickt he tends Here one begins, and there the other ends. Combate. v. War. Redoubled-blowes Fall like amazing thunder on his cask Like Perseus on his Pegasus. To Come. To arrive a. When scarce her feet had toucht the beachy shore By free force of her palfrey wan Access to th own: Till they with pacing won
The steepness of the hill, when their travel had attaind With weary steps they conquer all the way. Comet. It flew, And after it long blazing tresses drew The curled star that from his head throws out A thousand sparks, fatall torch, hairy lamps. On whose pale flame an angry spirit flies The shooting stars that glide, With bloody-beams. The bristled stars, n flaming letters writ sad destinie. The dismal star That threats the world with famine, plague, or wa: The Star that wears a beard of flame, The Autumnal ruddy streaming Sar Presageing famine, pestilence and war; mporting change of Times and Sates; Brandish their Crystal tresses in the skie, Heavens dreadful heralds, whose shag'd portent Foretels the coming of some dire event. Torch-bearers to a royal funeral, Il-boding lights: Those blazing stars that show A Princes death, or fatal overthrow Of prosperous States, The faal ushers of calamitie, The flaming Heralds, Harbenger of vengeance. To Compass. Impale, ingirt, environ, encircle, girdle, surround, swathe, swaddle, all about, hemme in, inlinke, sphear, hoop garter. A Compass. Circumference, circle, incirelet, surrounding, verge, boundry, phear, orb, round model, cope, circuit, inclosure. Confused. As the first Choas, ere division wrought An harmony, and to proportion brought The seeds of discord, undistinguisht Conquer. v. Victory. Triumph. Who wears the Laurel planted on his brow, Who with his conquests cloyed the jaws of death, Sing Pances, and thy brows with Laurel bind, A full and perfect conquest was obtaind, That for the sword no further work remaind, On the glittering rest I see
The glorious garland of the conquest born, While feather-ooted fame before us flies Upon the golden wings of honour born, Whom victory convoyes. Crownd with the Garland of her golden hair On whose glittering crest The glorius garland of the conquest rests Bright conquest shines upon his sword. Conscience. The souls pulse, eternal larum, ever-barking-dog The black-book, the hateful register. The terrour of the astonisht soul. The tempest of the mind, That well-kept Register, wherein is writ All ill, men do, all goodness they omit His pallid fears, his sorrows, his affrightings, His late wisht had I wists, remorseful, bitings The witness executioner and Judge. Justice bed-chamber. The King of Heavens Atturney General. Consider. To look on a thing with a serious eye With instructed, judging eyes to view To take a narrow view. Constant. Whom neither fear nor favour can Wrest from his thoughts, and make him less a man, Whom neither force nor fawning can Unpin, or wrench, from giving all their due Whose honesty is not So loose or easie, that a ruffling wind Can blow away, or glittering look it blind, Who rides his sure and even trot While the world now rides by, now lags behind, Whom nothing can procure, When the wide world runs bias, from his will To writh his limbs and shake, A man of firm resolves, firm as the center, Unmoved, as the poles; Bold hands as some might hope to force The rowling light of Heavens, as change her course.
Consume. Languish, waste, melt, thaw, decay, That with a slow infection melts away Like ice, before the Suns uncertain ray. Corn. Ceres goldy loks, treasure. The pride of Ceres plain. The Plowmans hope and long expected gain. Covetous. A mole. A son of earth that digs his mothers entrals To turn up treasure, A rich beggar troubled with Midas itch A sucking spunge, one that sits brooding ore his bags Theefe to himself. A dung-hil wretch, muck-worm Grown poore by getting riches, his own torture A rust unto himself, as to his gold, That spider-like doth spin a web of gold, Out of his own bowels-only knows the care And another the use of gold, scraping dust-worm, That starves at feasts, and in the Rivers thirsts, Whose wretched mind bends to no point but this, That who have most of wealth, have most of bliss Volopone's. Armed with hooking tentors, and clad in birdime That scrape like dung-hil Cocks in dirt and mire To find the gemme, they know not how to use Golds dropsied Ersycthous. Like Dypsa's thirst, Is never satisfied, unless it burst. Ever hungry, till he surfets Wealths horse-leaches that ever crave So much the more, the more they have, Whose droyling hands thinks nothing can supply The greedy wants of his insatiat eye. Nought can fill Th' unfathom'd gulf of his insatiate will. The picture of miserable happiness, and rich beggery; Such an one, as an enemy could not wish him worse, than to be himself; doing any thing to get that which he is determined, when it is gotten never to use. Rich fools, whose base and filthy heart Lies hatching still the goods wherein they flow, And damning their own selves to Tantals smart, Wealth breeding want, more wretched grow, A chiverel conscience, that will stretch to hold more, Base stooping soules, that grovel on the earth,
That think heaven for gold an easie morgage: One that could love God well, if there were an L. more in h name. One that hath coffi'd up his soul in his chest before his bo∣dy, whom upon any payments wrested from him, the charges of  rope, merely keeps from hanging himself. Like a dog in a wheel, toyles to roast meat for others eating, freezing before the fire, whilest he fears to be burnt, if he come nearer it. That could be content to have both his eyes pluck out, so he might have gold put in the holes. Court. The place of glorious troubles, empty fallacies, Fals delights, the shine of kings, envies hatching place, Where rules of State, and Ceremonies are Observ'd so seriously, that I must dance, And act ore all the complements of France, And Spain, and Italy, before I can Be taken for a well-bred English-man. Ʋpstart Courtier. v. Fantastick. The silken youths of Court, great Atlas of the State, That an high sayl of honour bear Using the fine Rhetorick of clothes, To win esteem, serious glorious fools, Court ear-wigs, wrigling to the ear of greatness Gaudy nothings. That can speak a tedious piece of nothing, Vary his face, as Sea-men do their Compass; Made of nothing but antick clothes and cringes, Signes of men, court bubbles, Gaudy glow-worms, carrying seeming fire, Fine clothes, with a bad lining. Barrels of others wit, His word like a phantastical banquet, just so many Strange dishes. A child of fancy, Pedlars of wit, That speak taffatie phases. Mushrom gentlemen, That shoot up in a night to place and worship The glittering Coutier that in tissue stalks, That wear a Pedlars shop about them Like the Cynnamon-tree-bark more worth than the body. Like the Bird of Paradise feathers, more worh than the flesh. Living under the tyranny of Ceremonies. Perfumed silk-worms. Inferiour orbes directed by the motion of higher sphears.
Living by the reflction of higher substances, Can better exchange a piece of gold than of reason. Such a man as his taylor pleaseth to shape him, Putting much of his judgment away about the situation of his cloaths. There is a confederacy between him and his clothes, be∣twixt them to make up a puppy. Proud of the ratling of his silks, (clothes being the remembrances of lost innocency) like a mad man that laughs at the ratling of his etters. Coward v. Brgadochio. A son of fear, whose blood is whey. A full bubble, a valiant vanity. That in high tearms can swear down fortresses, And spoil the enemy before he sees him. Whose spiri's onely active in his hel. One that hath indented with the grave to bring all his limbs thither. A Crpet knight. That date do nought but fear. Possessed with an ignominous fear. That manhood only by their beard bewray. Alivelsse damp beleaguers every joynt, as oft he swounds As ere he views his sword or thinks on wounds. That swings his sword about his head and cuts The empty aire, which hsseth him in scorne. Ready to run away from himselfe, like the Satyr that ran away a the noyse of the noyse of the horne which he himself blew. Looks as if his eyes would run into his soul, and his soul out of his body upon the least sent of danger. Castng such unlikely dangers, as all the planets together could arce conspire. Clinias. Damaetas. hersites. A valiant voice, that is resolved to have his sword never curst by a∣ny widow. Hs blcod not daring to be in so dangerous a place went out of his face, and hid it selfe more inwardly, and his very words as if affraid of blowes came slowly from him. Affraid of his own sword he wears, and affrighted wih the clashing, of his own armour. VVhose feet is his best defence, and his tongue his best weapon. A dish of skimm'd milke. Tost and butter. That fear the report of a calver. VVorse than a stuck foole, or hurt wild-duck. The fanning of his enemies plume would nod him ino despaire. Cream-fac'd fellow, lilly-liverd, whey-face, linnn chekes, pigeon∣liverd.
That wears all his daggers in his mouth, And will see his sister sooner naked than a sword. His blood runs thick, as if it would blot a sword. Prometheus was a sleepe while his heart was making, and forgot to put fire in it. If once his eye be struck with terrour, all the costick phisick in the world cannot stay him. Wonderful, exceptious and cholerick, where he sees men are lo to give him an occasion, and you cannot pacifie him better than by quarrelling with him. Whom when he is most hot, you may easily threaten into a very ho∣nest quiet man. The sight of a sword wounds him more sensible than the stroke, every man is his master that dare beat him, and every man dares that knowes him. He is a Christian merely for fear of hell fire, and if any religion could fright him more, he would be of that. Such as would conquer victory it self, if it stood in their way as they fly. Loving to shew a nature steep'd in the gall of passion, display the ignoble tyranny of prevailing discords, being valiant against no resistance, and making no resistance when they meet true valour. That would sooner creep into a scabbard, than draw a sword, and endure a bullet than shoot of a musket. Coy. A piece of pettish, froward, wanton anger. Such as possest Narcissus. Pssest with savage chastity. Coy as the plant Pudsetan, That shrinks at the approach of man. Rustick chastity. Discourteous modesty. That as long as they are chast, think they may be discourteous, And lawfully scratch men, if they do not kisse them. Consume their own Idolater. Of such a goddesse no time gives record, That burnes the temple where she is ador'd. Crafty. The subtile fox. Hyoena, Crocodile, and all beasts of craft, Have been distil'd to make one nature up. Volpone.
Cranes. That watchful fowl, the Pygmies enemy. Direct their flight on high, And cut their way they in a trigon ly, Which pointed figure may with ease divide, Opposing blasts through which they swiftly glide, Which with loud clangors fill the kie When they from cold and stormy winter fly Toth' Ocean and that aires more temperate breath, Inflicting on the Pygmies wounds and death. The Thracian fowle, which with their loud alarme Make little Pigmies souldiers run to armes. Strimonan birds in Pygmies death rejoyce, And tear the aire before them with their voice. Which while they sleepe make one keepe seninel. Plamedes utors. Which by their flying taught Him letters, and his warlick discipline. Credulous. A man of easie confidence, of rash belief, That hath the only disadvantage of an honest heart. To Cry out, v. Noyse. To rive, ear the aire with cries, To fill the bosome of the shricking aire, With loud complaints. Crime. v. Wicked. Guilty of a blacker crime, Than ere in the large volume writ by time, The sad historian reads, acting black mischief, A fault Not to be purged with brimstone, fire and salt. A sin no praiers or tears Can ere wash off. That blurs the grace and blush of modesty. Critick. That beholds nothing but with a mind of mislike, Writing with oyle and fire. The least child their pen is delivered of, comes into the world with all its teeth. The Muses Cerberus. Archilochus himself was not more bitter. Churlish reteiner to the Muses. One that hath spell'd over a great many of books, and all his obser∣vation is the Orthography.
The surgean of old authous, healing the wounds of dust and igno∣rance. He is a troublesome vexer of the dead, which after so long sparing, must rise up to the judgment of his castigation. He is one that makes all books sell dearer, whilst he swells them into folios by his comments. Crocodile. Niles fell rover. Niles poisony Piate. Niles greedy beast. That kills the man, then baths him in his tears. That beast, which opposite to natures law In other creatures, mooves the upper jaw. Crowne. Cornet, chaplet, garland, diadem, incirclet, wreath, fillet, circlet, ringe, inglet, cincture, anadem, impalement. Cruell. Like Ounces, Tygers. or the Panthers whelps, Whose healths are morning draughts in blood. As Lycaon when he chang'd his shape VVh Selmus turned into an Adaman. The swallowing Syrts, Charybdis chaft with wnd, Or some fell Tyger of th' Armenian kind Did him beget—his cruel brest, Rough flint, hard steele, or adamant invest, As if he had drunk of the Ciconian stream, That frezeth all the entrailes into stone. He on the cruel Caucasus hard mounts VVas bred, or suckt from Tygers milky ounts. Of some Tygers bood, Bred in the wast of frst-bit Calydon. An heart hewn from a Parian stone. Mortar made of blood and clay. By rocks engendered, ib'd with steel. Like Tygers fel, VVhm their fierce dams with slaughterd cattels blood, VVere wont to nourish in th' Hircanian wood. Most delighted when They bath and paddle in the blood of men. To whose heart, nature hath set a lock, to shut out pitie. Cataline. Marius. Ner. Mzentius. Qaffers of humane blood. Savage rigour. More cruel than a Turke or Troglodite. Than the Laestrigon. The savages to Sythian rockes confind, VVho know no God nor vertue of the mind,
But only sence pursue, who hunger tame VVith slaughtered lives they and their food the same, Are not so cruel. As Phalaris or fam'd Gemonides. Hircanian Tygar. Numidian Getulian Lion. Anthropophagi. The horse-blood-swell'd Sarmatian, In whose heart a vein of matble growe. Enough to make men waver in the faith, And hold opinion with Pthagoas, That souls of animals infuse themselves Into the trunks of men—whose curish spirit Governd a wolfe, who hang'd for humant slaughter Even from the gallowes did his fell soul fleet, And whilst he laid in his unhallowed den, Infused it self into him. His heart is iron, and his heart-strings wire, The taitnesse of his face sowers ripe grapes. He was not bon at— But on some rock within the Pontick lad, Or Scythian mountain that so wildly stand, And vins of flint are every where disperst In slnder brnches through his iron brest. An heart as as hard as brasse, And more obdurate than Mdusa's was. Mercy shall as soon be found at the hands of prevailing cowards. Cuckold The only horned beast that hath teeth above. That hags his bugle in an invisible baldrick. Struck by the forked plague. So ingrateful, he nere thanks him tha made him. An he moon. Civil monster. Rtional beast. Cupid. The Pphian archer. The Paphian Prince. Cytherea's son. The loth affctng boy. Psych's soft husband. Venus sweetest son. The peevish shooting hoodwinkt else. Little great King. The quiver'd god. The mirthful god of amorous daliance. The blinking boy that winks and hits the mak. The winged god that woundeth hearts. Great little Emperour of hearts. The Cypian Queens blind boy. The Gyant dwarse. Venus wanton son. The god whose nights out shine his dayes. VVho though e's blind, shoos arrowe that have sight. Sees not to shoot, yer ses to hit the whie.
Little tyrant lordly Love That doth aw the gods above As they creatures here below, With his scepter call'd a bow, And doth all their forces bear, In the quiver that he wears, Whence no sooner he doth draw Forth a shaft but it is law. Custome. That second nature. Imperious tyrant. Vice-nature. That Apoplexie of bedrid nature. That takes from us the priviledge To be our selves, rends that great charter too Of nature, and likewise cancels man, And so inchains our judgements and discourse, To present usances. That great gyant that is so prevalent that of∣ten-times we shape the discourse of reason, and course of nature to the inbed notions, and preconceptions she hath printed in our minds. Cybele. Wood-unting mother by yok't Lyons drawne. The fruitful mother of the Gods. The turban'd Goddesse. The Berecinthian Queen. Saturnes great wife. Dindymens, Ops, Rhea, Vest. Cyclops. Joves tinkers. The thunder-smiths. The sweating throng Of hammeing blacksmiths at the lofty hill, The forgers of Joves fierce Artillery. v Aetna. v. Thunder. Which in vast caves their anviles beat Steropes, Brontes, nakt Pyracmon sweats v Hesiod. Theogonia. v. 139 In forging thunder, part now finisht, Jove This on affrighed earth hurles from above On the imperfect part, three clattering showres Of winter haile, and spring-tide-rain he pours, To which are added straight three flshes swift v. Virgil. Aen. 8. Of summer flames, three puffes of Autumne's drift. Cynthia. v. Moone. Diana. D. Dale. v. Valley. Dance. HE made his natural motion far more sweet, And shook a most divine dance from his feet,
To move in nimble measures. Moving measures. The Spheares could not in comlier order meet, Nor move more graceful, whether they advance Their measures forward, or retire their dance. To meet The sprightly Musick with their numerous feet. Dancing is the descant upon the plain song of walking, And with even motions beat the happy ground. Have you beheld the Graces dance Or seen the upper spheares to moove, So she did tun, returne, advance In her gestures, as she paces, Are united all the Graces. Dandle. Ballancing his weight in dancing him. So Hector dandled his Astyanax Then when the nodding plume upon his crest Frighted the child. Dangerous As to ore-walk a current roaring loud. On the unstedfast footing of a speare Though hell it selfe should gape. Ruine with her saile-strecht wing, Ready to sink us down and cover us. Darke. Gloomy, duskie, pitchy. As the first Chaos ere the light adornes The world, or Phebe fill'd her wained hornes. Dark as the sullen night. Where Phaebus never showes His chearful light. Dark as the Negro's face. Stars shroud their heads in clouds, night lost her eyes. Darke as the drowsie mansion house of sleepe. Not seen by Phaebus when he mounts the skies At height, nor stooping. Darker than Achron. Enough to make a night f day. No glimmering spark gave out his feeble rayes, Where yet the gladsome day hath not been seene, Nor Phaebus piercing beams have ever beene. Like the Cimmerian clime, Where sun, nor moon meet out the length of time, Wherein the eye of day A stranger was, and Phaebe's horned light, In vain contended with the shades of night.
VVhere is not so much as that fainter light. The glow-worm shoots at the cold brest of night. Darknesse lights elder brother there did raigne. Dark as the Egyptian night. The heavens did not peep through the blanket of the nght. Darknesse as thick as ill me clouds can make. Dk as the blind and quiet age of night. So dark as if the funeral of light VVere celebrated there. The moon into her darkned orbeeires Nor scal'd up stars extend their golden fires. Day. The suns bright daughter, issue, heire, The lesser children of the year. The verses of the book of time. The raggs of time. The hies of times old head. Happy Day. A day markt white in Clothe's hook. Old men were glad their fates till now did last, And infants that the houres had made such hast In bringing them to see this day. I now first breath and live. VVorthy to be the prime And first account of months, of years, of time. The Calends of all lucky daies, The rubrick, pact, epoche, dominical of all happy days. The golden number in a day, VVas never blisse more full and clear than this. The smiling month of My Nere lookt so fresh as doth this day. Signe this day with a purer stone. Powre wine unto thy Genius. VVith whiter wooll beclad the day, Children unborn as in the wombe thy lay, Sigh'd for the losse of seeing such a day. Space of dayes of nights. Thrice had bright Phaebus daily chariot run Past the proud pillars of Almena' son. Twice had the night shed poppy on the heads Of wearied mortals. Thrice Phaebus had unyoak his panting steeds Drencht in Iberian seas, whilst night succeeds. Sudded with stars. Ten times had Lucfer the stars supprest, Twelve times the day-star now had crownd the east.
Now had the Sun in golden Chariot hurld Twice bid good-morrow to the nether world, And Cynthia in her orb and perfect round Twice viewed the shadowes of the upper ground, Thrice had the day-star usherd forth the light, And thrice the Evening-star poclaimd the night; Now fifteen courses had the bright steeds run, Thrice had the Golden-sun his hot steeds washt. In the West main, and thrice them sharply lasht, Out of the balmy East. Hyperion from his glittering thron Seven times his quickning rayes had bravely shown, The dewy-cheet Aurora's purple die, Thrice dappled had the ruddy morning skie, And thrice had spread the curtains of the morn To let in Titan when the day was born, Phoebus was thrice eoucht in his watry bed The dewy cheekr Aurora did display Her golden locks, and summon up the day, Twice twenty times, and rests her drowsie head, Twice twenty times within old Tithons bed, Five times had Hesper Titan warnd away, Five times again, did Lucifer appear, Waving the standard of the glorious day; Thrice had the bright surveyor of the heaven, Divided out of the day and night by even, And equall houres. Five morns had cleard the Air with Phoebus light, And from the pole remov'd the damps of night, Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring Their fiery torcher his Diurnal ring, Ere twice in murk and occidental damp, Moist Hesperus hath quencht his sleepy lamp, Or foure and twenty times the Pilots glass Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass; Now fifteen times had Phoebus gone to rest, Inning his Chariot in the gloomy West. David. Kingly Prophet, Israels sweet singer, Jesses stout son, Holy song-man, The holy Father of wise Salomon, The father of rebellious Absalm, That with his sling the mighty champion sw, The pious O pheus of the Jew.
Deaf. A culvering discharged at his ear, would scarcely bore it, Deprived of the hearing sence, To whom the greatest talkers, are as dumb, One that enjoyes that benefit, that he never hears himself ill spoken of, Deaf as remorseless seas Natures drumme lies in his eares unbraiz'd, Deaf as th' Icarian rocks. Death. Natures bold Pursivant. The forgetful lake, The Eclipse of life. The graves purveyour Sleeps, younger brother. The Stygian bay, Eternal sleep within a bed of dust, The two-long-joyned lovers sad divorce, The dark and common period, Tyrant ore tyrants, thou which onely dost Clip the lascivious beauty without lust, The pale-fac't sergeant, that layes us in our able chest Natures rude serjeant, the moth of natures Art, The common extinguisher of natures candles, The first Alchynist to calcie into dust The living bodies,—Lifes Epilogue The unsparing Pursivant with Eagles wings, That knocks at poore mens doors, as well as Kings, The sad stipend of the first transgression, The child of sin. Great pale-fac't tyrant, Sad message of the ullen bll Death attends, Natures pale-fac't baylffe, The parting stirrup at the journeyes end, That night, Which from the living takes the last of light. Hate and terror to prosperity, e put my eye-bals in thy vaulty browes And ringe these fingers with thy hous-hold worms, And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust Come grin on me, and I will think thou smilest And kiss thee. Miseries love and wish That onely can Measure the true dimensions of a man Which is at best, An unexpected and unwelcome guest,
Grimme executioner to destiny, Birth-day to Eternity, Unchanged law of Nature. The best and last Physitian. Ʋntimely Death. To Whom the Fates owe yeares, Abortive darkness, veils the setting light, The crime and sad mistake of destiny The untimely seisure of the greedy grave, Th' extortion of the rigorous fares. Exacting fate, Deaths supererogation to the ates. Death-bed. v. approaching death. When the latest sand Of the spent hower-glass is now at hand, And as she spake that word, her voice did alter Her breath grew cold, her speech began to faulter, Fain would she utter more, but her faint tongue, Not able to goe forward faild, and cnge To her dry roof—when the drum of death, Beats a cold march. When deaths pale-slags advanced in his cheeks, His eyes turning round in the dance of death. Lips trembling, as though they kist their neighbour death Ready to take his oaths to be deaths true liege-man, Death swims and baths her self within his eyes, He gasps for breath, as the grave gasps for him. That hath id the last stage of life, Lises candle twinckles within the socket, When he hath bid the world and life adieve, And set one foot within grimme Charons boa, Expecting every minute deaths sad summons Lifes wilight. When his last testament and grave, Is made an icy stifness, benums by blood. Deformed. Her eyes do sink into their holes, As if they were afraid to see the light Her breath infects the Aire, and sowes a pestilence: 'Tis known that she hath eyes by the holes onely Which have crept further in, than her nose out. Her quarrelling teeth Of such a colour are that they themselves Scare one another, and do stand at distance. Nature made her, when she was disposed to just, And length of time, hath made her more ridiculous, Caidia new, come from the jawes of hell
Natures Errata, faul escaped natures Print, Which who so hath to wife, Shall nere be cuckolded, unless for spight, By some that durst not do't but in the night. For fear of loathing her. Never sin was at so high a rate, But one nights hell with her might expiate A shape, the Poets were afraid to fain, For fear the shadow might infect their brain With hollow yellow teeth, or none perhaps, With stinking breath, swart teeth, and hanging chaps, With wrinckled neck, and stooping as she goes, With driveling mouch, and with a siveling nose, Whose face gives a prospect, which might well Give, a surphet to a weak stomack. Her nose seemed to threaten her chin, Her tears like rain upon dirty furrows Disgracing weeping with her countenance, Her hands those golden golls Tears in her eyes did seem there to bewail Their own disgrace. Like Chaos, or an unlickt Bears whelp, That carries no impression like the dam, The very dogs bark at him as he goes Crusty batch of Nature. A face not worth the scorning, Notclean enough to spit on Made by one of Natures unskilful and idle prentises. A nose at enmity with all others, and against which no possi∣ble defence, but a pair of Spanish gloves. That blunders all the rivers he passeth through, and avoids th sight of Painters and glasses, lest they should shew him the pattern of his visage: Goggle-eyed, sparrow-mouthed, gubber-toorhed, canker-eaten∣gummes, hook-nosed, rotten-teeth, Morphew-fact, beetle-browed, her nose and chinne half meet to make the teeth friends that are fallen out. A breath stinking up and down the room, a nose drop∣ping Winter, and Smmer; A Bavarian poke under her chinne, lav-ard, dugges, like two double juggs, bloody-fallen-singers, scabbed-wrists, Cow-wasted, tand-skinne, splay-footed, gouty legs, stinking-feer. Dowdy, Gorgon, Blouze, Gobrian, Mother, Fulsome;
Cavida, Mopsa, Niso, Fustilugs, That needs no other proof besides her face, To proclaim her witch. So far from being faire, None could be foule, that did with her compare, Natures trespass. Made up of natures worst deformities. She spied her filthyness, and fain she would Have blusht, if through so much dirt she could. Natures Heteroclite, with some member defective, Or redundant. Natures solocisme. A naturall vizard, like a winters Apple, shrunk up together, and half rotten. The Chaos of a man. Aesop, Thersites, Demagoras. The Sun doth almost fear to lend his shine, Least the reflection of his purest raies From such a dung-hill, as she bears about. Might chance to infect the universal Aire So, that a general plague should give the world A second deluge, and make Aire prevent The Doomesday of her sister Element. Nature was idle, and weary of her work, When she shap'd her. The fingers crooked are As Nature made them for no other use, But for to scratch her ugly face; There's Art lies coucht even in mishapness, And he that drawes the foulest monster worse Doth in it pencill out the best of skil; 'Twas Natures pride to shew that skill in her, Or else she made her for her common foyl, To set of all her slips in woman kind, And is not she the Queen of Drabs, v  Pastor. Lib. 2. Song . Whose head is peiwigd with scabs? Whose hair hangs down in curious flakes, All curld and crispt like crawling snakes; The breath of whose perfumed locks, Might choke the devil with a pox, Whose daintie twinings did intice The whole monopoly of lice Her fore-head next is to be found Resembling much the new plowed ground, Ftrowed like stairs, whose windings led Unto the chimney of her head, The next thing that my Muse descries,
Is the two mil-pits of her eyes, Mill-pits, whose depth no plumme can sound, For there the God of love was drownd On either side there hangs a souse, An eare I mean keeps open house. An eare which alwayes there did dwell, And so the head kept sentinel, Which there were placed to descry If any danger there were nigh, But surely danger there was bred, Which made them so keep off the head, Something for certain caused their fears, Which made them so to hang their eares. But hang her ears, Thalia seeks To suck the bottle, of her cheeks, Her cheeks, whose pride did make them ise, Contending to out-face her eyes. Upon her cheeks I'de longer stay, But that her nose calls me away, Her nose on which all beauty sat, Her Indian, Ruby nose, thats flat; Help Muses now, I have begun That as her nose, my verse may run; Help furies, you that cannot flatter, I know her nose affordeth matter, For on her nose there hangs I wot A curious Pearl of Chrystll snot. As purely white, as whitest rose, A dainty gemme for such a nose; But now methinks Thalia skips Intending to salute her lips: Although she fears her lips are such, 'Tis almost pain of death to ouch, I'de wish the divill so much bliss Those dayly to be damm'd to kiss; But where shall I find words uncouth To rake the kennel of her mouth? Whose wryness with a certain grace Sets out the beauty of her face, Whose dreary gapings might affright The lustful Incubus of night, And Succubus might be affraid
Hereafter to come near a maid, Whereout in curious posture hunge. The spungy flie-flap of her-tongue, As if that nature did contrive To hang her whilest she was alive. Her teeth were fixt like Eagles clawes Upon the ruines of her jawes, Which there were plac'd like pikemen tall, Something inclining to their fall, Whose ripen'd age did yield them mellow, The curious gold was no so yellow, I think she had them by descent From her first father Adam lent Her chin a little lower stands, Much like the cape of bon 'sperance, Which kindly nature stretched so, To point her way, as she doth go. Come Muses at Apollo's beck, And wreath an halter for her neck, Her neck was next, which might have bin A fi supporter for her chin But nature to supply her lack, Had dawn her neck up to her back. V. Sir Philip Sidney's description of Mopsa. Arc. 1. lib. Degenerate. To hold a wing Quite from the flight of all his ancestours, Unmindful of his fathers glorious name, He makes his fathers honour be his shame, That bastard well-begot. By Degrees. And as a lovely maiden pure and chaste, With naked ivory neck and gown unla'd Within her chamber, when the day is fled Makes poor her garments, to enrich her bed First puts she off her Lilly silken gown, That shrikes for sorrow, as she layes it down, And with her armes graceth a wastecoat fine, Imbracing her, as it would nere untwine. Her flaxen hair, insnaring al beholders, She next permits to weav about her shoulders:
And though she cast it back, the silken slips, Sill forward steal and hang upon her lips Whereat she sweetly angry with her laces, Binds up the wanton locks in curious traces, Whilst twisting with her joynts, each hair long linger As loath to be inchaind, but with her fingers; Then on her head a dressing like a crown, Her breasts all bare, her kirtle hanging down, And all things off, which rightly ever be Call'd the foul fair marks of our miserie, Except her last, which enviously doth feize her, Lest any eye partake with it in pleasure, Prepares for sweetest rest, till Sylvans greet her And longingly the down bed swels to meet her, So by degrees, &c. Delay. That spediest lamely comes to great desires, The stone that waiting suiters grinds By whom at Court the poore mans cause is sign'd, Who to dispatch a suit, will not defer To take death for a joynt Commissioner, Delay the woers bane, revenges hate, The plague to Creditours decayed estate The test of patience, of our hopes the rack That drawes them forth so long, until they crack Vertues best benefactour in our times One that is set to punish great mens crimes. Delight. To view with ravisht eyes How lay I all dissolved in delight To surfet with delight, Delight too strong for staid conceit Deluge. When as the ancient world did all imbark, v. Duber∣tas end of the second day: v. Sands Ovid. Me∣tamorph. 1. lib. p. 7. Within the compass of good Noahs ark Seven persons onely, were relieved from death, The solid Globe was but a sop, When Proteus drave his finny flock To feed on cliffes of steepy rocks, And to the Elms top fishes clave Where Turtles used their seats to have, And Does by nature fearful ride, To pass the Oceans stormy tide.
Despaire. v. Miserable. When every woe could by dispaire be brought. Psents it self unto the troubled thought. Hopeless misery. Destinies. v. Fates. The fatal Ladies. Daughters of night and secrecy. That draw the chain of destiny. Upon whose threads both lives and times depend, And all the periods of mortality. The impartial maids. Inexorable three. The impartial tray that spin the fatal twine. The Adamantine sisters. Stern nimphes. The great pair royal of unchanged maids. Destroyed. The very ruines now ly ruined. With scarce such reliques as may prove a being. In former times. Bured in its own dust. Devil. v. Pluto. Nights black Monarch, sly parent of revolts and le. The grand accuser of the brethren. The Stygian prince. Mans restlesse enemy. The general adversary of humane nature. Hells envious tyrant. Master of the damned crew. The old malicious serpent. The roaring Lyon every hour. Seeking his prey, and ranging to devoure. That grand professour of destructive arts. The prince of hell, VVho whilome from heavens glory fell, Like an infectious exhalation Shot through the sphears. That all shapes Doth counterfeit to perpetrate his rapes. Mans inveterate foe. The soul of envy. Dew. The mornings tears. Aurora's liquid pearl. Gemmes which adorne The beauteous tresses of the weeping morne. The tears that swell the roses blushing checks, As if the earth to welcome in the morn, VVould hang a jewel on each ear of corne. That in a gentle shower Drops pearls into the bosome of a flower. The pearly drops which youthful May,
Scatters before the rising day. Diana's silver sweat. The pearly purled showres Hangs on the rose bud tops, and knowing it Must be anon exhaled, for sorrow shrinkes It selfe into a tear. That from Aurora's eyes In Chrystal tears is wept, when she must leave The bed whereon her lov'd Tithonus lies, The aire close mourner for the setting sun, Bedewes her cheeks with tears when he is gone To th' other world. The cold sweat of the morne. Diana. v. Phaebe. The chast-born arrow-loving Queen. The chast-born seed of Jove. The beamy Queen. The virgin huntresse. The maiden archer. The grovy Queene. Bow-bearing goddesse. The goddesse of Gargaphia, Titania, Cynthia, Trivia. The three shaped goddesse. Phebus bright sister. Latona's shining daughter. Dido. Unhappy Carthaginian Queen. Infortunate Eliza. Phaenician, Phrygian, Tyrian, Sidonian Queen. Aeneas lucklesse hostess. Good Sichaeus widow. To Die. v. Death. Souls departed. To cast off the robe of clay. To drop into the grave. To pass the fatal ferry. Death unjoynts the soul and body. Whose latest breath Hath freely paid their full arrears to death. Become a tenant to the grave. Matriculated among the dead. Enrolled in the Register of death. To quit scores with nature. Rak't up in deaths cold embers. The stiffening cold benums her senceless limbs. The winter of cold death Congeales her path of life, and stops her breath. To make A swift descent into the Stygian lake. Hs eyes do swim in night, To pay their debt to the exacting fates. To go on natures embasse. Like poor farmers pay. Quit-rent to nature on the very day.
When we bequeath Our bodies as a Legacy to death. When death shall lulle us in eternal rest. The meeting eyelids conclude a lasting league. To house with darkness and with death. When we must Resolve into neglected dust. When we must Resolve to our originary dust. When we must Commit an incest with our mothers dust. Their rolling eyes together set in debt. Together they expire their parting breath. Their heavy eyes with dying motion urning. They close and sigh out death To dislodge the soul. To passe the flamy pile. To accomplish their fate. To pay his period to fate. Smke to the house of death. Whose soul hath fled th' abodes of men. To pay tribute to the fates. To Pluto's mansion dive. To hide his wretched head In Ploto's house, and live amongst the dead. To kisse the cup of death. To nature he obedience gave, And kneeld to do her homage in the grave. His eyes possesse eternal night. The Parcae with impartial knife, Have left his body tenantless of life. ossest with lasting sleepe. The pale ghost fleets into aire. reading the pathes that lead o the dark region of the dead. olded up in death. To force Between two long-joyn'd lovers sad divorce. When life doth ebbe away. ost in cold night of death. To fall To a loathed nothing, in the unera. To become A Potentate within the starry court Free from th' Eclypse of earth.
Fee from the darksome prison of their clay. To break the prison of our clay. To sayle ore the vast main of death. To shift our flsh, to crosse the Sigian lake. Tat have performed the taske of life. Put out the tapour of our dayes. A soul uncas'd, unorgand by the hand of death. To sleepe in peaceful ashes. Death unclasps the fleshy cage. To have his exit from the common scene. Death breaks the shell of sin. And there is hatcht a Cherubin. The Gordian knotted band Of lifes untied. To pay the shot at natures table. To return to their mothers dusty lap. The body is confined to dust. Take a poor lodging in a bed of dust. VVrapt in the cold embraces of the grave. To pay to nature her last duties. To walk the way of nature. To submit to the law of nature n the falling eye-lids death appears, VVhen we that precipice shall tread, Vhence none return that leads unto the dead. The tombe Yawns to devoure him. Darknesse veiles the setting light, VVe to the graves infernal prison must Descend, and rot in silent shrouds of dust. Death's all-curing hand doth close the eyes. Lost in the ashes of their funeral. Dying Beauty, Fair eyes enombed in their sweet circles. Death dallying seeks To entertain it self in loves sweet place. Decayed roses of discoloured cheeks Do yet retain fair notes of former grace, And ugly death sits fair within her face. Sweet remnants esting of vermilion red, That death it self doubts whether she be dead. So lookt once poyson'd Rosamund, The lllies and the roses that while ere, Strove in her cheeks till they compounded were.
ave broke their truce and fiercely fall'n to blowes, And now the lilly hath overcome the rose. Different. Twixt whom is so great od, Almost as twixt the furies and the Gods, Who these would make to meet, he may as well A reconcilement work twixt heaven and hell, Most inconsistent beings. Difficult. VVhich may employ the strength of all their car. And taske their best endeavours. Uneasie taske, enough to rack the brain To bring about, and make all study vain. All Hercules twelve labours put in one, VVould not hold weight, with this alone. Discourse. Discourse thus entertaind the day. And in discourse consum'd the shortned night. VVith such discourse they entertaind the feast, That tane away dispose themselves for rest. They rise with day. Disease. That tedious guest. Hrbenger of death. Blood-sucker. Deaths arrowes. Deaths pale unwelcome mssenger. Vertues shop. Vertues sharp schoolmaster. Unwelcome guest. Sad companion. Unwelcome visitor. The Amighties rod. The bodies jrring and untuned Musick. That consumes the reins, And drinks the blood out of the swelled veines. Doubt. Doubtful. Even as a ship upon the raging sea Be ween two winds crosse tossed every way. Uncertain, knowes not in what course to set her: O my divided soul! how do I tremble. Like to the doubtful needle twixt two loadstones. One thought another doth controle, So great a discord wracks the wavering soul. Such thoughts had Biblis when she wooed her brother. Such Meleagers mother when she held The faal brand. With a battel in the fighting thoughts. As when a mighty Oake now almost fell'd, his fall
On each side theatens and waves to and ro The ague, palsie of the soul. The tumult of distracted minds. Plunged in doubtful passions: The tempest of the thoughts. A strange confusion in the troubled soul, Whose flying thoughs are at no certain and. The jarring passion of the struggling soul. Quandaring passion. The souls Labyrinth. Tde of the mind, Earthquake of the brest. The megrim of the soul. Euripus of the mind. Tost like a ship twixt two encountring tides. Dove. The feathered steeds that Venus chariot draw. The harmless nuntios of peace, which have all Like other creatures, only want the gall. The birds that bear a rainbow in their neck. The feathered emblems of chast love. The feathered coursers of the Queen of love. Dreams. The creatures of the drowsie brain. Sleeps airy shapes. Her sences keep a festival. The fancies revels. The fantasies of night. The slattering visions. The sweet oftence of erring fancy. The fancies Chao. The fancies poetry. Delighted fancies play. Shape feigning Morphus in the dead of night, Sent from the King of rest with speedy flight, Presents, &c. As ominous as was Calphurnia's dream The night before her Caesar dyed. Prophetick fancy. Fair sanguine dreams, that see to chear the night With beauteous shipes and rosie wings. Such Caesar had before the day He conquer'd Pompey in Phasalia. With strange ormes, and shadowes ominous. Did my last sleep my greedy soul entertain. The smoaky clouds of sleep. Sleepes shadowie operations. The images presenting day desires. Rest-disturbing fancie The sleepy brood hatcht by the wings of night. Confused shewes thrown from sleeps horny wand. A ghastly dream that did last night surprize.
The frighted fancy. The mocking of unquiet lumbers. Black illusions of the night. Chrystal visions. The maygame of the shaping fancy. The fancies wardrobe rifled, thrown on heaps. Drink. Drunkard. With generous wines they chear Their heightned spirits. Empty the bowles of wine and brains of wit. One that will be a man to morrow morning: One heele trips up the other. Makes indentures as he goes. A blind man with eyes, and a cripple with legs on. A speaking tost. A living sponge. Soused in liquor. Drunkenness, Audacious thief that oft before ones face. Steals man away, and leaves a beast in place. One outlawd by himself, all kind of ill Did with his liquor side into his veins. That orfeits man, and doth dvest All worldly right, save what he hath by beast. The soul eclypst. The raving fancy. Puffing his cheeks, blearing his curious eye. Studding his nose with vitious heraldry, While pearls and rubies doth his wine disclose, He makes his purse poor to enrich his nose. So far drowned in dink, he needs the Crowner to sit on him. That hates nothing more, than an unfill'd can. Twenty of the dogs dayes rain in his nose. All about him are under the line. His nose in the cup in winter saves the labour of a tost, And is enough to give his drink a second brewing. With bowles so full, At once they fill their bladders and their skull. That to no seat confine Their wounding feet. Drought. v. Famine. Thirst. A fiery thirst Sups up the vital humour and doth dry Their beauties up into Anatomy, Leaving not so much moisture that they may Use their throats for complaint. Each bears an Aerna in his thirsty breast. They all complain, yet rests not any where.
So much of moisture as to make a tear. They drink The stale of horses, and the gilded puddle, That beasts would cough at: To Drown. Drowned. So headlong Ino with the load she bears, Fell, and the sparkling waves did fall in tears Struck down by Neptunes trident. To make themselves a shipwrack. Dying in water, to revive in fire. VVhom Tnetis in her silver bosome took, That fid their tombe and watry grave, VVithin the silver bosome of a wave. To whom rude tempests ave Made an unhappy and inglorious grave, The waves that were above when as she fell, For fear flew back again into their well, Doubting ensuing times would on them frown That they so rare a beauty helpt to drown, Her fall in grief did make the stream so roare, That sullen murmurings fill'd all the shore. A jewel never sent To be possest by one sole element, Let's drown him once again within our tears. Entomb'd within the watry main. The saphyre-visag'd God grew proud, Imagining that Ganymed displeas'd Had left the heavens, therefoe he on him seas'd. VVhom swelling waters do embalme, Neptune for ever do bewaile his death, And all the Nimphs tear off their sea-green haire. Drumme. The tongue of war, mocking the loud-mouthed thunder. The clamorous harbenger of blood and death. VVhose doubtful musick doth delight The willing ear, and the unwilling fright. A sound whose concord makes a jarre, 'Ts noyse in peace, though harmony in war. Dust. The batter'd center flew. In clouds of dust, rais'd from the horses hoofes, That beat a thunder from the groaning earth.
Clouds of dust did flie As great as Thracian whirle-winds blow about Ore the skies face, and put daies bright eye out, The mounted dust, like smoak obscur'd the skies, The swartish clouds of dust, did sute their arms in gray, As if the emulous earth meant to have Clouds, as well as the aire. The naked wind appareld her self in dust, The Aire is choakt with dust. Dwarf. Natures Epitomy, manual, Compendium, Enchyridion Natures lesser volumes, short-hand, Decimo sexto, Man in the Print of Amsterdam. A walking thumb, Whose voice more than his stature can Tels us, that he is a man. Jack of the clock-house, A thrum of man, Dandiprat, Hop-on my thumb, Who when he stands on tiptoes seems to sit. Pigmie. E. Eagle. THe Bird that bears, Joves awful lightning in her golden fears Joves fowle, that in her talons bears Impetuous thunder. Joves winged Armour-bearer. Joves feathered squire, The imperial Airie peoples King. That cleaves the Clouds, and bravely bold doth think, With firmer eyes, to make the suns eye wink, That dares the brightest Radiance of the sun, The bid that fixtly can oppose her eyes Against the proudest light in all the Skies, The princely bird that through the azure Skies At Joves command with fiery lightning flies. Of all the winged crew ordaind the head For faithful service in his Ganymed, The birds that change their aged plume And a new age, with newer wings resume.
Ear. The fleshie laborinth. The mazie holes. The bodies scouts. The Ecchoes winding mazes. The watchful sentinels. Hearing Portals. The crooked narrow allies. The winding entries. The portls that let in the sounds, Insatiate concave. In whose incirclets if you gaze, Your eyes may tread a lovers maze. The tippe no jewel needs to weare The tippe is Natures-Jewel there; The winding rounds That give an enterainment to the sounds, The hearing Organes, that drum unto the soul. To give ear. v. Attend. To lend a listning ear, a yielding ear, obedient ear, With glad allowance gave his counsel ear. To grace with glad attention. To lend soft audience. To give no ear. He hears me so, as rocks the roaring waves That beat their brows, As the tempestuous seas, the hopeless Mariner. Earth. The worlds great pedestial. Our globy Grandame. The Skie encompast Globe. The olid center, The center of the vast circumference The flowry mantled stage. The lower Globe, The fruitful surface of the pregnant soil Enricht by the labourious plow-mans toyl, The solid Globe ballanc't in weightless Air. Earth-quake. The ague of the earth. Earths. grumbling fit The center pants with sudden throwe, The trembling earth, a sad distemper showes The feavourous earth did shake The aguish earth trembles in every vein, The great worlds ague, the eeming earth Is with a kind of Cholick pinht and vext By the imprisoning of unruly winds Within her womb, which for enlargement strives, Shakes the old beldame earth, and tumbles down Steeples and mosse-grown towres,
Earth imprison'd Aire, with sudden birth, Scartles the world, and shakes the shivering earth. East. The honoured cradle of the Rosie morning, Aurora's sweet Vermillion lap, The gate hung all with golden tissues, Whence Hyperions Chariot issues. The light-disclosing portals of the Sun; The Chambers of the springing light; The ascendng Sun, Rising Sun, Suns ascent Where, into the Ocean Nysus, Hydaspes, and swift Ganges fall. The gray cheeks of the East, The neighbours to the Suns uprise Great Alexanders Altars, Pearly Aurora's saffron colourd bed The Nations that first see Sols early rising from Aurora's knee, Whence early day doth spring Where silver Ganges runs From whence the mornings beams ascend. Eat. To pay the debt due to the stomack To stop the mouth of hunger, To satisfie the exacting appetite, To give almes to our craving stomack. Eccho. Daughter of aire and tongue, Which the last of dying speech retorts, Whilest she with others language sports. The babling guest of rocks and hills, That blab that will not, cannot hold her tongue Who never asks, but ever answers all. Who lets not any her in vain to call The babling gossip of the aire, The vocal goddess of the woods, Slides through the vale, and danceth ore the floods. Loud Eccho's tear woods. The Ape of Speech, The image of a voice; The gentle neigh-bourhood of Grove and Spring, Unbosome all their Ecchoes.
Eclipse. The Suns or Moons mourning clothes, robes, The Suns tempest, storm; The Moon into her darkned Orbe retires. Sun, Moon's, swound, extasie, trance, enchantment, Fair Phebe in Diameter; Earth interposed betwixt the Sun and her Suffers Eclypse, and is disrobed quite During the time of all her borrowed light, The Moon paus'd in h paler sphear, Whilest her grim dragons drew her through the aie, Sole pale sister, in her wandering race With interposed wheels obscures his face, Thessalian witches, conjure down the Moon, The Moon deprived of her brothers sight Earth interposing his celestial light The earths thick shade Eclyp'st the silver browes of Cynthia bright, And her brown shadowes quencht her brothers light: Egypt. Upon whose fertile beast a thousand waies In wandring tracks the wanton Nilus plaies, And with his amorous folding arms doth seem T'imbrace small Ilands, whilest his silver stream From several channels of it self doth meet, And oft it self with wan on kisses greet Where Philips son That all the rifled Ocean won, Built his proud Ciie. The Phaian land. That soil where sad heaven never rains The fertile plain, where swelling Nilus serves in stead of rain, Where Nile discolours the blew Ocean. Egyptian. Those that shine in linnen stoles, where Nilus flowes, Renowned Nation, Fed with fair Nilus fruitful inundation, Which near confine The sweltering Coasts of swarthie Abyssine. That with timbrel'd Anthems dark, Bear Osyris woshipt Ark.
Eyes. Those lovely Lamps, those fleshie stars, The souls windows. Starry twins. Cupids quiver, Sparks excelling in their shine Fairest beams of Erycin. Cupids piercing shafts The wombs of Stars, from whence At every glance a constellation flies Sparkling Chrysolites. Natures looking glasses, The bodies lattices, watchmen, scouts, sentinels, Cupids burning glasss. Loves silent Oratours, Loves train band. Loves select band. Loves artillery, The starrie Jewels. Loves Legats, Embassadours, Looks the Embassie of Love. Loves Magizin of Archerie. Bright was the Sun, but brighter were her eyes; Such are the Lamps, that guide the Deities, Nay, such the fire is, whence the Pythian Knight, Borrows his beams, and lends his sister light. Eyes whose life infusing beams, Have power to melt the Northern icie streams, And so inflame the Gods of those bound seas, They should inchain their Virgin passages, Under whose lids do move, In nimble measures, beauty, wit, and love. Eies whose raies, Might thaw the frozen Russian into lust, And parch the negroes, hotter blood to dust. The Chrystall Cisterns that send out hot streames, Of liquid pearle, An eye might captive love. Beauty sometime in all her glory crown'd. Passing by that clear fountain of her eye, Her sunshine face there chancing to espie, Forgot her self, deeming she had been drown'd; And thus whilest Beautie at her beautie gazed She with her own perfections was amazed, 'Twixt joy and grief, she wih a smiling frowning Cast in her self, to save her self from drowning The Well of Nector, pav'd with Pearl and Gold; Where she remains for all eyes to behold, An eye where Loves dance galliards, On whose eye-lids sit A thousand Nymph-like, and enamoured graces, Bright Citherea's Arks of love;
Loves dumb musick, silent Oratory Rhetorick, The souls casemens. Natures Paradise, Beauties Chrystal quivers. The busie wanderers Cupids nest. Magick circles. Harbingers of Love, Cupids chariot, fowlers arrows, torches, touch-box, matches, Secret Oratours, thoughts mbassadours, Pandars of the soul, Nuntio's of the mind; Letting more light out then they take in, Eyes, which so far all other lights control They warm our mortal parts, but these our soul. The rowling eyes Cast flames, like lightning darted from the skies Gilding the object, whereupon they gaze The windows through, which the heavens delight to peep, Which when the heavens do spie, They think themselves braved by a lower skie. Where en trencht Cupid lies, And from these turrets all the world desies The salvages, that worship the Suns rise Would hate their God, if they beheld these eyes, All heavenly beauties joyn themselves in one To shew their glory in her eye alone; Which when it turneth its celestiall ball A thousand sweet stars rise, a thousand fall, Eyes sending forth such pointed darts As peirce the hardest Adamantine heart Whose motions wheel the restless fate of every lover. Those suns display, Their lids, and thence let out imprisoned day, The tempting books On which even crabbed old men look, Whence every beam creats a day Cupids throne befet with beams, An eye. Quick, round, and full, raid round with majesty; The Eagles do produce their bood To try their young ones there. Two sprightful jetty eyes, Where subtle Cupid in close ambush lies Two of the fairest stars in all the heavens, Having some business, do intreat her eyes To twinkle in their sphears, till they return, Whose eyes in heaven
ould through the airy region stream so bright hat birds would sing, and think it were not night, Eyes that seem a temple, where love and beauty are mared, hose every looks a triumph; Which nothing like themselves can fee; Eyes, which when so ere they rove All the Spheres of beautie move, Which while they make love conquer, conqver love The school where Venus hath learnt chastiy, Eyes which marry state with pleasure And keep the keyes of Natures chiefest treasure, Whose shining eyes Are the two greater lights of pids skies To cure his blindness love doth make repair Unto her eyes, able to steal the lookers on, and leave Them quite unfurnisht. Cupid did espy The greatness of his God-hed in her eye, The Deities Of love light torches at her flaming eyes. Love was dandled in her eye, Yet curbd with a beseeming gravitie Eyes might with a beck command a Monarchi; Eyes which hit when Cupids shafts do miss. That shut their coward gates on atomies Wounding eyes At every glance an arrow flies, Whose lasting eyes, Out-lookt the starry Jewes of the Skies. Elaborate. Things that were born, when none but the stil night, And his dumb candle saw his pinching throes, That cost the buffeting of many a dek, And bitten nailes with rubbing of the brow, Which cost the dear expence of oyle, Suckt by the watchful Lamp, That cost the tapers thirsty wast That smels of Lamps and night cap, Labour'd work, the child of a bed-ridden wit. Elegies. v. Lamentable. My blubbering pen her sable tears let fall In Characters right Hieroglyphicall,
And mixing with my tears are ready turning My late white-paper to a weed of mourning, Or inke and paper, strive how to impart My words, the weeds, my thoughts were in my heart; Or else the blots, unwilling are my imes, And their sad cause, should live till after times. Fearing if men, their subject should descrie, They forthwith would dissolve to tears, and die. Invailed in a sable weed, she sate, v. Browns Pastor. 1. Book. Song 5. upon Prince Henry. Singing a Song, whch stones dissolved at; How shall we find a fitting monument For brass and marble were they placed here Would fret, and melt in tears to lie so near Repeating ore The Story of his vertues, untill I Not write, but am my self his Elegie, Without disturbing the harmonious sphears, Weele bath below thy memory in tears Such grief, as who can utter it. Doth not vent forth his sorrow, but hs wit, I envie death, the treasure of his sleep Th' illiterate vulgar in a well-tun'd breath Lament his loss, and learnedly chide death. It were a shame for all, thou being gone, Not to have power to die with grief alone. But, 'twere proud piety if we Should think by prayers to alter Heavens Decree, His death, the crime of destiny Children untaught, by instinct for thee weep My distracted fears Have no commerse with reasonable tears, Whose death commands A subsidie from every private eye, Fetch all the Spices that Arabia yields; Distill the choysest flowers of the fields: And when in one their best perfections meet, Embalm her corps, that she may make them sweet. Infectious grief striking all hearers. Tears the best Expressours of true sorrow, speak the rest, Every tear speaks a dumb Elegie, The wine of lif's drawn out, and from this time
Meer lees is left this vault. Let him whose lines a private losse deplore, Call them to weepe, that never wept before. Call not the winds, nor bid the rivers stay, For though the sighs, and tears they could repay, Which injur'd lovers mourners for the dead, Captives and Saints have breath'd away and shed; Yet we should want to make our sorrow fit For such a cause as now doth silence it. So weell instructed are my tears Toy fall in ordered characters. My grief is more audacious, give me one, Who every day hath heard a dying groan! The subject of my verses may suffice To draw new tears from dry and weary eyes. To shrine his name within an Elegi, I may forget to drink, to eat to sleepe, Remembring thee, but when I do to weepe, In well weigh'd lines, that men shall at thy herse Envie the sorrow that brought forth my verse, May my dull understanding, &c. All joyes have now one common funeral. Our grief we cannot call A passion, since the ground is raional, Our tears and sighes may be excus'd, though those To deluges, and these to tempests rose. No pen can plead excuse For Elegies, howle all who cannot sing, For tombes bring turfe who cannot marble bring, I oft have verse on meaner subjects made, Should I give presents, and leave debts unpaid? Want of invention, here is no excuse, The matter I shall find and not produce, And as it fares in crowds, I nothing doubt, So much would passe, that nothing can get out, And in the work which now my thoughts intend, I shall find nothing hard, but how to end. Had this been for some meaner persons herse, I might have then observ'd the lawes of verse, But here they faile, nor can I hope t' expresse In numbers, what the world counts numberlesse, I dare not (learned shade) bedew thy herse
With tears, unlesse that impudence in verse Would cease to be a sin; and what were crime In prose, would be no injury in rhime. Upon Whose death the Ocean might turn Helicon. O who will give me tears? Come all ye spring Dwell in my head and eyes; come clouds and rain, My grief hath need of all the warry things That Nature hath produc'd. Let every vein Suck up a river to supply mine eyes, My weary weeping eyes too dry for me, Unlesse they get new conduits, new supplies To bear them out, and with my state agree. What are two shallow foords, two little spouts Of a lesse world? The greater is but small, A narrow cupboard for my griefs and doubts, Which want provision in the midst of all; Verses, ye are too fine a thing, too wise For my rough sorrowes; cease, be dumbe and mute, Give up your feet and running to mine eyes, And keep your measures for some lovers lute, Whose grief allows him musick and a rhime For mine excludes both measure, tune, and time. Now unto sorrow must I tune my song, And set my harp to notes of saddest woe. Befriend me night best patronesse of grief, Over the pole thy thickest mantle throw, And work my flatter'd fancy to belief, That heaven and earth are colou'd with my woe, My sorrowes are too dark for day to know; The leaves should all be black whereon I write, and letters where my tears have washt, a wannish white. v. Elegies on Dr. Donne, annexed to his Poems. Quarles Emblems joynd with his divine Poems. Habbingtons Castara, the third part. Sr. John eamounts Poems. Johnsonus Virbius upon Ben. Johnson. Ʋpon Mr. Edw. King fellow of Chr. Coll. in Cambridge. Elements. The primitive ingredients of all bodies. The messe of simple bodies. Natures first mournival.
The jarring inmates of all bodies. Whose discord makes the worlds harmony. The Diatessaron of natures harmony. Natures great Tetrarchs. Elephant. The stiffe-kneed carry-castle. Natures great Mster-piece. The only harmlesse great thing. Giant of beasts. The towre-backt beast. Vast Lybian beast. The ivory-toothed beast. That scornes whole armies, and yet fears a mouse. Eloquence, Eloquent. A speaking pomander. A exchequer of good language. Whose tongues mens ears in chains could tie, With due attention drawing every ear, Such smooth, soft language that each line Might stroke an angry God, or stay Joves thunder,—make the hearers pine With envy—whose words in order meet, And softly stealing in with equal feet, Slide into even-pa't numbers, with such grace As each word had been molded for its place. Had the sun, When he pursued the swiftly flying maid; Courted her in such language, she had staid. Persuasive magick of the charming tongue, The Be within his sacred mouth seeks roome To arch the chambers of her honey combe. Mercury could not have wooed Venus with more magificent elo∣quence. When he speaks, Mute admiration lurketst in mens ears, To steale his sweet and honeyed sntences. Such charming eloquence As in the ear doth lock up every sence Of the rapt hearer. Able to reconcile antipathies. Language melting in the eare. Whose words leave in all such impression, as is wont to be the first elementing and foundation of love. If Eloquence her self would speak, she could not make use of more winning termes than those he useth. Suad sits thron'd upon his tongue. Revived Tully. Nstor returned to see Another age, to adde unto his three.
The fear, lest he should make an end, Lessens the pleasure that his speech doth lend To the admiring eate. His tongue the ear with musick feeds VVhen he did speak, th'alloted hour would stay His hasty minutes, and beguile the day, And yet the greedy hearers chid the hast Of the false hour, that ran away so fast. Elysium. v. Pleasant place. The blessed fields where gentle lovers walk. In endlesse joyes. The blessed groves. The happy mansions of the dead. The blest abodes. Those pleasant places. Those pleasant fields, and groves of all the graces. The joyful bliss of ghosts repurified. VVhere every object charmes the wandering eye, And bids the soul gaze there eternally. VVhere all those objects are that lend delight. To the admiring fancy. VVhere growes the golden tree. At the same season nature there doth bring The autumnes wealth with pleasures of the spring. VVhere in green meadowes sits eternal May, Purfling the margents, whilst perpetual day So double guilds the aire, as that no night Can ever rust th'enamel of the light. Elysian lay, VVhere every season is he month of May. VVhere restored formes nere fade, VVhere growth can need no seed, nor light a shade, The joyes which in our flesh through fraile expence Of strength, through age were lost t'our injur'd senc, VVe there do meet again, and those we tast A new, though we devour, do ever last. Embrace. Swathe, swadle, environ, wrap, grasp, clip, girt, girdle, hug, clasp, Sweet endearments. Closer than cockles, and in lustful twines Oubid the vi, or the winding vines, So near, and folded in so close a knot, As if they could concorporate and grow one. So clasping ivie round the oake doth grow. So Salmacis embrac'd th'Hermaphrodite
As in the fount he bathed. The Polipus doth so deteine his foe, With strict embracements glu'd. T'd fast in Natures chains. Her yeilding neck with loving twines embrac', With amorous twine, About the husband oak, the vine Thus wreathes to kisse his leavie face, Their streams thus rivers joyne, And loose themselves in their embrace. Tus turtles bill, and groane, Their loves into each others ear, Two flames thus burn in one, VVhen their curld heads to heaven they rear, The flattering and uxorious ivie so Enclasps her aged husband. Embracing with as much delight As Salmacis her dear Hermaphrodite. So the uxorious vine Doth with the straight and well limb'd elme entwine. And in such embraces twine, As if we read unto the vine, Te ivie and the columbine, VVeaving into more subtile twines Than woodbine, ivie, or the vines. His armes infold her in more subtile knots Than amorous ivie when it hugs the oake. VVeele cling together like two wanton vines, Circling our souls and loves in one another, VVith such embrcements, as it seem'd their souls Desit'd to meer, and their hearts to kisse. The female ivie so Emings the barkie fingers of the elme, And locks her so in his embraces, As if he meant to pinne her to his heart, Hangs on him As if encrease of appetite did grow From what it grew on. Cleaving lke burres. Like streams which flow, Encurl'd together, and no difference shew, VVhilst in their liquid silver on they un, And twine themselves like wool together spn.
Embrion. v. Abortive. Unfashioned lump. The Chaos of the lesser world. Rude, and yet shapelesse burthen of the wombe. Natures first draught. Endymion. The moons pale favourite. Mount Lamus sleepy shepheard. England. Neptunes parke. The British e. Albion. That Isle which Neptune did divide, And set apart from all the world beside, Purgatory of servants, Hell of horses, Paradise of women. The ringing Island. Stor'd with mountains, bridges, wooll, With Churches, rivers, women beautiful. Little world, so self-sufficient, that she seems to thrust away from her all the world besides, as being a substanrive that can stand by it selfe. Europes epiome. Europes microcosme. Queen of Isles. Neptunes minion. The Churches first daughter. That had the first Christian King, and out of whose bowels sprung the first' Christian Emperour. To Envie. Envious. Bearing devouring Aena in his brest. His own torment. Fuy Eynnis. Like to Aglaucos turnd to speckled stone. Brning like Aetna with embowelled fire. Like Basilisks that dart an eye. Impoyson'd with the dreggs of cruel hate. That draw an envious breath. What more could poison if it had a tongue t'expresse. Whose tongue's a spunge of venome. That feels a busie swarming nest Of never dying dragons in their brest. The viper of the venemous soul. To look with narrow eyes. Malice lies lieger in his brest. Whose eyes cannot look right on any happy man, nor ears bear the burthen of his praise, contrary to other plagues, he is plagued with anothers well being, making happinesse the ground of his unhappi∣nesse, and good newes the argument of his sorrow, whose favour none can win, but at the dear race of being miserable.
Such an one, as his enemy needs wish him no worse, than to wish his own happiness seen by him. That when he sees anothers happiness, And views himself, wishes the organs of his ight were crackt, And that the engines of his grief would cast His eye-balls like two gobes of wild fire forth, To melt the unproportioned frame of nature. That could eat his entrals, And sink his soul nto the earth with sorrow. Of a lan body and visage, as if his eager soul biting for anger at the ogge of his body, desired to fret a pssge through it. Envie. The barking Sylla. Envy tears The snakie fleece which on her hed she wears. That black inhabitant of hell, Self eating ele, Through others leannesse fatting up her selfe, Swol'n like a oad, betwixt her bleeding jawes, He hissing serpents wrigling tailes she chawes. Sicilian tyrants yet could never find A greater torment. The fury lapping vipers blood, And feeding on their flesh, her poysonous food, Her body more than meager, pale her hew, Her eeth all rusty, eyes that look askew, Her brest wist gall, her tongue with poyson swell'd, She only laught when she sad sighs beheld, He ever waking cares exile soft sleep, She cannot look on good success but weepe, Repining pines, and wounding others bleeds, She on her selfe revengeth her misdeeds. That dak shadow ever waiting on shining vertue. That banquets in anothers miseries. Epicure. v. Glutton. Voluptuous. That ect which acknowledge no greater evill than pain, nor hgher blsse than pleasure. An easie soul made tender with delight, Which thinks that he hath forfeited that houre, That adds not to his pleasure, or his power. Epitaph. In deathlesse verse Bestowing same on noble sepulchers.
The lying postscript of a perjur'd stone. The sad elogium of a speaking stone. Epithalaminm. The Nuptial song. Hymenaean verse. Thou that dwell'st on Helicon, That to men dost virgins hale, With sweet flowred Margerum; With a smiling look appear. Let this day with pleasure spring, Nimbly dance the flaming pine, VVith good auguries come wed, Like a mytle ever green, VVhere the Nymphs their sports pursue; Come O with a willing mind, Sunk in Thespian rocks where chill, To the Bridegroome call the Bride, As when closely creeping vines, Chastest virgins, you who may Make the aire with Hymen ring, Fairest souls that shine more bright Than your nuptial tapers light, And with deeper piercing dart, Beams af love into the heart, Modest Hymen dare not here At your sacred rites appear, Blushing that his paler light Is by you eclips'd to night, And your power, far above All that presidents of love. He his saffron robes neglects, And his garlands disaffects. All his tapers, all his flowers, All his fillets, all his powers, All the pleasures, all the sweets That attend the genil sheets, All his chains and loving bands He resignes into your hands, My soft joyes now you are wed, Be the curtains for your bed; May faire honour and delight Cown your day, and blesse your night; May your oft repeated kisses
Bring with them as many blisses, And the warm embrace of love Be soft as Downe, on Venus Dove, May the pleasures of your bed, Pass the hairs upon your head, And your joies out-vie the sand. O thou fai Uranias son, Hymen, O thy brows impale Take thy Safferon vail and come, Yellow stocks of woollen weare, Shrill Epithalamiums sing Shake in that fair hand of thine Those two to an happie bed, On the shore of Cyprus seen, Fostering it with Rosie dew, Leave the Aonion Caves behind Aganippe's waters drill, In Affections fetters tyde, Claspes, the Oake in amorous twines; Taste the like another day, Hymen, Hymenaeus sing. Whats that we see from far? the spring of day Bloomd from the East? or fair enameld May, Blown out of April? or some new Star filled with glorie to our view; Reaching at heaven To adde a nobler Planet to the seven? Say, or do we not descrie, Some Goddess in a Cloud of Tiffany, To move, or rather the Emerging Venus from the sea. 'Tis she, 'tis she, or else some more divine Enlightned substance, see how from the shrine, Of holy Saints she paceth on Throwing about Vermillion, And Amber spice— ing the chaste Aire with fumes of Paradise, Then come on, come on and yield A savour like unto the field, When the bedabled morn, Washeth the ears of corn.
Lead on fair pair of Nymphes, the whilest her eyes Guiltie of somewhat, guild the straw-berries And cherries in her cheks: ther's cream Already spilt, her rayes must geam Gently thereon, And so create lust and temptation, To surphet and hunger Help on her pace, and though she lag, yet stir Her homeward, well she knows, There is her heart, where ere she goes. See where she coms and smels, how all the street, Breaths Vneyards and Pomgranates, oh how sweet As a fir'd Altar is each one Breathing pounded Cynnamon, The Phoenix nest. Built up of odours burneth in her brest. Who would not there consume His soul to cyndars, in that rich perfume, The while He burns to embers in the pile. Hymen, O Hymen, tread the sacred ground, Show thy white feet, and head with marioram crown Mount up thy flames, and let thy torch Display the Bridegroom in the porch. In his desires Towring more, more disparklig than the fires Shew her, how his eyes do burn, And roul about, and in their motion turn Their balls to ash heaps: hast Or else to nothing he will wast. Glide through the banks of virgins then, and pass The showres of Roses, luckie four-leav'd grass The whiles the clouds of younglings sing And drown you with a flowry spring Whilest some repeat Your praise, and bless you, covering you with wheat, Whilest others do divine, Blest be the Bride, on which the Sun doth shine; And thousands gladly wish You multiply as doth a fish. Why the, on forward fair aspitious Bride, And come upon the Bidegroom like a tide,
Bearing down time before you, hie Swell more, and loose your selves, imply Like streams which flow Encurld together, and no difference show In their mot silver, un Into your selves, like wooll together spun, Or blend so, as the sight Of two, makes one Hermophradite, Welcome at last unto the threshold. Time Thron'd in a saffon evening seems to chime All in: kiss, and so enter, if A prayer must be said, be brief, The easie gods, or such contempts, have onely myrtle ods To stroak, not strike: fear you No more wild Nymphs, than they would have you do But dread, you more offend In that you do begin, than end; And now you are enterd, see the codled cook, Runs from his torid zone, to py and look, And bless his dainty mistress, see Now th' aged whisper, this is she, Who now must sway Us, peace shield her, she's pretty, yea and nay, And the smik, butler thinks it Sin in his wappery not t' express his wit. Each striving to devise Some ginne to take her eyes Now if we must, for Ceremony sake Bless a sack posset, luck go with it, take The night charm quickly, you have spels And Magick for to end, and hells To pass, but such And with such torture, as no God would gruth To live there, and for ever frie, Yea, and consume, and grow again to die, And live, and in that case Love the damnation of the place. To bed, to bed sweet Turtles now, and write This the long day, and that the shortest night; And yet though short, for you, for me, I count this night as long as three Lying alone,
Estrige. That drops her egs upon the naked land, And wraps them in a bed of hatching sand, Exposed to the wandering traveller, And feet of beasts, which those wild deserts tear. Eternitie. The soft down of Eternitie, Unfathom'd circle, Endless duration, The boundless Ocean of conceit, That great uncenterd vast circumference, That knows no limits, unconfined by time. From all Eternitie. Ere by the sphears times motions were created, Ere the astonisht spring Heard in the Aire the feathered people sing, Ere time had motion, or the Sun obtaind His Province ore the day, Ere the worlds great Creator did, From the dark formless Chaos light divide, Sablish eternal lawes, to which he tide His creatures and himself, and did divide The worlds set ages by unchanged fate, When fea and earth, and heaven was yet unfram'd, Ere nature had that face, they chaos nam'd, Ere Titan did the world with light adorn, Or waxing Phoebe filld her wained horn, Ere the self-poysed earth in the Aire was pla'd, Or Amphytrite the vast shore embrac'd. To all Eternitie. v. Ever. Ethiopian. Upon whose brow And curled locks the scorching sun doth show His lasting tyrannie. A wainscot face, Which in the clearest light Bears in his face still a continued night, Whose face wears natures mask, natures vizard That dive the biny seas, For those gay things which so much fancy please Gods image cut in Ebony or Jet. Eve. Nosooner woman, than a wife, The general universal Grandame, The bride
Taken from out her sleeping husbands side. Satans first factour. Temptations handsel, On whom the Devil first did make essay To y his cunning in the tempting way. Evening. Phoebus bright chariot, now had run Past the proud pillers of Ascmena's son, The sun doth gallop down the western hill The eb of day, the winter of the day The Autumne of the light. When doubtful light Draws on the dewie chariot of the night To Thetis watry bowers, the sun doth hie Bidding farewel, unto the gloomy skie, The labour of the day, now near at an end, From steep Olympus Phoebus steeds descend, When the eye of heaven Is quite clos'd up, and hath with earth made even, The drooping light Begins to treble the encreasing shades. Now hasty Titan to th' Hesperian seas. Descends. Phoebus now enters the Tartessian main, The old age of the day. When day doth end, And Phoebus panting steeds to seas descend, The day declines his light, And earth-born shades, had clothed the world with night. The day grown old and weak. The evening now descended, and did steep The eyes of all men with desire of sleep, The day grows old, And gins to shut in with the Marigold, The neat-heards kine do bellow in the yard, And dairie maides for the milk pepar'd. Now great Hyperion leaves his golden throne, That on the dancing waves in glory shone, For whose declining on the western shore The oriental hils, black mantles wore, When the gentle Aire Breaths to the sullen night a soft repair. Now the setting Sun To drown as much of his bright orb begun, As the Moon wants, when after ful she wain Or grows near ful, when daies last light Gives place to the approach of duskie night.
Night in her black shade Shuts up the day. The setting sun doth hisse, Drencht in the sea. The declining of the parting day. Now Titans orbe, halfe drowned in the seas, Gave part to us, part to th'Antipodes. When the declining lamp Trebles the shadowes, and the evening damp, Begins to moysten, and refresh the earth. When day yeilds up his right To the succeeding Emperess of night. The envious west, Too greedy to enjoy so fair a guest, Calls Soll to bed, where ravisht from our sight, He leavs us to the solemn frowns of night. The drooping light. Expiting of the day. Day in her death-bed. Day undressing. What time the bright sun fiery teame Towards the western brim begins to draw. Arrival of the night. The sullen night now her black curtains spread, Lowring the sun had tarried up so long, Whose faire eyes closing, sofly stole to bed, When all the heavens with dusky clouds were hung, When birds wild musick burthen every bough, And with their chipings lullaby the day, Hushing the silent night. Sleepy light, When as the sun hales towards the western shade, And the trees shadowes three times greater made. Phaebus ray sunk in the seas, Sols steeds retire, To quench their burning fetlocks and to steep, Their flaming nostrils in the westerne deepe. The suns half buried in a cloud, Whose raies the vapours of approaching night Have rendred weak and faint. The declining sun Had hurried his diurnal load To th'borders of the western road, By this time had the heavens surrounding steeds Quell'd their proud courage, turn'd their fainting heads Into the lower hemisphear to coole Their slaming nostril in the western poole,
Night had laid the sun to sleep Now night begins to muffle up the day. The wether rings his bell. The toyling ploughman drives his thirsty teames, To tast the slippery streams. The droyling swineheard knocks away, and feasts His hungry guests The Box-bill, Ousil, and the dapled Thrush As rivals meet at their beloved bush. The morning of the Antipodes. The day growes old, the low pitcht lamp hath made No lesse than treble shade, And the descending damp doth now prepare T'uncurle bright Titans haire, Whose westerne wardrobe now begins 'infold Her purples, fing'd with gold, To cloath his evening glory, when th'alarmes Of rest, shall call to ly in Thetis armes. Time hath lodg'd the sun. The weather rings his evening bell. The curle-pate waggoner of heaven Had finisht his diurnal course and driven, His panting steeds down to the western hill, When silver Cynthia rising to fulfill Her nightly course lets fall an evening tear To see her brother leave the Hemisphear The golden-headed chariote of heaven With hasty speed his prouder rains doth bend His panting horses to their journeys end. He blushes, and with unrestrain'd careere, He hurries to the lower hemispheare, And in a moment shoots his golden head Upon the pillow of fair Thetis bed. When the candles begin to inherit the Suns office, When lights make an artificial day, When the Sun like a noble heart shews his greatest Countenance in his lwest estate. deceased day. The Sun makes speed to leaue our west, to doe his office in the other hemisphear, as if he meant to carry news what stars he left behind. Nights black contagious breath Already smoaks about the burning crest
Of the old feeble and day wearied Sun. The waining of the Sun. The bat doth flie Her cloistered flight to sullen Hecats summon The shade born Beetle with his drowsi humme Hath rung nights yawning peal, Seeling night, Skarfs up the tender eye of beauteous day. When like Elinar wih his evening beamss The Sun hath turn'd to gold the silver streams, The treble shades begin to damp The moistened earth, and the declining lamp invites to silence: Light thickens And the Crow makes wing unto the woods, Good things of day begin to droop and drowse, Whilst nights black agents to their preys do rows The west but glimmers with some streaks of day. Now spurs the lated traveller apace Unto the timely Inne, When as the Nightimgale chanteth her Vesper, And the wild forresters couch on the ground, The long shades of the hills appear, The Sun is fled to Thetis bed, When night entombs the dying light, What times the gray flie winds her soultry horn The Even-star bright Towards heavens descent had slopt his burnisht wheel. Phebus goes to rest Inning his Chariot in the glooming West The Sun in golden Cstariot burld Now bid good morrow to the nether world. The evening damp Begins to fall, and heavens declining lamp, Bespeaks the doubtfull twilight, day grows old, Invites the fowls to roost, the sheep to folds When day doth give her room Unto the shady gloome. When rising stars shal spread Their golden flames Evening star The star that ushers in the Even, And gives a beautie to the sober West. The sea bath'd star that brings
Night on, and first displaies her sable wings. That Titan warnes to bed. The glistering herald that proclaimes the night. That bright star that last forsakes the skies. Ever. v. Never. Till dissolution date times, nights and daies, While radiant stars shall run their usual race, Whilst Neptunes armes the fruitful earth embrace, Whilst Cynthia shall her hornes together close, While Lucifer the rosie morne fore-showes While lofty Arctos shuns the salt profound. While shades the mountains cast, streams to the main Their tribute pay, or skies the stars sustein. While spangling stars shall give the skie their light. Till time and memory shal be no more. Whilst land the sea, and aire the land shall bound, Whilst labouring Titan runs his glorious round. Whilst ther's a summer to succeed the spring, Or Autumne winter. Whilst upon his wing Time hath a feather. Till Lachesis have no more thread to spin. To the last syllable of recorded time. Whilst the sun light, or earth doth shadowes cast. Till time, that gives all, have an end. Whilst the celestial orbes in order roule, And turn their flames about the stedfast pole. Experience. That looks with eyes of all the world beside, An with all ages holds intellignce. In credit by the trust of years. Wisedomes great looking-glasse. Mistresse of fooles. That dear bought learning. Extasie. The soul eclipst. Th'intranced soul. The short divorcement of the soul. That shorter death.
F. Face. WHose face is beauties chair of state, Where in triumphant majesty she sate. Nature made And gave the damk rose its pleasant grace, That men might liken somewhat to her face. Envy would burst had she no other taske, Than to behold this face without a maske, Making the eyes glad prisoners to her face, Unpattern'd beauty summon'd all her grace To the composure of so sweet a face. A face wherein The linked Deities their graces fix, Where roses with unsullied lillies mix. A face worthy a Goddess. Immortal frame of a matchlesse beauty. A face wherein doth swim A flood of beauty. Rch beams of beauty shine within her face. Beauties Elisium. Tempe, Elixir, Magazin, Quintessence, Exchequer. Transcript of perfection. Tht box where sweets compacted lie. Beauty takes up her place, And dates her letters from that face, When she doth wite. Hive of sweetnesse. Rich magazin of sacred treasure. Whence graces spring in unconfined measure. The lilly and the rose So much contending lately for the place, Till both compounded in her beauteous face. Perfections magazin, where beauty doth command desire: That court of beauty, where the Queen O Love doth keep eternal residence. Where beauty spreads Her glittering wings, where majesty
Crown'd with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye Diffusive joy. The dining roome, When love and beauty will on feasting come. The silver horned moon is faine Still by night to mount her waie, Fearing to sustein disgrace If by day she meet this face. That pretious book of love. Unbound volume of beauty That paper perfect white Where love hath writ the story of delight With beauties reddest inke by nature stirr'd. If that Geometry had lost proportion, Sheneed look no where else to find it. A face, to which all that look upon it yeild obedience; So that the only means to be rebellious is to be blind. Invites delight, and courts the longing eye. A face Which neither rhetorick, no glasse can flatter. Beauties tower, a face in which is seen Natures best picture of the Cyprian Queen. A face which Gods might move, And like Tydides wound the Queen of love. That face, which nature looks on, when she drawes Wihin a look the pandects of all lawes Concerning symmetry, which Jove doth view, When he would give his silver flakes their true And proper tincture, which the lillies make Their sampler, when their native white they take. A face, that owes the wealth of nature. Fair. v. Beautiful. Bright. Fair as the Eastern morne. When with her summer robes she decks the plains, And hangs on every bush a liquid pearle In May's triumphant moneth. As the replenisht moone. Faire As Phaebus raies gilding the glittering aire. More faire Phaebus nere chariots through the gilded aire. Holding resemblance with those spotlesse skies, Where slowing Nlus want of rain supplies; That Chrystal heaven, where never Phaebus shrod
His golden beams, nor wrapt his face in in clods Fair as unshaded light or as the day In its fairest bith, when all the year was May. Faire Weather. V. Calme. The pleased heavens their fairest livery wear. The face of heaven is masked with o clouds Nor wrinckled into frownes. Fairies. The airy troop which nimbly play, And by the springs dance out their summers day, Teaching the little birds to build their nest, And in their singing how to keep their rest. Which whilst they measures tread Within the meadowes make such circles green, As if with garlands it had crowned been. Those elves That pinch those maids that have not swept their shelves. And if by chance, by maidens oversight, Within door water were not brought at night, Or if they spread no table, set no bread, These nip them from the toe unto the head; But for the maid that hath perform'd each thing, They in the water pale do leave a ring. Which lend their weaker glow-worme fir To conquer the nights chilnesse, with their Quee In harmless revels tread the happy green. That by moon-shine ringlets make, VVhere the ewe no meat will take. That in cowslp bells do lie When they hear the owlets cry, On the bats back which do fiy. The moon-shine revellers and shades of night. The Orphan heirs of fixed destiny. The glow-worms are their torch-bearers, lanthornes. The elves for fear Creep into acorn cups, and hide them there. Dncing their ringlets to the whistling wind. Cld in the snakes enamel'd skin: Killing the cankers in the muske-rose buds. Warring with reare-mice for their leather wings, To make the small elves coats. The yellow-skirted Fayes,
That tread the moon-lov'd maze. The honey bagges steal from the humble bees, And for night tapers steal their waxen thighes, And light them at the fiery glow-worms eyes. And pluck the wings from painted butter-flies To san the moon-beams from their sleepy eyes. That dance by drowsie fires glimmering light. In a field of yellow broom, Or in checkerd meadowes where Mints perfume the gentle aire, And where Flora spends her treasure, There they dance their circled measure. There is Mab the mistresse Fairy That doth nightly rob the dairy, And can hurt, or help the churning, As she please without discerning, She that pincheth country wenches If they rub not clean their benches, And with sharper nayles remembers When they rake not up their embers, But if so they chance to feast her, In their shooe she drops a tester, This is she that empties cradles, Takes out children, puts in ladles, Tains forth midwives in their slumber With a five, the holes to number, And then leads them from their boroughs, Thorough ponds, and water furrowes. The Fairy Queen. Come follow, follow me You fairy elves that be, Which ccle in the green, Come follow me your Queen, Hand in hand les dance a round, For this place is fairy ground. When mortals are at rest. And snorting in their nest, Unheard and unespied Through key holes we do glide, Over tables stooles and shelves We trip it with our fairy elves, And if he house be foule, Or platter dish or bowle, Upstaires we nimbly creep And sind the sluts a sleep. There we pinch their armes and thighes, None escapes, nor none espies, But if the house be swept, And from uncleanesse ke
Wee praise the houshold maid, And surely she is paid, For we do use before we go To drop a tester in her shooe. Upon a mushroms head Our table we do spread, A corn of rie or wheat, Is manchet which we ear, Pearly drops of dew we drink In acorn cups fill'd to the brink, The brains of nightingales. The unctious dew of nails Between two nutshels stew'd, Is meat that's easily chew'd, the beards of mice Doth make a feast of wondrous price. On tops of dewie graffe, So nimbly we do passe, The young & tender stalk Nere bends when we do walk Yt in the morning may be seen Where we the night before have been. The grashopper and fle, Serve for our minstrelsie. Grace said, we dance a while, And so the time beguile, And when the moone doth ide her head, The glow-worme lights us home to bed. Oberons Clothing. When the monethly horned Queen Grew jealous that the stars had seen Her rising from Endymions armes; In rage she threw her misty charmes Into the bosome of the night To dim their curious prying light, Then did the dwafish fairy elves, (Having first attir'd themselves) Prepare to dresse their Oberon king In light robe for revelling. In a cobweb shirt more thin Than ever spider since could spin, Bleacht by the whitenesse of the snow, As the tormy winds did blow It through the vast and freezing aire, No shirt halfe so white, so faire. A rich wastcoat they did bring Of the trout-flies gilded wing; At this his elveship gan to fret, Swearing it would make him sweat Even with its weight; and needs would weare His wastcoat wove of downy haire
New shaven from an Eunuchs chin, That pleas'd him well, 'twas wondrous thin; The out side of his doublet was Of the four-leav'd true love grasse, On which was set a comely glosse By the oyle of crispy mosse, That through a mist by starry light, It made a rainbow in the night, On each seam there was a lace Drawn by the unctious snailes slow trace, To which the purest silver thread Compar'd, did looke like slubberd lead, Each button was a sparkling eye Tne from the speckled addars frie, Which in a gloomy night and dark Twinkled like a fiery spark, And for coolenesse next his skin, 'Twas with white poppy lin'd within. His breeches of that fleece were wrought Which from Colchos Jason brought; Spun into so fine a yearne, Mortals might it, not discerne, Wove by Arachne on her loome, Just before she had her doome, Dide crimson with a maidens blush, And lin'd with sost Dandalion plush. A rich mantle he did weare, Made of the tinsel Gossamere, Bestrowed over with a few Diamond dropps of morning dew. His cap was all of ladies love, So passing light, that it could move; If any humming gnat or flie But puff't the aire in passing by; About it was a wreath of pearl, Dropt from the eyes of some poor girle, Was pincht, because she had forgot To leave clean water in the pot, And for feather he did wear Old Nisus fatal purple haire, A pair of buskins they did bring Of the cowladies coral wing,
Inlaid with inkie spots of jet, And lin'd with purple violet. His belt was made of yellow leaves Pleated in small curious threaves. Beset with amber cowslip studs, And fring'd about with daisie buds, In which his bugle horn was hung, Made of the babling Ecchoe's tongue, VVhich set unto his moon-burnt lips He winds, and then his fairies skips, And whilst the lazie drone doth sound, Each one doth trip a fairy round. Oberons Diet. A litle mushrome table spread After a dance, they set on bread, A yellow corne of Parkey whea, VVith some small sandy gritts to eat, His choice bits with, and in a trice, They make a feast, lesse great than nice. But all the while his eye was serv'd, VVe cannot think his ear was starv'd; But that there was in place to stir His eares, the pittering grashopper. The merry cricker; puling flie, The piping gnats shrill minstrelsie, The humming dor, the dying swan, And each a chief Musitian. But now we must imagine first, The elves present to quench his thirst, A christal pearl of infant dew, Brought, and besweerned in a blew And pregnant violet, which done, His kitling eyes began to run Quite though the table, where he spies The horns of papry butter-flies, Of which he eats, but with a litle Neat coole allay of Cuckoe spittle. A litle fuz-ball pudding stands, And yet not blessed with his hands. That seem'd too course, but he not spares To feed upon the candied haires Of a dried canker and the lag,
And well bestrutted bees sweet bag. Sroking his palate with some store Of emmets egges, what will he more, But beards of mice, and gnats stew'd thighes, A pickled maggo, and a dry Heppe, with a red-cap worme thats shut VVithin the concave of a nut. Bown as his tooth is, with the fat VVell rooted eye-ball of a bat, A bloted earewigge, and the pith Of sgred rush, he glads him with. But most of all the glow-worms fire, As much betickling his desire To burn his Queen, mixt with the far Fecht binding jelly of a star, VVith withered cherries, mandrakes ears, Moles eyes, to these the slain stags tears, The unctious dewlaps of a snaile, The broke heart of a nightingale, Orcome with musick; with a wine Nere ravisht from the clustered vine, But gently strained from the side Of a most sweet and dainty bride, Bought in a daizie chalice which He fully quaffes up, to bewitch His blood to height. This done commends Grace to his priest, and the feast ends. Drawn by a team of little Atomies; The waggon spokes made of a spinners legs, The cover of the wings of grashoppers, He traces of the smallest spiders web, Her collers of the moon-shines watry beams, Her whip is made of little cricket bones, Her waggoner a small gray-coated gnat, Her chariot is an empty hasel nut Made by a squirrel. Oberon, the Emperour. Mab the Empresse. Periwiggin, Periwinckle, Puck, Hobgoblin Tomalin, Tom Thum, Courtiers. Hop, Mop, Drop, Pip, Trip, Skip, Fib, Tib, Tick, Pinke, Pin, Quick, Gill, Jin, Tit, Wap, Win, Nit: The maids of honour. Nimphidia, Mother of the maid.
Fame. v. Report. That fluttering ill That thrives by flight, and as it goes growes still, The tatling snow-bal. Old times recorder. Sorrowes hasty barbinger. The drunken bastard of the multitude. The long tongu'd gossip. Times treasurer. True honours eagle-winged herald. That sounds the silver trumpet. Clad in a robe of gold, Whose train old time obsequiously doth bear, Wherein in rich embroydery is enroll'd The acts of all the worthies ever were. On her faire breast she two broad tablets wears Of Chrystal th'one, the other ebony, Where are engraven all the names of yore, In the large tombe of lasting memory. Or the black book of endesse obloquie. Her palace placed betwixt earth and skies, The windowes all composed are of eyes. The walls are strongly edified of ears, And underfoot floord all about with drums; The rafters trumpets admirable chear. The cranies tongues. The doores unlock with every little breath That on the sun beams gloriously to ride. The registers, the worlds eternal houres. The light-foot, feather-tongued dame. She that enquireth into all the world, And hath about her vaulted palace hurld All rumours and reports or true or vain, What utmost lands, or deepest seas contein. Her house is full of Eccho made, Where never dies the sound, And as her browes the clouds invade, Her feet do touch the ground. Famous. Who bears. The rarest fame that ere enriched aire, Or found the way faire to aeternity. Whose name Still breathes perfume from their embalming fame,
Beyond whose worth shall never sound a name, Nor honour in her everlasting story, More deepe engrave for all ensuing glory. A fame which shall Out live the sun, and close the worlds great eye. A blast From fames loud trumpet which so long shall last, Till the last trumpet drown it. Fame addes perfume unto his dust, Which your name shall save From the black edicts of a tyrant grave, Nor shall your day ere set till the sun shall From the blind heavens like a dull cynder fall. And all the elements imbnd their strife, To ruine what they made, then your fames life, When desperate time lies gasping shall expire, Attended by the world in general fire. Which from times injury, Fame still will vindicate. His name is fames best musick. Famous beyond the utmost date of time. Spreading fame Fore-runs the welcome of his honoured name To last for times eternal processe. Whose highly honourd name for ever bears A welcome accent to all honest ears; No irrh, nor Cassia, nor no choice perfumes Of unctious Nard, or aromatick fumes Of hot Arabia, do enrich the aire With more delicious sweets, than do the faire Reports that crown the merits of his name With heavenly lawrels of eternal fame. Fames Immortal books record no nobler names. Whose louder name Hath blast enough, to split the trump of fame. Whose name is writ in fames immortal annals. Worthy to be filed on fames eternal bead-rol. Whose name even fills report. Sainted in fames best Kallender. Canoniz'd by fame. Inrolled in the register of fame. Whoe fame hath won A strong advantage on the sithe of time.
Nor time nor malice can wrong out the right, In the inheritance of fame he must possesse. That fills the wide and open mouth of fame. The farthest shore Washt by the Ocean shall him adore, And all those northern Isles, whome dayes bright flame Scarce warmes, shall bear the thunder of his name, Which shall survive the funeral of time, And be the subject of a learned rime. Beheld by many with the eyes of fame, That nere had happinesse to see his face. Dear son of memory, great heir of fame Enrolled by the hand of sate, in fames steele tables, Whose name—Is impt upon the wings of fame. Hurld Hot from fames trumpet, round about the world Eternall same, trumpets forth his deserts Whose fame extended is so wide As that on it a man to heaven might clime VVhose rich report. Fame was opprest with as a talk too great VVinged fame Growes great with honour of—name. VVhom all, that dare believe report, admire. The Poets theam and patron. Fame shall resound them on oblivions hese, Tll graves gasp with her blasts, and dead men rise. VVhose praise is sung of in unsilenc't story. VVhose praise In spight of envie and her restlesse pains, Is unconfin'd as blest eternity. The vales shall ring Thine honoured name, and every song shall be A Pyramis built for thy memory. VVhose fame runs the suns course. VVhose fame can be Confin'd by nothing but eternity. Only the period of all daies Shall seal his fame, and never ending praise. VVhose fame in never dying rimes Shall be delivered to succeeding times. VVhose fame shall last Till to be truly vertuous, truly chast
Be held a sin. Sooner shall &c.—then thy fame Shall be forgot, or honour fail thy name. Whose high renown shall onely bounded be By the worlds bounds, and vast Eternity, Whose fame times file shall never fret away: Whose fame shall credit win, Till Lachesis have no more thread to spin, Nor time a feather on his crazy wing, His glories crescent to a circle grew. Mounted to an height that envy cannot reach. Whome fame is so desirous to honour, that she borrows all mens mouths to joyn with her trumpet. No Prince could pretend height, nor beggar lownesse, to bar him from the sound of his praises. Whose name Is nursed by the fullest breasts of fame. Long needy fame Doth even grow rich by sounding—name. Whose fame is writ with characters of brasse, A sorted residence gainst the teeth of time, And Razour of oblivion. VVhose honour baits the edge of times keen sith, And makes him heir of all Eternity, Surviving fame with daring flight, Doth give his name eternall right, VVhose name doth strike the stars, And rings about the concave. A fame may dare times proudest injury. His garland with time edg'd about, Lest any age should ever ravell't out, VVrit in fames eternall legend, VVhose fame shall never die, Till time lies buries in Eternity. V. Ever. Never. Shall live beyond the Calendar of time. Famine v Drought. Like beasts some suck Beasts dugges, and when milk fails with greedy jw Meeere blood from their exhausted udders draw. Herbs and green leaves they wring, bedewed twiggs They lick, and juice of bleeding vines, small sprigs Of trees, they for their tender sap do squeeze, The ground no pasture for their horses yields: Nor yellow Seres cloaths the fallow fields;
The men eat grasse, and when the fields grow bare, The grasse from off their camps dry turfs they tear; With tears, or nothing must they quench their thirst. Impetuous famine, sister to the sword, The pinching Fury. Left hand of death, child of th' infernall Lord, That pleasure taketh in the tedious breath Of pining Mortalls, and their lingring death, The people tear their trembling flesh for food, And from heir ragged wounds they suck forth blood The father dies, and leaves his pined corse T' enrich his heir with meat, the hungry nurse Broyls her starv'd suckling on the hasty coals, V. Browns Pastoralls. 2 l. Song 1. Description the cave of famine. Devours one half, and leaves the rest in holes. The Tyrant that compells the mother To kill one hungry child to save another. Famine in their dry entralls takes her seat, What nature most abhorres enforc'd to eat. The infant trembles at his fathers knife, The babe re-enters her who gave it life. The lively form of death Still yawning wide, with loathsome stinking breath, With hollow eys, with meager cheeks and chin, With sharp lean bones piercing the sable skin. Some mince their papers will in parchment writ. V. Dubar∣ta's Furies And so devour their bitthright at a bit. Fancy. The roving, pregnant, busie, teeming sence, The souls mint. The forge of shapes and dreams, Commanding Empress of the brain, ubiquitary, faculty. The immateriall Coyner. That makes a bodilesse Creation. Bounldsse, restlesse faculty, free from all engagements, digg without spade, sails without Ships, Flies without wings, builds with∣out charges, fights without bloodshed, in a moment striding from the Center to the circumference of the world, by a kind of omni∣potency creating and annihilating things in a moment, and marry∣ng things divorced in nature. Fantastick Gallant. Something more than the shape of a man▪ The chief burden of his brain is the carriage of his body, an the setting of his face in good frame, which he perfoms the bet∣ter, because he is not disjointed with other Meditations. He hath staid in the world to fill a number, and when he's gone there wants one, and there's an end
In the speculation of his good parts, his eys like a drunkard es all all double, and his fancy like an old mans spectacles makes great Letter in a small print. He conceives mens thoughts very idle, that is onely busie about im. Both his Inprimis and his Item are his cloaths. A pretty iece of finicall ignorance, or a fool without his motley coat. Such a man as his Tailour pleaseth to make him. That puts away most of his jugement about the situation of his loaths. His cloachs are sacrified- Going with such a noise, as if his body were the wheel-barrow  carry his rumbling judgement. His whole body goes all upon skrews, and his face is the vice that moves them. His glittering cloaths shew like the sunshine in a puddle. Who now and then breaks a die bisket jst, Which that it may more easily be chewed He steeps in his own laughter. With a brain lighter than his feather. Like an empty bottle, and his head the cork to stop it. His skin is tanned in sivet, Walking, as if he had a suit of wainscot. All his behaviours are printed, A marmoset made all of cloaths and face. One that weighs His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile Beyond a point, for fear ' unstarch hs look. A fellow so utterly nothing, that he knows not what he would be. That would rather have the whole Common-wealth troubled, than an hair out of order about him. Ever in the slavery of Ceremonie and Complements. A man consisting of a pickedevant, and two mustachoes, and ut∣terly to defeat him there needs but three clippes of a pair of cz¦zars. A barren brain in fertle hair. A speaking Butterflie. Sober drunkards. Fastidious, Brisk, wise onely by inheritance. who while he proudly wears A silver hilted rapier by his side, Endures the lies and knocks about the ears, Whilst in his sheath; the sleeping sword doth bide
Wears gaudy clothes, And fills up his imperfect speech with oaths, That hath a Bedsam fancy, all whose conceits are anticks. The cares of men having little else of them but speech and laugh∣ter, using the preface of a mile to bring in a furlong of matter, That speaks his mind in fustian eloquence, Forced affected phrase, and strained discourse, Whose language is astonishing bumbast, till men understand him they are scard with it. Wits in jest, fools in earnest, There is a confederacy between him and his cloaths to make a puppet: A man In whom the Tailours forming art, And nimble barber claime more part Than nature her self can. Fat. A whale with a tunne of oil in his belly. A mountain of Mummy. That wears Shrove Tuesday in his cheks. If he lives till dooms-day he' burn a wek longer than the whole world. A face like a Sarazens. Mountain of flesh. Walking barrell. That cannot see his own knee. Voluminous body, Cloak bag of guts, a load of guts. Luxury swells in his eyes. And his fat belly loads his yielding thighes. Fate. Those lasting leaves. Whose smallest character is never altered. The doom Spun on the fatall sisters sable loom. Clotho's book. The Canons of eternall date. The Consistory of the stars. Entred the book of unavoided fate. Enroll'd in heavens brasse leaves. The privy Councell of the heavens and planets. The Adamantine book. The Commissary of God. That hath mark'd out a path and period For every thing. Knot of all causes whose changelesse brow Ne'r smiles not frowns. The brazen Laws. The ancient sisters, adamantine doom. Decrees that needs must passe, Writ in huge folds of solid steel and brasse, With Adamantine pens, Heavens consistoriall Decree.
A more unchanged law Than any Mede, or Persian ever saw. Etrnal, unresisted orders of the Gods. Fates. v. Destinies. Favourite. Aomes that dance within the gilded raies That kings shoot out. Aspiring souls who grow but in the spring, Porc'r by the warmth of some indulgent king. Their fair leaves spread But as the marigold to the suns eye, And in themselves their pride lies buried, For at a frown they in their glory die. Fear. Fearful. As if all his blood turnd whey. Crest-fal'n. Blood-shaken. Bach'd in a cld quick silver sweat. So fear'd young Proserpine rapt in the coach Of the infernal king. A chill fear Shook all his powers. So old Aegeus shak'c When he the posoned cup to Theseus gave. Presaging fears her quite did confound. A chill cold sweat Bath'd all my limbs. Drown'd in fear. With such a fear flies the aire-piercing dove. A chilling fear surprizeth all his joynts. Fer the underminer of all determinations Making abortive answers. Then cold amazements stiffened up his haire. Congealed blood usurpt their trembling hearts, and left a faintnesse in their feeble parts. Who trembling out distractful language speak. Fear, the ague, palsie of the soul, tempest of the mind▪ A chilling ice shivers through every limbe. My blood shrinks back into my veins, And my affrighted hairs are turn'd to bristles. My eyes creep back into their cells, As if they seem'd to wish for thicker darknesse Than either night or death to cover them. His soul melts within him. A chilling sweat ore-uns my trembling joynts. My seated heart knocks at my ribs, against the use of nature.
Distill'd almost to jelly. Harowes the soul, and makes the eyes start from their sphears. The haire stands on end Like quills upon the fretful Porcupine, The bedded, haire like life in excrements Start up, and stand an end. A freezing sweat Flowes through at all my pores. The knees are mutual anviles. A breathlesse man prickt on by winged fear, With staring eyes, distracted hear and there, Lke kindled exhalations in the aire, At midnight glowing, his stiffe bolting haire, Not much unlike the pens of porcupines, Parboild in sweat, and making fearful signes. With a look so pitious in pourport, As if he had been loosed out of hell To speak of horrours. The bolting haire Staring upright on their affrighted heads Heave up their hats. Horrour and heart-amazing, fear possest The fainting powers of my troubled brest. Fear is the carefullest, and greatest housewife of our passions, keep∣ing all the rest in Centinel. Fear the Jaylour of the soul. A flesh quake doth possesse their powers. My knees each other stuck, the frighted blood, Fled to my heart, my ears like bristles stood. Feast. The table groans, as though this feast, Would as the flood destroy all fowle and beast, The boards are princely serv'd, and Bacchus flowes In burnisht gold. With feasts they crown this day, And wanted nought to crown the appetite With rich content. Where all the guests impaild with dishes sit. Studied dishes. Where lusty diet and the frolick cup Doth rouse, and raise the quickned spirits up, And brave triumphing Bacchus doth display His conquering colours in their cheekes. The wanton cook prepares his poynant meat, To teach the satiate palate how to eate, Where every dish invites the likorish sight.
A table whose spread sides admit A large accesse of friends to fill the seats of this capacious circle, fill'd with meats Of choicest rellish, till his oaken back Under the load of pil'd up dishes crack, Giving the eyes a pleasant tast before They come unto the mouth. When with choice viands they delight, And satisfie the wanton a petite. Feaver. The pulses spur. Within the deserts of Arabia, nor in the entrails of the sea, was there ever so furious a monster found, and if Tyrants, whose me∣mory is hateful to us, had been stored with such instruments for ef∣fecting their cruelties, surely the martyrs had endured a feaver for religion, and not that outward fire, nor bitings of wild beasts. At every sting it caries a poor sick person to the borders of the o∣ther world, and causeth him sensibly to touch the extremities of life. To support it long, a greater remedy than paience is no lesse than requilite, and other forces than those of man. Enough to make a man pity him four hundred leagues off, yet he is so valiant, he would not fly though pursued by an army, and so stately, he would not rise from his bed to salute a King. If God had conferred a king∣dome upon him, with condition never to sleep more than he doth, he would prove the most vigilant prince living, not would need ei∣ther guards or sentinels about his person. Feet. The pedestals. Bases of the frame of man. Like Thetis. The tramplers. Feet that print the farewel of all beauty. Cupids pursuivants. That set an heaven on earth. The precious rootes of understanding trees. With whose pace doth move A band of beauties. Fierce. v. Cruel. Violent. Fierce as the Midian tyger. Fidler. A man and a fiddle out of case. That rubs a living out of two sticks. So many strings above a beggar. His life is so many fits of mirth, A country wedding and a whitsonle are the wo main places he
domineers in, where he goes for a musitian, and overlooks the bag-pipes. Fight, v. War. Sea-fight. Ships against ships, beaks meeting beaks resound, And run a stern, the aire is darkned round Wih flying darts, which falling th' Ocean hide; Then urning their fore-castle far more wide, They make their horns engirt the adverse fleet, As when strong winds with tides repugnant meet. One way the sea, the waves another go, The ships upon the furrowed Ocean so, Make different tracts, and waves upon the Main, That oares rais'd up, the sea beats down again. They grapling fall into the crimson lake, Nor-there alas their emnity forsake; But weakly try the combate out, where he That conquers, can no long survivor be, At whose ingrapling natures mantle took A purple colour. Their armed naval forces made Blew Neptunes face, the first discolour'd stage Of war, a scene of their incensed rage. Men would have thought some forrest moov'd from far When winters rage, the pines proud tops doth bar; Or that the fam'd Aegean Cyclades Torn from their roots had floated on the seas. Blood fill'd the wrinkles of the sea's visage, which the water would not wash away, that it might witnesse it was not alwaies his fault, when we condemn his cruelty. Fingers. Fingers might Bacchus grace. Five nimble brethren small Arm'd with pearl-shell helmets all. Cupids shafts. Fire. Domestick sun. Weightlesse fire Whose flames unto the highest arch aspire To vomit flkes of fire. Wrapt in the embracements of th' unwilling fire. So Mleager fied, when to the flames His mother cast the fatal brand.
Flamy Pyramids. Sleeping in his ashie bed. The soule of Chymick art. Pomethean theft. The sun of night and dark dayes. Darting its scateed shines in crispy spires. The fiery tent. The fiery vault. The hot bright flamer. The elemental flame. Fountain of life. Source of motion. That mercilesse impartial element. The waters flaming enemy. Firme. Firme as those celestial poles Twixt which the stars in all their course do move. Firme as the center. As the golden taper of the sun, Which hourely sailes the circuit of the skie. Firme as the northern star, As that bright line, the measure of the years Which makes a league betwixt the poles And joynes the Hemisphears. Fishes. The Oceans frie. Sea citizens. The scaly, finny crue. Watry citizens, wtry leagions, scaly legions. The inhabitants of the briny regions. The natural boats. The living ships. Neptunes busie burgers. Spawning legions, armies. Watry burgeles. Free people of the sea. The scaly train, The finny coursers. The denisons of floods. Nptunes finny subjects. that row themselves with finny oares. The angl rnibling prey. The watry constellations. The sas stars, planets. The innumerable legions Of greedy mouhes that haunt the briny regions. The scaly nation, arm'd in silver male. That cut with golden oares the silver stream. Proteus finny flock. Neptunes watry heard. Proteus scaly infantry. Fit. As a pan-cake for shrove tuesday, a moris for May-day, a can∣dle for the candlestick, a nayle for the hole, a Nuns lips for a F∣ars mouth. Mde for no other use. Designed by nature for no other end. Which on good advantage stands. For—&c.
Flattery. Flatterer. Language stow'd with flowers. Court-mothes. Erewiggs. A shadow of a foole. Flies of estate and sun-shine. Gilt, fi'd, soothing tongue. Born in the country of good words. Court-erewigs, wrigling in the ears of greatnesse. Oly eloquence. Catching oratory. Words steep'd in oyle. Charitable, lyars, smooth-fac'd, silken, soft, velvet words. That dresse their speech in plush. Those worst of ravens that devoure The quick, when others rey but on the dead. The tame wild beast. The servile tyrant. Glutinous bodies that can stick Like snailes on painted walls. That poure their oyle into the ears. Make their revennues out of legges and faces. That spin their raiment Out of observance. Tied to their friends by th'teeth. The very aire of him whom he observes Blowes off his cap. A soul ground into oylie colours. Stretching each thing even to divinity. That doth enforce An empty laughter in a vain discourse. Which put so large a distance betwixt the tongue and the heart, that they are seldome relatives. That ha the Heliotropian quality of the Tulip and Marigold, following the motion of the sun, opening and shutting with him. None hath better command of rain and sun-shine in his face, to smile and weep at pleasure. That wear their faces to the bent Of others looks. The gilding flatterer that doth torment, His active lunges t'endeavour a consent, And eccho to anothers speech. The picture of a friend. Following them, whose fortunes may tempt his paines to deceive them. He is before hand with your thoughts, and able to suggest them unto you. He will commend to you first what he knowes you like, and hah alwaies some absurd story or other of your enemy; and then wonders how your two opinions should so jump in one man. His worst chiding is his most earnest commendation,
You are but too good, too honest, &c. Most active in the worst diligences. It is an happinesse not to discover him, For as long as you are happy, you shall not. Flora. The summers Queen. The Lady of the flowers. The painted wife of spicie Zeplryrus. Zephyritis. Chloris. Flowers. The golden tufts within a silver crown. Dazie. Kind natures neatest huswifery. The gaudy issue of the spring. The summers pride. The fresh springs gaudy hue. The beauteous children of the spring: Flora's embroidery, checker work, richest stock. The spicie infants of the spring. The fading issue of the spring, Earths embroidery, diapery, enamelling. The valleys quaint enameld eies, That on the ground ture suck the honeyed showers, And purple all the ground with vernal flowers. The livery of the spring. The painted bravery of the spring. The moly meadowes glory and delight, The earths stars. Guilded bosses. The flowry graces of the smiling spring: The summers gaudy gallantry. The checkered pavement of the greens. The flowry tufts. Flora's bracelets beads. The terrestial galaxie. Flora's richest tapestry. A mine of flowers. Natures drapery. The beauties of the spring, Which lay down their heads At soome trees roots on mossie feather beds. The smiling beauties of the buxome spring. The gemmes on Flora's haire. Proclaimers of the spring. The trimming laces of Flora's mantle. The treasures of the wanton spring The curious weaving of the spring. The painted glories of the spring. Everlasting. Muskmillions. Sweet William. Time. Maiden-blush. Peagle. Tulip. Oxlops. Lady-smock. Sops in wine. Start up and kisse me. Sweet Bsil. Marjum.
tufted Daizy, six-leav'd Primrose, True-love, Lly, azure Hare-bell, Rose, yellow King-cp, tawny Columbine, Orange-tawny, Marigold, Pansie, Cowslip, Hony-suckle, Viole Piony, Monks-hood, Buglosse, Pinke, Bears-foot, Batchlours button, Burrage, Crow-foot, Crow-toes, Daffadil, Dendelion, Priest-crown, Eglantine, Gdle-flower, Flower-deluce, Hearts-ase, London-button, Lady-gloves, Liricumphancy, Rose-parsley; Wake-Robin, Rose-mary, Prick-madam, Rocket-gallant, Capons-taile, Shepheards-pouch, Tansie, Sow-thistles, yarow, nose-bleed, Wood-bin. To Fly. To swim, to glide, to spin, to spring, To break the aire with nimble wing. With wing'd ascent springs through the boundless aire. Shoots through the aire. Sweeps the aire. To cut through the uenclosed aire. Swims through the airy main with eathered finnes. Then switly through the yeelding aire they glid, To strike airy rings. His tossed feathers chafe the wandring aire. Waving his wings through airy regions glides. Through aire they ply with an industrious wing, And spread their shady pnions. And with wing'd nerves swim through the clustering clouds, And with a swooping flight glide through the aire With nimble wing they cleave the flitting skie. Trough aire they spring, Spreading the pinions of their nimble wing. Sailing upon the bosome of the skie. Swmming upon the bosome of the aire. To make wing. To keep. Hold wing. Unto the aire their feathered sailes they yeild, And row with plumy oares. To Fly away. v. Swift. Arethua sled So from the river that her ravshed. Such was chast Daphne's flight, Shunning the dalliance of the God of ligh. Recommends the protection of his life to his eer. As trembling doves the swooping eagle fle, Or a young lamb, when he the wolfe spies. As panting doves the eager awke eschewes, Or eager hawke the panting dove pursues.
Foole. The most arrant dotish clown that ever was without the priviledge of a bable. A simple nothing. His behaviour such, it is beyond the degree of ridiculous. Looks like an ape that had newly taken a purgation. A subject it to be the stale of laughter. A subject able to justifie excessive laughter. Over whom contempt may make a just challenge. A motly, thick-brain. Not well furnisht in his upper roomes. Whose wit is turn'd the seam-side outward. Pity nature was ere at leasure to make him. A drum that every one may play on. No more brains than a butter-fly. Whose tongue is the gentleman usher to his wit, and still goes be∣fore it. A mere stuft sute. Looks like a musty bottle new wicker'd, his head the coke for it. A most Catholick cocks-combe. One fit to drink good store Of pure, unmixt, brain-purging Helebore. A child at mans estate. One whome nature hudled up in hast, and left his best part unfinished. The rest of him is grown to be a man, only his brains stay be∣hind. That hath nothing to prove him a man but his shape. Forehead. v. Brow. Forehead fair as summers face. Built upon two ivory arches. The mount of bleached snow. Beauties spheare, A thousand several graces mooving there, Clear promontory where sweet violets grow. Forget; e drink oblivion to forget her name. Under oblivions rusty keyes conceal'd. To lock out of remembrance. In Lethe drowned. Inhospitable memory. Which can no longer entertainment find Within the memory. Exiled from all the confines of Memory. Cancell'd from all the books of memory. He need not learn that art Temistocles so much desired. Blotted out of the souls great registers. Dvsted of remembrance.
He that forgot his name, may sooner this remember. As winter torrents tumbling from on high, Wast with their speed, and leave their channels dry, So run from my remembrunc— Fortune. The worlds imperious Queen. Blind inconstant Goddess. Great arbitresse of humane things. Constant in nothing but inconstancie. The only rebellious handmaid against vertue. Inconstant Queen of humane state, Rectresse of actions, arbitresse of fate, To whom all sway, all power, all empire bowe. That stands upon her golden ball, And makes the world her toy to play withal. That tottering stands upon her rolling wheele. Which in triumphant pride, In chariots drawn by blinded horses rides. Rackets with man as with her tennis ball. That this day raiseth to a crowne, Whom she the next day tumbleh down. Fortunate. v. Happy. Whose souls are only troubled how to bear the burthen of their blisse. Envie put out thine eyes, least thou shouldst see The Oceans of delight that flow in me. Fortunes eldest son and heir. Fortunes white boy. The button on fortunes cap. I fear My soul hath her content so absolute, That not another comfort like to this Succeeds in unknown fates. Happy enough to pity Caesar. As if both heaven and earth should undertake To extract the best from all mankind to make One perfect happy man. He takes it for an injury, If fortune chance to come behind his wish. Nor doth wide heaven that secret blessing know To give, that she on him doth not bestow, Blind fortune is his slave, and all her store, The lesse he seeks her, followes him the more. Born under joyful destinies, and smiling stars. Like to the stately swan,
Rididing on streams of Blisse; more rich array'd With earths delight, than thoughts could put in ure, To glut the senses of an Epicure Tired with the surfet of delight More fortunate than he, To whom both Indies tributary be. To move as a star in the orb of happinesse, Moving in a Labyrinnth of delight Which have More happinesse than modesty could crave. Fortunes great pledge, to whom Fae ever ow'd so much. Environ'd with delights Commanding Fortune. The favourite of heaven. In favour with the stars. Fortunes darling, Minion. Swimming, bathing in felicity, One that knows not so much as the name of misery, To whose nativity the Fates doow A swelling glory. For whom A glorious thread they spin, such as their Loom Is proud to see. An happinesse worthy the envy of the gods. Happinesse courts him in her best array, To whom all blessednesse in nature is a servant. Child of indulgent fortune. As if Fortune had got eyes onely to cherish him: As happy as Metellus. As Polycrates. Thy tents shall flourish in the joyes of peace, The wealth and honour of thy house encrease. Thy children and their offspring shall abound, Like blades of grass, that cloath the pregnant ground. Thou full of dayes like weighty shocks of corn, In season reap'd shall to thy grave be born. The fight of him doth strike the envious blind. As the mounted Sun Breaks through the clouds, and throws his golden rays A out the world: so his increasing dayes Succeed in glory. Fountain. v. Springs. Foul. v. Deformed. Free. Free as the air. Free as the mountain wind. My soul enjoyes an unrestrained freedome. With all th' indulgence of fair liberty.
My thoughts disclaim all right and interest Any can challenge in me. Unshckled souls, Unengaged thoughts. Friends. A pair of friends, or rather one call'd two. Our but divided selves. Diapason of vows and wishes. A mind in two divided, but not partd. A double body, and yet single hearted. Pylades soul, and mad Orestes was In these if we believe Pythagoras. That partake of one anothers good and evill with so lively a re∣flexion, that there needs but one blow to make two wounds. Or se∣cond selves. Our other selves. Achilles, Patroclus. Hercules Hylas. Joathan, David. Titus, Gesippus. Theseu, Perithous, Pilades, Oestes▪ Damon, Pithias. Nisus, Eurials. Wrapt and woven into all trusts and counsels. Nor the silvet doves that flie Yoak'd in Cytherea's Car, Nor the wings that lift so high, And convoy her sun so far, And so lovely, sweet and fair; Or do more innoble love, And so choicely match'd a pair Or with more consent do move. Frost. Keen frosts have chained up the deep. The streams are bound with ribs of ice. The floods in icie fetters bound. Crusted earth. Every honey-headed twig Wears his snowie Periwig, And every bough his snowy beard. Waters have bound themselves, and cannot run. Suffering what Xerxes fetters would have done. The fish are froze as they swim in the wave The wine is frozen in the cup. The Countrey swain. O'r the stiffe waves doth drive his loaded Wain, The frozen wine hoth keep the vessel shape. A shell of ice doth glaze the Rivers o'r, And had Leander such a shore descry'd, Then in that narrow sea he had not dy'd
The Frost doth cast an icie cream Upon the lakes and Chrystall stream. Shew me those flames you brag on, you that be Arm'd with those fires wine and Poetrie. You are now benumm'd spight of your god and verse, And do your Metaphors for prayers rehearse. Whilst you that call snow fleece and fethers, do Wish for true fleeces, and true feathers too. Our rivers are one Chrystall, shores are fit Mirrours, not being now like glasse, but it. Our ships stand all as planted, we may swea They are not onely born up, but grow there. While waters they are pavements firm as stone. And without faith are each day walk'd upon, What parables cal'd folly heretofore, Was now discreet to build upon the shore: There's not one dines amongst us with washt hands Water is scarce here, as in Africk sands, And we expect it not, but from some god, Opening a fountain by some Prophets rod, Who needs not seek out where he should unlock A strem, what e'r he struck would be true rock. When as heaven drops some smaller drops our sense Of grief's encreas'd, being but deluded thence; For whilst we think those drops to entertain: They fall down pearls, which came down half way rain. Green Lands removall now the poor man fears, Seeing all water frozen but his tears. We suffer day continuall and the snow Doth make a little night become noon now. We hear of some inchrystall'd, such as have That which procu'd their death become their grave. Bodies that destitute of soul yet stood, dead, and fell not, drown'd, yet without a Flood, Nay, we who breath still, are almost as they, And onely may be call'd a softer clay, We stand like Statues, as if cast and fit For life, not having, bt expcting it. Each man's become the Stoicks wise man hence, For can you look for passion where's no sense? Which we have nor resolv'd to our first stone, Unlesse it be one sense to feel w' have none.
Our very Smiths now work not, y what's more, Our Dutch men write but five hours, and give o'. We dare provoke faith now, we know what 'tis To feel cold death, onely by suffering this. All fires are Vestal now, and we as they Do in our Chimnies keep a lasting day, Boasting within doores our domestick Sun Adoring it with our Religion. We laugh at Fire-briefs now, although they be Commended to us by his Majesty, And 'tis not treason, for we cannot guesse, That we should pay them for their happinesse. Each hand would be a Scevola's, let Rome Call that a pleasure hence forth, not a doom. A Feaver is become a wish, we si. And think faln angels have a benefit, Nor can the thoughts be impious when we see Weather that Booker durst not prophesie. Weather may give new Epocha', and make Another Since in his bold Almanack. Weather may save his doom, and by hy his foe Be thought enough for him to undergoe. We now think Alabaster true, and look A sudden trump should antedate his book; For whilst we suffer this, we ought not fear The world cannot survive to a fourth year; For sure we may conclude weak nature old, And crazie now, being she is grown thus cold: But frost's not all our grief, we that so sore ffer its stay, fear its departure more; For when that leaves which so long hath stood, 'Twill make us count from since the second Flood. Frown. The Hieroglyphick of anger and deniall. T' unsmooth the forehead with observ'd distast, Furrowing the forehead with an unseen plow, To fold the brow in angry frowns. The tempest of the face, the discontented brow. To muffle up the face in frowns. The hated strangers fee. The cloud that hangs upon the brow. A forehead gathered into frowns. A look drest up in frowns.
Brow knit up in clouds of wrath. Brow whereon dwells anger. corn fits in state upon his urly Brow. vineger verjuice face. To wear a frown upon the brow. uffled his brow like a new boot. Contracted brow. To purse the brow. To furrow up the face. The rising furrows in the brow. The sour countenance More angry wrinckles on his brow appear, han hunted lions in their Fury were. Fruit. Summers pregnant treasures. Tribute. Autumnes burdens. The dangling pendants of the trees. Pomona's jewels. Fruitfull. Natures chiefest wardrobe, no other soil Doth more reward the industrious plowmans toil, With rich encrease no other pastures keep More horned heads, more wealthy fleeced sheep, Where the bleating flocks, And horned herds do graze, the labouring ox Wearied in those fat furrows, ne'r deceives Hopes which the greediest husbandman conceives, Whose tender paps with plenty overflow. Fury. v. Anger. Rage. Furies. Daughters to old night. The Nymphs of Nemesis. In snaky curls they twist their dreadfull hair, Whose tresses dangle down with hissing snakes, And crawling adders with their forked tongues. The sisters with their hissing hair, Who on the faces of the guilty stare, With dreadfull Torches—infernall Harpie. Eumenedes With snaky curls, that on the guilty seise Black midnight imps. Erynnis had encompass'd all The Town, her snakie hairs and burning brand, Shaking us when she rul'd Agave's hand, O the self-main'd Lycurgus. The sullen broods of evil spirits. Upon her horrid brows did serpents hisse. Her komb kemb'd poyson down. Whose scourges wound All guilty souls,
A sulphureous vapour from her eys possest the fair, And sweet complexion of the abused air With pestilence. The ghastly Sprites that haunt the gloomy night. Black Pluto's messengers, Posts. Executioners. Snake trest sisters with knotted whips of wire. Malignant Spirits periwig'd with Snakes, Hells hatefull hags. Murthering Ministers, that in their silent substances Wait on natures mischief. Unhallowed hags, fell Ministers of fate. The die Tartarean monsters hating light, Begot by dismal Erebus and night. The Jades That drag the tragick melancholly night, V. Virgils Alecto. Aen. 7. V. Sands Ovids Met. l. 4. p. 141. Lucans Phemon, lib. 5. And with their drowsie, slow, and flagging wings, Clip dead mens bones, and from their misty jaws Breath forth contagious darknesse in the air. Megaera. Alecto, Tisiphone Furious. v. Angry. Mad. VVho would have seen the picture of Alecto, or with what man∣ner of conutenance Medea kill'd her own children, needed but take his face for the full satisfaction of his knowledge in that point, Nor Dindimenian, nor the Pythian Priest, Are wih such Fury by their gods possess'd, Nor Bacchides, nor Corybantes so, VVhen on shrill brasse, they iterate their blow. G. Gale. v. Wind. VVhispering Gale A Came dallying with the leaves along the Dale. VVhich whispers out its tale. In such soft language, as but fills the sail. The flitting Gales, That cool the bosome of the fruitfull Vales. Natures soft fan. The airs cool whispers. Soft spirits of the air.
The wind pants out small gusts as out of breath Gamester. Blacking the night with oathes and imprecations. Spending the day In cursing fortune, and his fruitlesse play, That civil gun-powder which can in peace Blow up whole houses and their whole increase. Tht spends his time In oaths and exclamations on his fate. That makes his whole estate a lottery. Bewitched with their hopes, they nere give ore, Looking to gain their own, or to win more. There is but a cast at dice betwixt him and a beggar▪ Ganimed. Joves beauteous Catamite. Whom Joves majestick bird to heaven trust up To igle nectar in his genial cup. From Ida's shady top. Juno's fair rival. Garden. v. flowers: Pleasant place. Garland. v. Crown. Leavie twines, wreathes. Flowry chaplets. Verdant incirclets. Glorious impalement of the brow. Garments. Vestment, habits, habiliment, array, raiment, livery, robes; man∣tles garbe, weeds, vestures. The bodies sheath, scabbard. Fairest covers of the foulest shame. Foule fair marks of our misery. Gemmes. The pibbles paving Neptunes court. The riches of the unsounded deep. That gay purchase which doth make The scorched Negro dive the briny lake. As rich a gemme As ere enamoured glorious diadem. Bight gemmes Adding new splendour to the diadems. The wealthy store Of Ganges, and the Erythrean shore; Such Cleopatra wore When she first Caesar met. The rich seas spoiled store. The pride of natures store. Rich spoyles of the Eastern shore. Shell-fish spoiles.
What the diving Mooe▪ 'Mongst the red weeds seeks for in th'Easterne shore. Some ly in dead mens skulls, and in the holes Where eyes did once inhabite, there were crept, As 'twere in scorne of eyes. Reflecting gemmes That wooe the slimy bottom of the deep, And mock the dead bones that ly scattered by. Rescued from the covetous sand To make the seas hid wealth adorne the land, And though the Sun did hold his light away, You might behold this gemme by its own day. Which impart To wondering eyes the workmans art. That which the Sultans glistering bride doth wear, To these would but as glow-wormes eyes appear; The Tuscan Duke's compared showes thick and dark, These lving stars, and his a dying spark. Ghosts. v. Souls departed. Dislodged soules. Airy shapes. Fleeting shades. Airy mockeries. Unsubstantial phantasmes. Sightlesse substances. Cold midnight wanderers. Glad. This day I received my private Gospel. Swell, swell my joyes, and faint not to declare Your selves as ample as your causes are, I did not live till now, this my first houre Wherein I see my thoughts reacht by my power, The earth receives me not, 'tis aire I tread, And each step that I take my advanced head Knocks out a star in heaven. More glad than is The teeming earth to see the long'd for Sun Peep through the hornes of the celestial ram, My joyes like waves each other overcome, And gladnesse drowns where it begins to flow. It is the only way to make me contradict my selfe when I account my selfe miserable. I have not any discontent which is not lost in the joy I receive, This sweetnesse all the bitternesse of my spirit in my most sens∣ble dstasts. Eenough to blot out all the story of my misfortune. I surfeit with excessive joy.
Can there be a thing Under the heavenly Iris that can bring More joy unto my soul, or can present My Genius with a fuller blandishment, The raven almost famisht joyes not more When restlesse billowes tumble to the shore An heap of bodies shipwrackt on the sea. I write, and having written I destroy, Because my lines have bounds, but not my joy▪ So joyes the Pilot that hath scap't a grave In the swell'd bosome of an angry wave, And after all his shipwrack't hopes at last Doth in that port his joyful anchour cast, Which hath occasioned many pious aires, And been the subject of his serious praiers. Can fate present What after this, I can call discontent? More proud am I of this, than Phaeton When Phoebus flaming chariot he did guide; Before he knew the danger coming on, Or else than Jason, when from Colchos he Returned with the fleeces victory. Then on his neck shedding a shower of joy, That ten-years travell'd Greek return'd from sea Nere joyd so much to see his Ithaca. Pouring himself into embracements, Loosing himself in Labyrinths of joy. So joy'd Andromeda freed from her chaines And the grim monster. His breast scarce holds his joyes, whose fancy works On golden wonders. I know not whether I then was more compos'd of joy or joy of me, for I seemed not merty, but mirth it self. As glad, as was the wandering youth of Greece, When he from Colchos brought the golden fleece. Like sea-men that descry the land at last, For whose glad sight, they get the hatches under, And to the Ocean tell their joyes in thunder. Shaking those barnackles into the sea, At once that in the wombe, and cradle lay. As Nymphs and Shepheards when the timbrell rings, Or crooked Dolphin, when the saylour sings.
Whose joy and mirth. Transcends the united pleasures of the earth. What angels tongue can let The world conceive our pleasures when we met. Who could have seen how that kind Roman dame Orecome with joy did yeild her latest breath, Her son returning laden with such fame, When thankful Rome had mourned for his death. Might have beheld her personated right, When I approached to—sight. Like as a man whose hourely wants implore Each meals relief, trudging from doore to doore, That hears no dialect from churlish lips, But newes of Beadles and their torruring whips, Takes up perchance some unexpected treasure, New-lost, departs, and joyful beyond measure, Is so transported, that he scarce believes So great a truth, and what his eye perceives, Not daring trust, fearing it is some vision, Or flttering dream, deserving but derision. I am too narrow to contain my joy. The Merchant when he plowes the angry seas, And sees the mounting billowes fall upon him. As if all elements, and all their anger Were turn'd into one vow'd destruction, Shall not with greater joy embrace his safety. My joy cannot shew it self modest enough without the badge of bitternesse, my tears. My plenteous joyes, Wanton in fulnesse, seeke to hide themselves In drops of sorrow. Imparadis'd. An extasie of joy. Drunken with joy. Ready to leap out of their skin. Glove. Whose fine proportion showed well what a dainty guest was wont to be lodged therein. The hands sheath. Glutton. v. Voluptuous. That dis-people all the elements, to please their palates. That impoverish seas And aire dispeople, their proud tast to please. That greedy tyrant to obey, Who varies still his tribute with the day, His health by surfets forfeiting.
Vest only in the kitchen Alchimy, Philosophy. To tire their glutted appetite. Chain'd by the teeth unto their meat and drink. Digging his own grave with his teeth. Witty and ambitious appetite. Three elements at least dispeopled be To satisfie judicious gluttony. Nice palates, Knowing stomachs, That never fast, but presently after dinner, The whole world is his confectionary. Banquet beagles. That wears his brains in his belly. That cannot judge the controverted cse, Twixt meat and mouth, without the bribe of sauce. That gull the seas, Their witty appetite to please. That eat The heads of parets, tongues of nightingales. The brains of peacocks, and of ostriches. And could they get the Phoenix, Though nature lost her kind, she were their dish. Apicius, Geta, Galba. Vitellius. Heliogabalus, Sybarites, Abderites, Sardanapalus. Goates. The bearded heard. The wanton flocks. The bleating flocks, Which powle the steepest mountains motly rocks. God. Almighty essence, arbiter of fate, Who wisely governs what he did create. Whose unresisted hands do tear The clouds with dreadful thunder. The great Disposer. The geat director of the rolling stars. Emperour of Angells. King of stars. The great Creatour. To whom nothing's so great as to resist, nothing so smal as to be con∣temned. The first and last of things. Whose great arme spans the East and West, And tacks the center to the sphear. The great Three-one. That sees the secret chambers of the heart, And with his knowledge can prevent our thoughts. Goodnesse's eternal fountain. Searcher of the heart. The spirit that all the world maintains, And the poiz'd earth in empty aire susteins.
Great self-subsisting nature. One accent of whose breath hath power To ruine heaven and earth, and in an houre To build a thousond more. The worlds great Architect. That his mansion hath on high Above the reach of mortal eye. All living creatures that doth feed, And with full hand supply their need. That with his miracles doth make Amazed heaven and earth to shake, That by his all commanding might, Did fill the new-made world with light. Gods. Eternal beings. Awfull powers. Immortal essences. Heavnly dwellers. The blest Celestials. The deathlesse powers. Heaven imbowred Gods. That on immortal thrones reside. Heavens tenants, that in heavenly Halls Haveblest abodes. Ever-being states. The heavenly housed powers. Skie-thron'd powers. Heaven-housed states. Deities. Immortal Synod of the glorious skie. That do the fates eternal courses know, And tell of things to come. That have the power To trouble or compose all things below their bower. The powers that never vary state. Immorral guests, Which with Ambrosia and Nectar feast. Great Berecynthia's deathlesse prgeny. To Go up and down. To keep their pathes. To apply their steps. To taske their steps to. To divide their nimble paces. To taske the feet. Direct the steps. Gold. Pretious dirt. Fairer dunghill. Mechanick trash. Jove knew thee when he courted Danaae, And Cupid wears thee on that arrowes head That still prevailes. On Ida once the Martial maid. Venus and Juno did to mortal eyes. Naked for thee their sacred bodies show The bait of avarice. The glittering oare.
India's rich bowels. Tagus. Pactolus sands. The misers God. The general charme. Bright son of Sol, much brighter than his father. The golden ore That lies on Tagus or Pactolus shore. That pure sand The Indians find upon Hydaspes strand. The golden apples of the Hesperides. The golden fleece. The Golden number. Golden rule. Bills of this metal slackt At'lanta's pace, And on the amorous youth bestow'd the race: Venus the Nimphs mind measuring by her own, Whom the rich spoiles of cities overthrown, Had prostrated to Mars, could well advise Th' adventurous lover how to gain the prize. Nor lesse may Jupiter to gold ▪ For when he turn'd himselfe in , Who can blame Danaaeor the ben tower, That they withstood not th' Almighty shower. Never till then did Love make Jove put on A forme more bright and noble than his own. Golden age. The age of better mettal. Strife only raign'd, for all strove to be good. Rivers ran with streams of milk. Honey-dropped from the trees. The earth unto the husbandman Gave her voluntary sees. When no freezing cold beguile. The eternal flowry spring. And th heavens a constant smile, Darted upon every thing, When no ship had brought from farre Neither ill sought ware nor war, Pale conscience started not at ugly sinne When good old Saturn's peacefel throne Was unusurped by his beardlesse son. When jealous Ops nere fear'd the abuse Of her chast bed, or breach of nuptial truce, When just Ast aea poys'd her scales, in mortal hearts. Saturnes reigne, when as the homely cave, A narrow dwelling to the people ga.
A litle hearth, small fire, when beasts and men Slept in the shadow of one common den, The hearb gave wholsome seeds at first, And the clear fountain quencht their thirst, Beneath the shadow of the pine, Men slept, then in the Ocean brine; No keele was washt, no unknown guest On any forraigne coasts did rest, No blood was shed through bitter hate, No armes took up to pluck on fate, For what should hostile fury do? Or stir up mad mens spirits unto. Saturnes reign, When as the earth unmeted did remain, And no long journey's known, the sea not cut By any crooked sterne, as ye To such new but thens, and  dering wind To play withal, no limber say  could find; Nor did the erring mariner so Travel, or yet find out the constant star. By which to steer, nor as they now do roame from remote places to bring traffique home. The servile yoke did not the bull disturbe The unbackt Jennet knew no bit or curbe, The dwelling house no dore had, but stood ope, Nor was the stone prefixt, that bounds the scope Of common fields, the bollow oake the hive That yeilded honey, neither did they drive Their cattel home, but with their udders swel'd, They flockt unto the milk-paile uncompell'd, No wrath, no war, no armies to invade, For no smith then, knew how to cast a blade. In the worlds young dayes Nation 'gainst nation did no forces raise T▪ invade each other, no man then for gain Da'd in a thin rib'd bark to crosse the main. No craft was knowne, no fraud then understood, The udders of their cattel lent them food, The fleece their garments, only to defend. From wind and weather (for no other end Was clothing made) pride was a monster then Unheard, unthought, one fashion was to men.
Women another, for no change they knew, One garbe they kept, and studied nothing new, None idle was, but liv'd by his own sweat, he brook their drink, the herbe and root their meat, he industrious oxe safe wanders up and down. ares and bright felicity do crown And seede the land; through seas by Neptune tam'd No sailors fly, faith feareth to be blam'd. No chast house with adultery defil'd, Cstome and law had spotted sin exil'd, Each man about his own hills shut up day, And 'bout the widow elmes doth vines display, And frolick in free earouses. When every thought a seed did bring. And every look a plant did bring. And every breath a flower, Then earth unplough'd did yeild her crop, Pe honey from the oake did drop; The fountains did run milke, The thistle did the lilly bear, And every bramble roses wear, And every worm made silke, The very shrub did balsome sweat, And nectar melt the rock with heat, And earth did drink her fill, That she no harmful weed did kow, Nor barren ferne, nor mandrake low, Nor mineral to kil, The male and female us'd to joynt, And into all delight did coyne That pure simplicity, Then feature did to forme advance, And youth call'd beauty forth to dance, And every grace was by, It was a time of no distrust So much of love, had nought of lust, None fear'd a jealous eye. The language melted in the ear, Yet all without a blush might hear, They liv'd with open vow. Each touch and kisse was so well plac't, They were as sweet as they were chast.
The goates their swelling udders home did bear The droves did then no shaggie lyons fear; No herbes did with deceitful poison flow, And sweet Amomum every where did grow. Ripe grapes did dangle from the briars tops Hard oakes sweet hony formed in dewie drops The pine did then no use of trade retaine. Each country bred all fruit, the earth disdaind The harrows weight, and vines the sickles stroke. Strong ploughmen let their bulls go free from yokes, Wooll learn'd not to dissemble colours strange, But rams their fleeces then in pastures chang'd To pleasing purple, or to saffron die, And lambes turne ruddie, as they feeding lie. The golden time which uncompell'd, And without rule in faith and truth excell'd, As then there was nor punishment, nor fear Nor threatning lawes in brasse preseribed were, Nor suppliant crouching prisoners stoopt to see Their angry judge, but all was safe and free. To visit other worlds no wounded pine Did yet from hills to faithlesse seas decline. Then unambitious mortals knew no more But their own countries natur-bounded shore, Nor swords nor armes were yet no trenches round Beseiged townes nor strifefull trumpets sound, The souldier of no vse in firme content And harmeless ease their happy dayes were spent, The yet free earth did of her owne accord, Untorn with ploughes, all sorts of fruits afford, Content with natures unenforced food. They gather wildings, straw buries of the wood, Sower cornells, what upon the bramble growes, And Acorns which Joves spreading oak bestowes. 'Twas alwaies spring, warm Zephyr sweetly blew On smiling flowers, which without setting grew; Forth with the earth, corn unmanured bears, And every tree renewes her golden ears, With milk and nectar were the rivers fili'd, And honey from green holly-oaks distili'd. When froth-born Venus, and her brt, With all that furious brood young Jove begar.
In horrid shapes, were yet unknown Those Haleyon daies, those golden daies are gone. There was no clyent then to wait The leisure of a long-tail'd Advocate. The Talion law was in request, And Chancery courts were kept in every breast; Abused statutes had no tenters, And men could deal secure without indenters; There was no peeping hole, to clear The wittols eye from his incarnate fear. There were no lustful cinders then To broyl, the cabonadoed hearts of men; The rosie cheek did then proclaime A shame of guilt, but not a guilt of shame. There was no whining soul to start At Cupids twang, or curse his flaming dart. The boy had then but callow wings, And fell Erynnis scorpions had no stings. The better acted world did move Upon the fixed poles of truth and love; Love essenc'd in the hearts of men, Then reason rul'd, there was no passion then, Till lust and rage began to enter, Love the circumference was, and love the center, Untill the wanton daies of Jove, Te simple world was all compos'd of love. V. Britannia's Pastorals. Lib. 2. Song 3. Boet. Matam, lib. 2. Met. 5. Juvenal. Sat. 6. Tibullus. Lib. 1. Eclog. 3. Goodly. Like a ship in her full trim. Portly. Stately. Mooving in state. Like the sayling swan. Mooving with a portly grace. Gorgon. Medusa's snaky head, which who looks on Is strait congealed to a sencelesle stone, On whom Minerva her due vengeance takes, In turning of her radiant haires to snakes, For her unlawful pleasures in her fane, From whose hot blood, when her bold Perseus slew, Thence Pegasus, and thence Chrysaor flew Under the frosty Atlas clffie side:
Grape. The juicie burden of the vine. The spicie clusters of the vine, The juicie vines attire. The purple pendants of the vine. The dangling jewels of the clustered vine. The swelling clusters great with child of Bacchus. Giving the eyes a pleasant tast, Before they give the mouth repast. Grasse The mountains motley lock. The green plush of the plains, The enameli'd vallies flowrie fleece, The chequered vesture of the Meads, Dressing the vallies in their shaggie freeze. The tufted mantle of the fields. The earths green Summer gown. Grave. v. Stoick Sldome he smiles, and smiles in such a sort, As if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit, That could be mov'd to smile at any thing, That looks with such Majestick grace' As if he sway'd an Empire in his face. The Grave. Tomb, Urn, shrine, monument, shrowd, vault, charnel, Last home. The cold bed. The common Inne. The harder Lodging of mortality, deep Goal of Death The chaitable honou. The everlasting bed, Which makes no changing of the Sheets. Earths dark bosome. Deaths cold embers. Deaths melancholy dungeon. Caves of death. The cabinet where is laid the pawn for the Souls re-turn. The bed of clay. The wormie bed. Deaths publick tiring house, where all men must, Measure their cold proportion in the dust, That locketh up our scattered dust, That she must audit upon trust, That quiet closet of content. The childs portion, our common mother bequeaths her children. Dusty confinement of the body. That dusty bed. Where unfelt worms, are all the fleas are bred.
ithin whose dusty Territories plowmen are full. Compeers to Kngs, where the spade may challenge precedence f the Scepter, and where the mitre may not contest with the tock. There where the weary from their labours rest. Nor pisoners there inforced by torments cry, fearlesse by their old tormentors lie. he mean and great on equall basis stand, No servants there obey, nor Lords command, Where all in silence mourn, From whose dark shores no travellers return, A Land where death, confusion, endlesse night, And horrour reign, where darknesse is their light. Great. Of the Gigantick Size. The Folio of nature or of art. Natures text-hand. Natures great capital letters. Of vast proportion. Large Dimensions. Grief. v. Melancholy That froward Scholler in Arithmetick, Who doth Division and Substraction flie, And onely learns to adde and multiply. Beauties moth, cancker. Daughter of care and misery. Souls-afflicting vineger. To Grieve. v. Mourn. Lament. Groan. v. Sigh. The end of this gave life unto a groan, As if her life and it had been but one. Sad symptome of oppressing misery, Wounding the pitying air. Grove. v. Dark, Silent VVood. All husht and silent as the mid of night. Birds that compassion from the rocks could bring, Had onely license in that place to sing. Whose dolefull notes the melancholy Cat, Close in an hollow tree sat wondring at, Trees nod their curled heads as they would be The judges to approve their melodie, Where Fairies danc'd, and Shepherds quills, In sweet contention past the tedious day: Dark silent grov, profan'd by no unholy love.
Where witty melancholy ne'r Did carve the trees or wound the air, Where nought except a solitary spring Was ever heard, to which the Nymphs did sing, Narcissus obsequies. The scattered grove Leads winter shelters, and gives summer bowers, As with the flood in courtesie it strove, And by repulsing the sharp Northern showers, Courts the proud Castle, who by turning to her, Smiles to behold the wanton wood nymph wooe her, A bushie grove pricking the lookers eye, Where every morn a quire of Sylvans song, And leavs to chattering winds serv'd as a tongue, By which the water turns in many a ring, As if it fain would stay to hear them sing, And on the top a thousand young birds flie To be instructed in their harmonie Gilty. v. Blush. Whose guiltinesse betraying blushes speak, That makes his fault legible in his cheeks, His trembling lips, and his disjointed word. Attainted breast. The conscious thoughts. Gyant. Sighing out clouds of breath. From his great yawning nostrils, the earths bold sons, A moving rock, a walking, stalking tower. Great stones he flung, Like quarries by a warlick engine slung. A walking Aetna, natures great Folio. A stalking mast, Natures text-hand, Natures whole cloth. He that saw him goe Would think some steeple reeled to and fro. When the dreadfull monster stir'd His massie limbs, beneath his feet hee rea'd A cloud of dust, and wheresoe'r he went. Flight, fear and death his ghastly steps attend, That swears by great Mahoon, moving mount of flesh. Corflambo, Garuganu. Colbrand, Brandamart, Typhoeus, Antiphaes, Polyphemus, Brontes, Steropes, Pyracmn The serpent footed issue that durst invade, And would on heaven their hundred hands have laid. Tirans. Mimas, Porphyrian, Enceladius, Rhaetus
reat sons of earth. Of large dimensions. The great hill-lifters. Gunnes. Engins whose rude throats. The immortall Joves great thunder, counterfeit. The weighty circumstance of glorious war. iick thunder, pes of thunder, Whose vast throats disgorge, And with loud thunder belch their angry language. Vomiting out, digested into flame, What was but dust cramm'd in. Cowardly cruelty, That date not speak, nor do, but at a distance, H. Hair. THE heads native ornament. Natures shadow. Locks like streams of liquid amber Smoothly dangling seem'd to spread, Curtains fit for beautes chamber. Hangings fit for beauties bed, Of which slender golden sleave Love his wanton nets did weave. The strings of Cupids bow. Venus trammells. Sleavy Amber. Cupids sleavy chains, Insnaring nets like to the rayes, Wherewith the sun doth diaper the seas. Had fair Arachne wrought her hair, When she for skill with Pallas did compare. Minerva's work had never been esteeem'd. The silken fringes of the head, Her hair was rold in many a curious fret, Like to a rich and artfull Coronet. Upon whose arches twenty cupids lay, And were, or tied. or loath to flie about. Such hair. As those that lay their tresses to the Sun, View hers, and see if theirs be not agreeing To roll them up, as scarcely worth the seeing.
Her tresses far more fair, Would shew in heaven, then Berecynthians hair, Her plenteous hair in curled billows swims, On her bright shoulders, and harmonious limbs. The flaxen wealth of nauture. The dangling curls. The bounteous treasure of her hair, Whose dangling tresses if they had been shorn, Yet never cut and unto Colchas born, They had allur'd the venturous youth of Greece, To hazard more than for the golden Fleece. Bright Phebaean hair, Where perfum'd Meanders are. That amorous cordage, glistering groves. As if that nature for so rare a piece. Had meant a shadow, Whose curious tresses dangle all unbound With unaffected order to the ground. Her tresses falling down, As loath to be imprison'd on her Crown. I saw the soft air sportively to take To divers forms, and sundry shapes to make it. Natures rich fan, whose wires are drawn Softer than the threads of Lawn, And are softer than the leaves On which the subtil spinner weaves, That net of beams able to captive Jove. Vulcan need not a finer, stronger net, For Venus and her Champion to set. On whose radiant hair Cupid sits fettered in a golden snare. Her dishevel'd hair Hung down behind, as if her onely care Had been to reconcile neglect and art. His hair becomes him like the star That ushers in the day. Locks some curled, some forgotten, with such a careless care and art dissembling art, as she seem'd she would lay them for a pattern, whether nature simply, or nature help'd by cunning were the more excellent. A net able to have caught Jupiter When he was an eagle. It was doubtfull whether the hair grac'd the garland, or the garland the hair. Whose odour fills the ambient air.
Which loosest fastest rist. The golden sea, whose waves in curles are broken. The wanton winds, with beauties so divine. Ravisht, staid not, till in her golden haire, They did themselves in sweetest prison twine, And fain the sportive winds, there would their stay Have mad, but forc'd by nature still to fly. First did the puffing kisses her locks display. Her sunny locks Hang on her temples like a golden fleece. Nature there paid the spider, and hath wove A golden mesh'intrap the hearts of men. Like a Laconian maid, ▪Ties her neglected haire in curious braides▪ Locks so aptly twin'd That every haire a soul doth bind. Insnating all beholders. Like to the silk the curious Seres spin. Which from their crown Phoebus and Bacchus wisht were hanging down. Small as the wey net Which Vulcan once for Mats and Venus set. Haile. The candid balls of ice. The candid pellets of the skie. The northwest wind under the weeping kid. Never so thick his vollies racketed. Of bounding balls, of icie pearl. The gunshot of the skies. Halcyon. The azure-plumed Halcyones. VVhose birth controlls the raging seas. Birds of calme that brood upon the charmed wave. Hands. Natures hand-maids. The bodies victuallers. A wealthy palme VVhich holds the sweating of the Eastern balme. VVhence Jove might sip out nectar. Fingers the darts of love, Which with a touch might make a tyger mek, So soft, so feeling delicate and sleek, As Nature wore the lillies for a glove. As might beget life, where was never none, And put a spirit into flinty stone.
Where whitenesse doth for ever sit, Nature her self enameld'd it, Where with a strange compact dothly, Warme snow, moist pearl, soft ivory. There fall those saphire-coloured brooks, Which conduit like, with curious crooks, Sweet Ilands make in that sweet land; As for the fingers of that hand, The bloody shafts of Cupids war, With Amethists they headed are, Which without stroke subdue. Which with their whitenesse make one desire to touch them, and with their softnesse rebound a desire to look on them. In whose comparison all whites are inke, Writing their own reproach, to whose soft seizure The cygnets downe is harsh, and spirit of sence, Hard as the plough-mans hand. Hang'd. Chok't with a hempen squincy. To dangle from the cursed tree. To go to heaven in a string To take a turne at Tyburne Happie V. Fortunate I am in Elysium. I will pronounce this for my birth day. Plact in the Apogaeum. Zenith of all happinesse Whose blisse Meets his desires, or prevents his wish. One that hath so much happinesse, as puzzles his soule to find subiect for another wish. Envy to cry could scarce forbear, Finding no argument could urge a tear, I am too great for Fortune to bereave, Though much she ravish, she much more must leave. My blessings are above low fear, Like Nobe before, Latona's doome. Blest Beyond the treasures of the balmy East. Every day Rose with delight, and with it to us set. An happinesse, which Jove would be More proud of far, than of his deiry.
VVrites a non ultra to his blisse. n happinesse which none can have but he, ust blush to call ought after misery. Hard. Hard as the ploughmans hand. As the camels cllows knee. As adamant, VVhich nought can soften but the blood of goats. Hard as the unrelenting tyrants heart. As the Scythian rock. As fire-engendring flint. As the stiffe ribs of iron. As the lasting marble. As solid brasse. As the rockie stone. Harpies. The virgin raping fowles. Stimphalian monsters. Ttarian birds. Aello. Ocypete. Celaeno. ore horrid monsters, direr plagues than those, Or wath of Gods, from Styx yet never rose, Like fowle with virgin faces, purging still Their filthy paunches, arm'd with talons ill, And ever pale with famine. Jupiters dogs. Daughters of Neptune, and old Tellus. Parents of prodigies. Phineus tormntours, which with hooky clawes, Snatcht all his meat, to glut their filthy mawes. Harvest. v. Autumne. The reaper panting both for heat and pain, VVith crooked rasor shaves the tufted plain, The full ears humbling their flowry top, Are even as ready with a grateful crap, To think the husband for his painful toyle. The summers green is girded up in sheaves, Borne on the bear with white and bristly beard. Now the industrious harvester, Scorched all day with his own scalding heat, Shaves with keen syth, the glory and delight Of motly meadows. When Ceres yellow locks are shorn. Hast. v. Swift. Each step the other strives to overgoe. VVith hasty feet, swallowing the tedious way, VVith speed that went before the winged thought. VVith speed untainted by delay. VVith a lovers speed. Ste'd in his reeking sweat. Each envious pace vies to be first. Hast looks through his eyes. VVith such speed, He's almost dead for breath, hath scarcely more
Then will make up his message. With as much hast as they would fly death. To spar, to give wings, to feather flight, to post. Hate. To pursue with a stepdames hate. The tender swallow hateth lesse the cold. He hates me like a dog or snake, The Gods cannot more hate the Stygian lake. Pursues him with Vatinian hate. Bupalian hate. God loves not goodnesse more than she hates thee. Unreconciled hatred. When these agree, Nature will reconcile antipathies. So plants love oyle. So vines the colwort love. So sheep love wolves. Swounds at the very name. And sinks as if he mean the Antipodes To see, and leave this loathed hemispheare Wherein I breath. Haven. Harbour, port, safe station of the tossed barge. Clme bosomes that embrace the shp. The weary seamans wish and hope. The long expected shore. That hath occasioned many pious aires, And been the subject of the seamans praier. Hawke. The common terrour of the doves. The airy hunter. The insulting tyrant of the aire▪ The airy pyrate, Rover. Head. Crest, sommet, globe of wonder. That doth contain All sence, and fountain of all sence, the brain. Health. My pulse beats musick, and my lively blood Danceth an healthful measure. Whose brow no wrinkle bears, Whose cheeks no palenesse, in whose eyes no tears, But like a child, shee's pleasant, quick and plump, She seems to fly, to skip, to dance and jump, And lifes bright brand in her white hand doth shine, The Arabians bird rare plumage plated fine Serves her for surcoate, and her seemly train, Mirth, exercise, and temperance sustein.
Whose humours in sweet temper ly With undisturbed harmony. The humours calme. Hear. To salute the ear. To be presented to the ear. To strike, to beat the ear. To entertain the attentive ear. To glad the ear. To wound, to stab the ear. Hearken. v. Attend. To grace with attention. To lend a willing, yeilding ear. To lend soft audience, Afford the speakers tongue an ear. Heart. The busie furnace. The spring of heat and life. The anvile on which all the thoughts do beat. The bodies sun. The seat of passions. The soules throne, The minthouse of affections. Heat. Hot. The suns offensive rage. Hot as the scalding ray Which Phoebus darts, when he divides the day Into its equal halfes, Hot as the torrid zone. Burning with a calenture. So hor was the Tyrinthian when he wore The poison'd shirt washt in the Centaures gore. So burning Phaeton, when he did drive The flaming chariot. My bulke to Aetna turnes, And all her flames pent in my bosome burne. I dare that fire it self for heat provoke That chambers in the skie. Like flames of burning sulphur. Acheron. Phlcgethon. Hot as a burning feaver. As Perillus bull. Seething, boyling, soultry, stewing, baking, brewing, frying, roasting, broyling, parching, scorching, burning, flaming, chased smoaking, sweating, reeking, glowing, findging, scalding. Hot as the flaming furnace. Heaven. The Olympick Hall. Joves white hall. The starty vault. The stately palace of the Gods. The spangled canopy. The airy battlements. Star-spotted-spangled-powdered-checkered-embroyderered cur∣tains, carpets, books.
The azure circle. Upper loft. Christal map. The highest chamber, story, gallery. The glistering circles of the skie. The rolling globe. The Chrystal sphears, arches. The azure tester trimm'd with golden sparks. The starry seeling. The rich pavillion of the Gods. The Chrystal rafters of the skie. The vast extensious of the skie. The blew rafters of the spangled skies. The spangled mansion of the stars. Heavens gilt azure cope. Joves high turrets. The glorious roofe, the star-enamelled vault. The starry court of Jove. The vault of stars. The starry round. Heavens shining bauldrick. The azure-spangled regions. The Christal throne. The starry round. That house of purer bodies tenanted. The rapid orbes that bear The changing seasons of the year, On their swift wings. Silver chime, Moving with melodious time. The silver pages of that book, Where stars are golden letters. Glory's magazin. Starry towers. Celestial bowers. Saphire rafters of the skies, The whirling poles. That dance their daily galiard. Majestick roofe fretred with golden fire. Harmonious orbes that roul In restlesse gyres about the Artick pole. Hector. Andromache's stout husband. Priams tall son. Priams valiant son. The Grecians hate and fear, Till he that was their fear, became their scorne, And slain, was by Aeonian horses torne. Hecuba, Priams sad wife. Hectors unhappy mother. Great Dima's daughter. Priams fruitful wife, That gave the all illustrious Hector life. That scratcht out Polymnestors eyes. Buried with stones upon her flung, Yet first reveng'd with curses of her tongue. Whom raging grief converted to a bitch. Ulysses scorned lot. Unhappy Queen, VVhich after she so much of joy had seen,
Had life by fates unkindest kindnesse lent, To see her daughters impious ravishment; Her sons untimely fate, her husband die, And roll'd in blood before Joves altar lie; Polyxena dear issue of her wombe, A sacrifice upon Achilles tombe; And which was worse than all shee saw before, The livelesse corps of her young Polydore. Helen. v. Beautifull. The beauty of whose cheeks Brought against Troy the army of the Greeks. Paris unhappy bride. Leda's fair daughter, That charming beauty, free from tainting spot, Worthy of Jove, if not by Jove begot. The twin-brothers pride. Hell. Sad Averno's strand. The depths to heaven-oppos'd. Pluto's sad monarchy. The shady coast. Pluto's wide-door'd house. The damned dismal mansion. The darksome plashie lake of Acheron. The silent deeps, And horrid shades where sorrow never sleepes. Pluto's pale kingdome. Dungeon. Blind caves of Dis. The gloomy dwellings of the damned spirits. Where Demogorgon's in dull darknesse pent. Where hideous Chaos keepes. Pluto's grizly band. A land where death, confusion, endlesse night, And horrour reign, where darnesse is their light. The infern. I vault. The dolorous mansion. Where Styx the old grandame of the Gods doth lie. That dungeon where the damned souls are shut. The pooles of scalding oyle and sulphure. The burning wheele turned round in flames. In burning beds of steele the damned lie. Where Ssyphus his restlesse torments rolls. Roasted in sulphure. And washt in deep vast gulphs of liquid fire. The black empire. The ugly baleful bower. The loathsome kingdom. Puto's empty regiment. T'accurst aboades, monsions. The gloomy empire of th'infernal king. The unamiable realm. The realms to day unknown,
The dreadful house of Austere Pluto. Where Tantalus doth ever dread The falling stone that hangs upon his head. There are those youthful sisters which in vain Powre water still into that fatal tun, Which is as empty as when they begun. There Centaures, there the hissing Hydra stands, Scylla, Briarius with his hundred hands, Fire-arm'd Chymera's, Harpies full of rape, Snaky hair'd Gorgons. Gerions triple shape. There all the furies, daughters to old night, Implacable, and hating all delight. Before the adamantine doors do sit, And there with combes, their snakie curles unknit. The dungeon of the damned this is nam'd, Here Tityus for attempted rape defam'd, Hath his vast body on nine acres spread, And on his heart a greedy vulture fed, Ixion turn'd upon a restlesse wheele, With giddy head pursues his flying heele. v. Stix, Cocitus, Phlegethon, Acheron, Ixion, Tityus, Belides, Tantalus, Geryon, Cerberus, Furies, Pluto, Proserpine. Helmet. Nodding a terrour to the foe, with plumed crests. The plumed caske. The Souldiers warlick maske. The shining caske. The armed heads defence. Hercules. The bold Tyrinthian Hero. He who bears the dreadful club. Whom twice six labours deified. Proud Almena's son. Fair Almena's son. Joves great laborious son. That wore the fatal shirt. VVhite-anckled Hebe's spouse. VVhose shoulders did sustein The world, nor shrunk beneath so great a fraught. To strangle serpents was his cradle sport. VVho when he saw the Thracian horses feast VVith humane flesh, their mangers overthrew, And with the steeds, their wicked master slew. Joves cruel wife was sooner weary to impose, Than he was to performe. VVhose garment that he wrapt his body in, VVas glorious spoiles, the Nemean Lyons skin:
The injur'd worlds revenger, and his own. First he the grim Cleonian Lyon slew; Next Hydra did with sword and fire subdue; The Erimanthian Bore with Javelin stroke; The brasse hoov'd stagge with golden antlers took; The chac't Stimphalides his arrowes felt, From th'Amozonian won her precious belt; Then cleans'd Augaeus stalls with ordure full, And vanquished the furious Cretan bull; Serne Diomed his ravenous horses threw, Three-headed Gerion in Iberia slew; The Hesperian dragon-guarded apples won, And scowling Cerberus shewed to the sun. Hermophradite. Sir and Madam twisted both together. One orbe contains both sun and moon. Within whose eyes Both Venus and Adonis lies. In every simple sound A perfect dialogue is found. Tib and Tom in a trick. Natures Philip and Mary's sixpence. Two sexes in one Individual. Hermit. v. Anchorite. High. Which with lesse distance peeps into the stars. Than which no place of earth doth swell more high In any place, nor nearer meets the skie. Which by their wondrous height Might seem to threat the skies, and once more fright The Gods with a gigantick war. That out-braves the skie. Till as Atlas pillars which did tack. Heaven to the earth. That to an immense height drawes up the eye. A cliffe As high as the Canarian Tenariffe, Which lift their swelling tops above the skies. Which shrouds His airy bead in hanging clouds. Whose lofty top Nature hath made contiguous to the heavens, Whose lofty top doth know
No distance from the Skies. Singing his pate against the torrid Zone. Makes Offa like a wart. That emulate the Skie, As they would ease great Atlas of his load, That rear Their glitering tops, which fatall lightning fear, Invade the Skies, And bid defiance to the Skie, That lick the stars, and steal a kisse from heaven, That muffle up their heads within the clouds. Like Athos Mount, Or Erix steep and long, Or like old Apeninus rais'd on high Into the Air, kissing the starrie Skie. Whose top seems to despise The under vale—doth rise▪ In stately height to parly with the Skies, As Mountains on whose barren brest, The labouring clouds do often rest. Whose stately eminence. Vassals the under vales circumference, So high as if they meant, To ease strong Atlas of his punishment, Whose head like winged fame, Might pierce the clouds, yea seem the stars to kisse, And Mausolus great tomb might stand in this. Tempting the Skie, so gh From thence swell'd mountains seem but to the eye As atoms, losing their heads within the Skie, Bearding the stars, thrusting acquaintance on the Skie Proudly insulting o'r the under Skie, Whose lofty foreheads brush the stars, As if thee meant to put out heavens bright eyes, As if they meant to scale the Skies, Whose height doth court the clouds, Scaling Olympus snowie brow, Knocking their hows against heavens brazen doors, That heaven and earth attone. That reach heavens battlements, So high They thratned to give battell to the Skie, Which show Against the height of heaven their pointed brow. Skie-kissing, air-invading, High as Riphoean hills.
Hill. v. High. Two rockie hills lift their proud tops on high. And make a vale beneath, Their lofty brows display. Earths dugges, wart, risings, tumours, blisters. Athos, Atlas, Haemus, Rhodope, Ismarus, Eryx, Cithaera, Taurns, Caucasus, Alps, Appenine, Oeta, Tmolus, Aetna. Panassus, Othrys, Cynthus, Mimas, Dyndimus, Mycale. Plion, Pindus, Offa, Olympus, Helicon, Ida. History. The rorch of truth. The treasure-house of time. The glasse of ages past. The Matron with her eyes, behind her. Hippocrene. The fount Made by the horse hoof on the Muses Mount. ganippe's spring. The Heliconian well, The Muses sacred rill. The Poets fount, Where they to drench their ravisht lips are wont. V. Muses-Parnassus. Forked Parnassus spring, where those sweet maids of memory do sing Homer. The Grecian Merlin. The Muses high Priest Blind Bard of Greece. The Muses Purveyor. Apollo's Caterer. The Priest of Smyrna that took such delight In knowledge, that for it he chang'd his sight, Whose pen The Scepter was, which rul'd the souls of men. Honest. v. Forms of Commending. A man of a most confirmed honesty, He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or love for power to thunder. His heart's his mouth. Would not betray The Devil to his fellow, and delights No lesse in truth than light. A mind keeps correspondence to his tongue. A mind allied unto his words. He hath all the entendmenrs of an honest man, From whose free tongue proceedeth nought That is not correspondent to hs thought, Whose head and heart keep alwayes one pace. His conscience and his tongue keep the same tune. Who punishment, lesse than the trespasse fears.
Honey. The sweets that crown the labours of the Bee, The sweet provision of the Bee, Bees flowrie task. The riches of Hyblean Cottagers The treasures of industrious Bees. Honour. The waxen Palace of the Bee. The waxie Cabbins of industrious Bees. The Bees hollow home. The Bees arched cells. The dainty wax divided rooms. The honey Merchants shop. The waxen Canopie. Honor. The inheritance of air. Prides Stirrup. That glorious nothing. Ambitious wish and scope, Which envy ever lackies at the heels. That great engagement to great purposes. Swelling Titles, gilded emptiness, vertues due guerdo. Dreams in career. Embroydered names. The creature of authority. Hope. The poor mans god. The lullabie of care. The greatest antidote against despair. Miseries babie, rattle, lenitive. Ingaging expectation, The parasite of thought. The dream of mad men. Ever-changing gale, Swelling with wanton breath, the gaudy sayls Of glorious fools. Miseries cordiall. The onely happinesse of those that are deprived of all other. The hope with expectation feed. The dame of beggars, and the Queen of Kings. Our joy in sorrow, and our peace in strife. The waking dream. Brave temper of resolved spirits. Valours incentive. Patience's pillow. Lawfullest flatterer. The pullies to draw up dejected hearts. The first-born of experience Horns. The terrour of the skull. Natures offensive arms, And her defensive too. Horse. High bounding Steeds, whose rich caparison With Scarlet blush, with gold their bridles shone. The best that ever trode The sounding Centre. Like to the breed of great Laomedon,
r those which Jove gave Tros. The bloody spur thrusts anger in his side, Which perform their fiery course. rinckling their foam, and snowing on the dust. e Steed in stately trappings proudly stamps, nd in his mouth the foamy bridle champs, forth the ringled bit, and with his hooves Checks the submissive ground. He lifts his hasty hoof, as if he scorned The earth, as if his tabering feet had found A way to go, and yet ne'r touch the ground. Bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs. He is pure air and fire. Earth and water never shew hemselves in him, but in his still patience to let his ider mount him. There stamps a Steed that champs the frothy steel. This strokes the ground, that scorns it with his heel. His neck with thunder arm'd, his breast with force, Who from his nostrils throws a dreadfull, light Ealts in his own courage, proudly bounds, With trampling hoof the sounding Centre wounds, Breaks through the order'd ranks with eyes that burn, Nor from the battel-ax nor sword will turn, The ratling Quiver, nor the glittring Spear, Or dazling Shield can daunt his heart with fear, Through rage and fiercenesse he devours the ground, Nor in his fury hears the trumpet sound, Far off the battel smells, like thunder neighs, Loud shouts and dying groans his courage raise. One snorts, another puffes out angry wind, This mounts before, and that curvets behind, That with their hoofs so swift beat out the race, As if an engin shot them to the place, Going as if they did disdain the ground, And treading on it, not for necessity, but in contempt. The batter'd Centre flew V. Dubar∣ta's Han∣dicrafts description of an horse. In clouds of dust raised from their pransing hoofs, That beat a thunder from the groaning earth. Hour. Times lesser children. The fleeting measures of the day. The rags and bits of time.
Time labours to bring forth, 7, 8, 9, &c. Humble. Unambitious, spirit-groveling, low-pitcht soul. No swelling glory courts his private thoughts. Content with fortunes courtesie. whose unaspiring Bark by calm shores glide, So humble as she is able to put pride out of countenance. Who avoids not pride by not knowing her excellency, but makes it one of her excellencies to be void of pride. Hungry. A barking stomack. Lawlesse, famine, self-consuming hunger, Which makes men feed, on that they cannot feed Their weakened limbs. Hunger, the bellies flame. The empty bellies lean inhabitant. Like Erisicthon King of Thessalie, He dreams of feasts extends his idle jaws, VVith labouring teeth fantastically chaws, Deludes his throat by swallowing empty fate, V. Ovids Met. l. 8. Fab. Erisi∣cthon. Browns Pastorals, l. 2. song 1. And for affected food devours the air. Hot famine raves through all his reins, And in his guts and greedy palate raigns. Hunt. Hunter. None more, The choice affected, or t'entoil the bore, The tops of Mountains scale, And trace the leavie woods, Follows the cry of hounds, And drives the hair along the fallow grounds, Wakening the pratling eccho—sounds, And shrill Alarums of the foul mouth'd hounds, VVhilst hounds do make the woody hills, Talk in an hundred voices to the rills. The savage and the bloody sport Of chaste Diana—that loves to set The toils, and chase the Deer into the net, VVhose choicest musick is the cry of hounds. Quick-sihred Beagles in a view, O'r hill and dale, the fleeing chace pursue The sented trace. The babling eccho mocks the hounds Takes pleasure in his pale enclosed grounds, And lets the Rhetorick of his deep mout'd hounds Perswade his head-strong sorrows so to flie Before his herd, as they before the cry.
e quick-nos'd army with their full mouth'd sounds sue the timerous hare, e mournfull Eccho left off to bemoan r Loud Narcissus, and with them made one. Busie in pursuit of savage spoils, e drave the Deer into his corded toils, ith purple blood, slain Deer the hills imbrue Ovid. Met. l. 3. Fab. Actaeon. y tread the mazes of the pathlesse wood. Hyades. e watry Deities. The showry Constellation. The seven glistering stars the Bulls front. mpestuous Constellations. eeces to Tethys and Oceanus. aughters of Atlas and Aetheria. brosia, Eudoxa, Pasithea, Coronis, Plexautis. ytho, Tyche. Hydra. Lernean serpent with her store Of srightfull heads which by their losse encreast, hat having lesse she still had more, ill by the fire and sword at last supprest. ercules second Labour. Hymen. v. Epithalamium. The God of union, he that ties Hearts in a knot, and links in sacred chains, The mutuall souls of lovers, Great president of love the God that sings His holy numbers over marriage beds, By whose sacred Rites The Bride is led to nuptiall delights, The god that wears the Saffron robes, VVhose sacred lights, V. Marri∣age. Give lustre to the marriage nights. Hypocrisie.—Hypocrites. How foul soever the back-doore or postern be, the gate opening to the street is swept and garnished. Religious Alchimy, maskt impiety. Double iniquity. The filed tongue with defiled heart. False fire. Religions Meteors. Rather than lose a drop of praise, lick it up with their own ongues.
Like Saul going to the Devil in a disguise. Religious glow-worms. The Churches rotten wood. Sodoms apples. The Devil in a Monks habit. The Devil like an angell of light. Whited sepulchres. Wolves in sheeps cloathing. Gouty legs in silk stockins. Abomination in the Holy Place. Hanging an Angel for the signe in their face, when the Devi lodgeth in their heart. High hung mills mak most noise, and grind least. Shallow streams that make the higher noise for their low water. The archer and the mark in all actions, shooting at his own praise and profit. Fasting is meat and drink to him whilst others behold it. Gilt cups glister more than those of massie gold, which are sel∣dome burnished. Brave it in the shop, that have nothing in the warehouse. He hath a gaudy facing, hut cares not for the lining. Hide. To mask, shroud, cloak, couch muffle, periwig, coat, curtain, carpet, target, pave, matt. To canopie, to candie o'r, sheath, mantle, house, shell, cloyster, scarf, skreen, wrap, immure, envelope, involve, enshrine, enchest, liverit, vail, envail, to roof, to tester, to pavilion. I. January. VVHen with winter snow, The Pleiades doth Oemu top bestrow, When the times new-naming day draws near, Old Janus feast beginner of the year, That from old Janus takes his name, The leader of the moneths, The foreman in the Jury of the moneths, When the Sun hath run his full career, Through the twelve Stages of the turning year. The King of light, father of aged time, Hath brought about that day which is the prime.
To the slow gliding monhs, when every eye eirs symptomes of a sober jollity, d every hand is ready to present e service in a reall complement, st some in golden letters write their love, e speak affection by a ing or glove, r planes and poins (for even the peasant may; er his ruder fashion be as gay s the brisk Courtly Sir) and thinks that he Cannot without a grosse absurdity, e this day frugall, and not spare his friend, ome gift to shew his love finds not an end. ith the decased year. , Cold, Frost, Hall, Snow, Winter. Janus. Key-hearing god. The two fac'd god Patcius. lausius, That shuts and opes the year, Who onely of the gods can see his back. Old Vesta's husband. VVhose temple shut to Romanes did declare, A setled peace, but open, open war. Jason. He that from Colchos brought to Greece The wealthy Trophies of the golden Fleece The great Commander of the Argonautes. Aesons victorious heir. The Aemonan conquerour. Ice. v. Frost. VVater Chrystalized, ctusted snow, Chrystal chains Compacted water. Curded streams. Idle. Lethargick soul, slumbeing soul, with yawning lips VVhose arms infolded kni. A drowsie knot upon his carelesse breast, That lies in hungry wishes pin'd. That feed on sloth. As beetles in the dung they breed in, Not caing how the mettal of their mind Is eaten with the rust of idlenesse. A reasonable dormouse. His soul lies fallows
Ida. The mount enchas'd with silver springs. The famous mount of Troy, Where Paris judge'd the naked goddesses, Whose wealthy top, Is alwayes crowned with a plenteous crop. The stately hill of Troy, Whence Jove's great eagle snatcht the beauteous boy Idolater. Tht to the wod and stone devotion do, More senselesse than the stones they bow unto. Jealous. Jealousie. Burning like Aetna with an imbowell'd fire. Self-torturing Martyr. Hollow-ey'd, Snake-hair'd monster. That watches himself a mischief, and keeps a lear eye still, for fear he should escape him. Hundred ey'd Argos, ever waking spie. Pale hag, infernall Fury, pleasures smart, Envious observer viewing every part. Pin'd With seeking that he would be loath to find. The frensie of of the wise. Unkind carefullnesse. Self-punishment for others fault. Cousin of envy. Daughter of love and mother of hate. Self-misery for others happinesse. Beauties watchfull guard. Diligent in hope to lose his labour. That fruitfull mischief, ferall malady. Coninuall Feaver. The furious btter passion. Self-harming passion. Vertue drowning flood, That hellish fire not quenched but with blood, One that dates scarce trust his mother in bed with his wife. An head fly-blown with suspition. Argos was not so jealous of his Cow, Nor th' watchful dragon of the golden fleece. An ill Jailour that makes many break prison. It opens more wayes to wickednesse than it stops, and where it finds one, makes ten dishonest. Ignorant. Things like men, which seem far off a man. Of scarce so much understanding as will deliver him from being a fool.
Onely his lineaments bely a man, A son of earth. A narrow flat soul. A man of a lank shallow brain. Dull unconceiving brains. Idiot, Dzzard. Speaking beast. A greater babie. Cumine asse. Old children. A piece of earth that Prometheus put not half ths poportion of fire into. A soul drown'd in flesh. Ignorant rich man. A glorious fool, a golden asse. Shep with a golden fleece, a crowned asse. Dull as a thick-skul'd Justice, drunk with sloth, Or Alderman far gone in capon-broth. Island. Ground hugg'd in Neptuns arms. Clasp'd in the embraces of the sea. Hoopt with a watry girdle. Hedg'd in with water. Neptunes enclosures. Immortall. v. Eternall That may challenge time and out wear it. What neither age, winter nor death can know. Above times battery, which ages cloud can n'r benight. That neither stoop to age nor death: Imperfect. Embryon'd, unpolisht, unfill'd, not thoughly anvill'd. Impossible. v. Never, Incredible. Not within the sphear of omnipotency. Not within the capacity of being an object to an alighty power. Meer contradictions. Chymera', of a restlesse brain. We may hope as soon to calm a tempest with a song. Should all the world their daing wits confer, They should not make this lesse impossible. You may as soon go kindle fire with snow, As easily may'st thou thow A drop of water in the breaking gulph, And take it thence again unmigled, Without addition or diminishing. As soon▪ The whole earth may be bored, and the Moon May through the Centre creep and so Her brothers noon-ride with th' Antipodes. Imprison.
Its easier far, The torne and injur'd panther to restrain, In's hot pursuit, or stroke him coole again, To tell the cause why winds do disagree, Divide them when in stormes they mingled be, Strait fix them single, where they breath'd before, Or fan them with a plume from sea to shore: Than—men shall sooner see The inticed needle disobey, the tempting Adamant. Imprison. Confine, enjayle, enclose, fetter shackle, gyre, manacle, chain, enthral, enslave. Impudent. Of a ear'd impudence, Who have confirm'd their faces like to flint, Against all die of modesty. Who nere had somuch grace As is portended by the blushing face. Ashm'd of nothing but of modesty. One that hath dispensed with all shame. A reprobate in vertue. Without restraint of shame, or modesty. An headstrong impudence, that mocks reproofe. Which with small change might be turn'd into flint. Inconstant. v. Changeable. Incredible. v. Admirable. I adde no more least truth it self should blush, Fearing to loose its credit. Wer't not avouched by antiquity Who durst believe it? Behold, What hope transcends, nor can with faith be told, 'Tis past my creede. Beyond the credit of the credulous. Above all history, stands not within the prospect of be∣lief. Which to believe, Is a faith which reason without miracle Can never plant in understanding judgements. Not believ'd without some difficulty. Without all appearance of reason. There's nothing is incredible after this. Which none would speak, but he that thought He had a priviledge without controll, To speak things unlikely.
Posterity will scarce the same believe. Which no wise man can lend a thought to. I sooner will believe Medusa's head With snaky hairs was round encompassed; Or Scylla, or Chymaera's monstrous frame, Lyon and serpent parted with a flame, Or that the Minotaure hath ever been, Or Cerberus with triple dog-face seene, Or Sphynx, or Harpyes, Giants that had feete Like serpents, Gyges, or the Centaures fleete. I will believe all these can sooner be, Than that, &c. v. Never Impossible. Indian. That sucks sweet liquor from his sugar cane, That dives for pearls within the wealthy maine. That within The streams of Ganges bathe their swarthy skin. Infamous. Whose name is in black letters registred In the eternal book of infamy. From out the book of honour razed quite. Infant. Non-age, pupillage, mino ity, dawne of life. The new-spun thread of life. That hath but yet an inch of life. Bonelesse gums. Unbreathed suckling. Whose lips hang on the mothers brest. Whose cries A estill'd with rattles, and fond lullabies. A thrumbe of man, Natures epitome. The handfull of a man. Not much in debt to time. The mothers late deliver'd load. Whose young breath scarce knowes the way. VVhose pretty smiles could never yet descry The deep affect on of a mothers eye. VVhose imperfect pace, Can hardly lead his feet from place to place. Inocent. A man as free from wronging others, as himself. VVhose hands are free, And yet unstaind with any injury. From all aspersions clear.
Whose souls unsullied yet with oul offence Enthroned sit in spotlesse innocence. Pure as the stream of aged Symois, untainted with offence. White as the unsullied lilly was her soul. His looks doth raise from blemish clear. Intice. To train, toll, ensnae, becken, wooe, court, allure, bai. Job. That spectacle of patient miserie, All the ulcers that had been In Aegypt cured were broke out again In his distempered flesh. The patient Edomite. He that tr'd both estates, Acquainted with the smiles and frowns of fate Paent unto a Pove, Whom neither riches could make insolent, Nor naked pverty impatient. John the Baptist The son of Zachay. Late issue of the barrn womb. Christs former trumpet, The head of Prophets, Forerunner to the King of heaven, The morning-star of the eternl son, Whose head was price unto the Dmsels feet. Joyfull. v. Glad. Jy Publick. v. Shout. Noise. The Palace with the peope praises rings, And sacred joy in every bosome spings. The people that in shoals do swim, Walls window, ooft, owers, steeples, all were set With severall eyes that in this object met. Children uncapable to all mens thinking, Were dunk with joy, as others were with drinking, And stiks the heavens with sound of trembling bells. The Vocal Gddesse leaving dsart woods, Sldes down the Dales, and dancing on the floods Observes our woods, and wih repeating noise Contends to double our abundant joyes. Mirth digs her pits in every chek. To bury grief and sorrow, Casheer all care, and chear the foolish, soul To joyn. To mary glue, paste, wed, wedge, ive, yoke, manacle, fetter, shack∣cle, sodder, cement, knit, tie.
Iris v. Rainbow. Heavens Embassadresse, the thousand coloured dame, She that paints the clouds, Golden wing'd Thaumantia. The goddesse with the painted bow. The painted mother of the showers. Juno's embassad resse. Judas. The damned Iscariot, He that betray'd his master with a kisse, And miss'd of heaven even at the gates of blisse. Judge. Grim pronouncers of the Law. Living Law. Srict conservers of the Laws. Grave Stewards and dispensors of the Laws, That sit on bright Astraea's sacred Throne, That speaks nothing but chains and shackles. Whose stubble beard doth grate poor prisoners eyes. Whose stern faces look Worse than the Prisoner that's deni'd his book. Or Pilate painted like a scalded Cook. Day of Judgement. The worlds combustion. The generall Bonefire. The grand Sessions. Natures Funerall. The worlds sad hour. Dooms-day. When souls shall wear their new array. When the words masse shall shrink in purging flame▪ The last dayes summons, when earths Tophies lie, Ascattered heap, and time it self shall die, When the Sun shall From the blind heavens like a dead cinder fall, And all the elements intend their strife To ruine what they fram'd, When desperate time lies gasping, When thunder summons from eternal sleep Th' imprison'd ghosts, and spreads 'th frighted deep A veil of darknesse. When the knot of nature is dissolved, And the worlds ages in one hour involved In their old Chos, seas with skies shall joyn, And stars with stars confounded lose their shine. The arth no longer shall extend her shore. To keep the Ocean ou, the Moon no more
Follow the sun, but scorning her old way, Crosse him, and claim the guiding of the day. The falling worlds now jarring frame, no peac, No league shall hold, great things themselves oppresse, When earth and seas to flmes are turn'd, And all the world with one sad fire is burn'd. The utmost date of time, When rocks and all things shll disband. The great and universal doome, When Christ shall in a throne of clouds descend To judge the earth. With rusty maske the heavens shall hide their face. The aged world dissolved by the last, And fatal houre, shall to old Chaos hast; Stars justling stars shall in the deep confound Their radiant fires, the land shall give no bound To swallowing seas, the moon shall crosse the sun With scorne that her swift wheeles obliquely run, Daies throne aspiring, discord then shall end The worlds crackt flame, and natures concord end. The frame Of nature then shall feed the greedy flame, Men, cities, floods and seas by ravenous lust Of fire devoured, all shall resolve to dust. When the dancing poles Shall cease their whirling galliard. When Lachesis hath no more thread to spin, Nor time a feather on his crazy wing, When this vast obe of earth shall blazing burn, And all the world in funeral flames shall mourn; When heaven and hell amazng must appear In two extreams, joy, and excessive fear. The hindge of things Is broke, all ends run back into their springs. The second Chaos. When earth and sea in fiery flames shall frie, And time lies buried in eternity. When as to those enchaind in sleepe, The wakeful trump of doome shall thunder through the deepe With such an horrid clang As on mount Sinai rang. While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake,
The aged earth agast With terrour of that blast, Shall fom the surface to the center shake, When at the worlds last session, The dreadful Judge in midle aire shall spread his throne. July. That month whose fame Growes greater by the man that gave it name, When many well pil'd cocks of short sweet hay, stands in the field. What time soft night had silently begun To steal by minutes on the long-liv'd day. The furious dog pursuing of the sun Whose noisome breath ads fervour to his ray. v. Summer. Zodiack. Leo. June. Sol leaving Gemini, and drawing near Unto his height in Cancer, when shortest night Urg'd the Thessalian archer. v. Summer. Zodiack-Cancer. Juno. Saturnia. Great Queen of Gods. Great matron of the Thunderer. That chariots through the skies By peacocks drawn stuck full of Argus eyes. Heavens Queen. The Empresse of the skie. Silver-arm'd goddesse. White-arm'd deity. Saturnia that makes the white embrace. The ivory fingerd Queen. Drawn with a team of harnest peacocks, With silken bridles in a coach of gold, Lined with Estrich plumes. Shee That shares with Joves imperial soveraignty, Joves sister, and his wife. That kindles Hymens fires, The Queen of marriage, and of chast desires. Heavens great dame That hath the charge to rule the nuptial flame. In nuptial bands That ties the hearts, and then the willing hands. Jupiter. Saturnius. The Almighty Thunderer.
To give the soul a goal delivery. To deal their martial almes. To suffer shipwrack of the soul. And with his blood embrued The blushing earth. Making a fatal rest to lul Him in the sleep of death, which clos'd his sight, Shutting his eyes up in eternal night. Taught him the way to his grave. Driving the soul out at the yawning wound. Uncase, dislodge, untenant, uncage a soule. As when a spring conducting pipe doth break, The waters at a little breach burst ou, And hissing through the airy regions smoke, So lusht the blood. To Kill ones self. To leave the warfare of this life Without a passe from the great general. He gives himself a period to the race Of his loath'd life. To abridge their own lives pilgrimage. To be a traitour to ones selfe. To let out life, and so unhouse the soul. To break the prison, As if'were sweet to dye, when forc't to live. Accessary to their own death. Self murtherer. Kings. Gods enshrin'd in earthly frames. Fine but more britle ware. Sifted from common bran. Inferiour Gods. Earthly Deities. Mortal God. Whose awfull eye Bears signes of an imperious majesty. That swaies the awful scepter in his hand. The supream moderators of the law. Asta's princely stewards. Men in Text letters. Whose roval temples are impal'd With the enamel'd crown and diadem. Who on th'mperial throne Doth alwaies sit, and alwaies sits alone. Whose lives are gaudy troubles, whose crowns are Not more beset with pearls than stuft with care.
He that bears Heavens Scepter, and the clouds with thunder tears. The King of Gods. That power from whom, what ere hath being springs: The goat-nurst God, who three-forkt lightning flings. Whose nod the worlds foundation shakes. Father of men and Gods. Great Berecynthia's son. Great founder both of Gods and men. Grim Saurnes son. The great Olympick Jove. The spirit that all the world maintains, And the poiz'd earth in empty aire sustain. That with his dreadful thunder rends the skies. Who day with light inspires, Dividing duskie clouds with glittering fires, Who the dull earth, and tempest-tossed seas, Cties and hells sad kingdome doth appease, And with the equal power of a just law, Doth Gods above, inferiour mortals awe. Great Panomphaeus. v. Gods. Thunder. Justice. Whose looks are ixt and sad, her left hand holds A paire of equal ballances, her right A two edg'd sword, her eyes are quick and bright, Not apt to sqint, but nimble to discerne, Her visage lovely is, yet bold and sterne, Unpartial maid. Unbibed virgin. Beauteous Astraea. K. To Kill. v. To Wound. WIth thousand wounds divor' the trembling soul. The pavements blush with blood. Ths hand thy breath hath crusht to aire. Made him a morsel for the jawes of death, And wth his sword he sign'd his fatal passe. Ly bathing in their blood. Dath with his purple finger shuts their eyes.
That command the crowching knee, And the officious feet. Walking upon the battlements of Soveraignty. Kisse, v. Lips. The seals of love set on the red-wax lips. Inspiring souls, and whispering taes of love. Dumbe wooing. Harmelesse adultery. The melting sip. Loves alarme. Loves sweet indearments. The close conjunction of the happy lips. When zealous love print stories on thir lips. On lips to print the volumes of their love. Loves silent, but perswasive Rhetorick. Loves silent Oatoy, language. The soft and warm impression of the lips. The lips dissolv'd. Hymens lesse delights. The lovers oath, when lips are made the book. To coyn young Cupids. Loves mintage. Loves indentures. Their lips do meet so near That cockles might be tutor'd there. Whose kisses rais betwixt them such a fire, That should the Phoenix see, he to expire Would shun the spicy mountains, and so take Himself between their lips a grave to make. Loves tribute. To seal loves contract. Honest adultery. As if he pluckt up kisses by the roots, That grew upon her lips. The blind Gods darts. The abstract of true love. Loves print. Knee. Where the thighes Knit with the ham-strings in the knotty joynt. The parts sacred to mercy. The supple bender. L. Laborious. HIs sauce was labour, exercise his fire. Industrios Bees so in the prime of May, By sunshine through the flowry meadowes stray. In every joynt about him moves An Intellectus Agens.
Labour needlesse. To powre o the sea an uselesse shower. To guild refined gold. To paint the lilly. To throw perfume upon the violet. Send owls to Athens. To smooth the ice, or adde another hiew o the rainbow, or with taper light, To seeke the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish. To adde stars to the enamel'd firmament. To give drops to the swelling Ocean, And adde more beams to the Garish sun. To give more trees unto the thronged wood. ore leaves unto those trees. Labour in vain. v. Impossible. To number sands and drink the Ocean dy. To wash the brick, or the scorcht Aethiop. To sow their seed upon the plashie shore. To roll the restlesse stone of Sisyphus, And cast in water to th'unbottom'd tub. To teach the crab go forward. To make a bucket of a five. Make thornes bear figs, and make the thistles stoope, Prest with her grapie clusters. Make fire and water meet without contention, And seek to reconcile antipathies. Go tutour stocks, preach to the sencelsse stones. Go and sheare wool from the dull affes back. From the smooth bladders go and pull the haires. Go boyle a stone, and plough the barren shore, Or throw thy seed upon the mooving wave. Wite on the water, go and cut the fire. Build on the sand, and teach the stones to swim. Go hunt the winds, seek to revive the dead, Sing to the deaf, or the egardlesse shores. Teach eagles how to fly, Dolphins to swim, Dig through the Isthmus, prattle to the stones. Go glue the boken shell, spin spiders webs. Fght with the Gods, teach asses for the race. Go tie a knot on Dolphins slippery tayles, And think to bake thy loaves in a cold oven. Go feed a whetstone till thou makst it fat. Kk against pricks, and strive against the stream.
That since she clean forgot her former note. His fear the stout asp could not then dissemble. Which since that time is ever seen to tremble, The stars for pity drop down from their sphears, And Cynthia in gloomy vale of night Inshrowds the pale beams of her borrowed light. Then envy slept, and waking wept, And cruelty it selfe sate almost crying. There's not in all The stock of sorrow any charme can call Death sooner up. For misick in the breath Of thunder, and a sweetnesse even in death It brings with it, if you with this compare All the loud noises that torment the aire. Able to move, And justifie compassion in the brest Of unrelenting Stoicks. Fit object for the weeping ey. If time will not allow His death-prevented eyes to weep enough, Then let his dying language recommend Whats left to his posterity to end. Let such as shall rehearse This story, howle like Irish at an hearse. Which who so hears, It makes the eyes pay ransome for the ears. Larke. The wakeful herald of the morne. Days mounting herald. The bird that learns observance to the sun. Quavering her clear notes in the quiet aire. The ploughmans clock. The bird that to the morning sings. The Lyrick trumpeter of day. To laugh. Mood by the itching spleen. Smiling his face into more lines, than are in the new maps with the Augmentation of the Indies. The cirles of the eyes, flow with distilled laughter. Mirth digs her dimpling pits within the cheeke. Steeping their hard dry bisket jests In their own laughter. The eyes invested with the loveliest smiles.
raw dry the sea, or set it all on fire. Gorob the naked man of all his clothes. rom the childs elbow go and pluck a beard. Labaerinth. v. Minotaure. Art therein would needs be delighful, counterfeiting its enemy rour, and making order in confusion. Meanders, winding, intricate mazes, Which so beguil'd The troubled sence, that he which made the same Could scarce retire. The maze house of Daedalus. The winding prison of the Minotaure. To Lament. v. to Mourne. To tear the aire with cries. So wept the Fawnes that in the forrst keepe, So all the Nymphes, and shagge Satyrs weepe, Lamenting their lov'd Marsyas. They with remorselesse hands their bosoms tear, And wailing call on him that cannot hear, And with torn garments they present their woe. v. Elegie. Tears. Weep. Lamentable. Sorrowfull. Which who so reads, His eyes may spare to weep and learn to bleed Carnation tears. Like Niobe let every one That cannot melt at this, turne to a stone. To hear of this, Each heart was turn'd a wardrobe of true passion, Where griefs were clothed in a several fashion; Grief went her progresse through all hearts, and none Could own a thought, whose best advice could borrow The smallest respite from th'extreams of sorrow. The direst Tragedy that ever chaleng'd wonder. The rosie die that decks the blushing morne Grew pale, and clouds immurd the muffled skies. These woes made every one with woe in love. That heart is flint that doth not grieve to hear it. The high topt firrs that on the mountains keep, Have ever since that time been seen to weepe. The owle till then, 'tis thought full well could sing, And tune her voice to every bubling spring, But when she heard these plaints, then forth she yode Out of the covert of an ivie tod, And hollowing for ayde, so strain'd her throat,
to shew The lavish wrinckles of a laughing brow. Laughing as lechery were wthin their lungs. Smiles the cheeke in rest. Lawyer That travailes in the knotty aw. Who purchase land, build houses by their tongue. And study right that they may practice wrong. That studies brawling lawes, And setts his voice to sale in every cause. His pen is the plough, and the parchment, the soyle, from whence he reapes both coyne and curses. Long gown'd warriours. Who play in Westminister unarm'd at barriers. Purse milking nation, gowned vultures. Brawling Harpies. Whose tongues will live, when they are dead. Lean. Living Anatomy. Breathing skeleton. Living charnel house. A sack of bones. His skin hangs about him like an old ladies loose gown. A dwindle. One whose ribs like rugged laths rub out his doublet. The parched corps do show In the loose skin, as if some spirit it were Kept in a bagge by some great conjurer. Lean as a whetstone. Lean as a rake appears, That lookt, as pinch with famine, Aegypts years, Worne out, and wasted to the pithlesse bone. As one that had a long consumption. His rusty teeth forsaken of his lips, As they had serv'd with want two prentiships, Did through his pallid cheeks, and lankest skin, Bewray what number were enrank't within, How many bones made up this staved wight, Was soon perceiv'd, a man of dimmest sight Apparantly might see them knit and tell How all his veis, and every sinw fell; His belly inward drawn, his belly prest, His unfill'd skin hung dangling on his brest, His feeble knees with pain enough uphod Tat pind carkasse, cast, as in a mold,
Ct out by deaths grim forme. If small legs wan; Ever the title of a Gentleman; His did acquite it, in his flesh pull'd downe, As he had liv'd in a beleaguerd town. A wretch so empty, that if ere there be In nature found the least vacuity, 'Twill be in him. As if his hollow cheeke, Had been at buffets with an emberweeke. Tht wears good friday in his face. Whose hollow cheeks Are faithful Almanacks of ember weaks. The pining body to a shadow wears. V. Browns Past. lib. 2. song 1. Learned. v. Eloquent. The Muses minion. A branch of Minerva's Olive. A knowing soul. Lights of nature. Gulfe of learning. Gyant of wit. Monarch of wit. Quintessence of wit. Walking, breathing library. Atlas of letters. Dictatour of learning. Zenodotus heart. Crates liver. Minerva's tower. Rich mine of wit. Magazin of learning. Architect of wit. Monarch of Sciences. Learnings triumphant Victor. That rul'd as he thought fit, The whole monopoly of wit, Englands third University Whom all the Muses court. Walking Vatican. In the firmament of learning, he will shine to all poste∣ity, a star of the first magnitude. A soul so learn'd, truth fear'd that she Might stand too nakt near his philosophy. Many languags, that departed from Babel in a confusi∣on, met in his mouth in a method. The only wise, And when he dies, the fame of wisdome dies. Phaebus to him his oracles resign'd. Wisdome is only to his breast confi'd. v. Aristotle. Leaves. Trees shadie locks. The dangling tresses of the wood. The wanton gugawes of the gamesome wind. The trees green perewigge. The trembling pendants of the boughs. The shady covert of the fruit.
Leda. Helens fair mother. VVhom Jove deceived like a silver swan. And made her lay two egges, from whence there came The stoutest brothers, and the fairest dame. That ever chaleng'd wonder. Leggs. Cupids columnes. The bodies sister pillars. Leggs streighter than the thighes of Jove. Letters. The absent voice and tongue. The dumbe discourse. The talke at distance. Thoughts in black and white. The silent language. The hand talkes with the paper. Discourse by signes betwixt them whom distance have made dumb. Friendly communion of the thoughts, VVhen distance must deny that priviledge Unto the tongue, by dumbe interpreters. Letters of sad contents. Putting her fingers to unrip, the seale Cleaving to keepe those sorrowes from her eyes, As it were loth the tidings to reveal, VVhence grief should spring in such variety, But strongly urg'd, both to her will appeal, VVhen the soft wx unto her touch implies, Sticking unto her fingers bloody red, To shew the bad news quickly followed, And for a fescue, she doth use her tears, That when some line shee loosely overpast, The drops do tell her where she left the last, Her trembling hand as in a feaver shakes, VVherewith the the paper doth a litle stir, VVhich she imagins at her sorrow shakes, And pities it, which she thinks pities her, Made the short letter long, by reading it oft over. I burst ope the letter, but not till after the third pluck, as if the dumbe wax, pitying my too nigh approaching unhappinesse, seeme to be an unwilling messenger of my misery. Letters of glad contents How often did I kisse the seal, your letters waxen lock! ow of∣ten did I put it to my lips, that by that dumbe show, it might un∣derstand its welcome.
How often did I read, and read again the superscription! How did I smile at every word, every letter promising as many joyes, I never lov'd my name till I saw it writ with your hand on the back∣side of your letter. Mny times did I put my hand to the seal to breake it ope, and a many times withdrew it, fearing to sufet with excessive joy. Leviathan. That swarthy tyrant of the Ocean. Shielded in his proud scales, so close that air Cannot pierce through, &c. v. Job. chap. 41 . Qurles Job militant. p. 260 Light, Gods eldest daughter. The first-born creature. Times first-born issue. Beaueous daughter of the sun. Lightning. v. Thunder. The flsh of heavens antastick flame. Hot flaming issue from the clouds cold wombe, That like a viper eates the straitning roome For fre'r passage. The curled clouds do break into a radiant flme. As lighning by the wind foc'd from a cloud, Breaks through the wounded aire with thunder loud Distubs the day. Crushing the justling cloud. Rrified aire In flashingst eams doth ope the darkned heavens, Joves forked shaft. The whizzing exhaltations, The cleaving, tearing, riving of the skies. Heavens soultry flash Riding upon a paire of burning wings. The crosse blew lightning seem'd to open The brest of heaven, and let downe he sheets of fire. Like. As Daucius sons, Tymber and Larides, Such perfect copies were they of each other, Their parents knew not Tymber from his brother. Like Spencers Amias and Placidas. Natures disguise. Humane paralels. An apple left in two i not more twin Than these two creatures. These hands are not more like. One sand resembles not another more. VVater and water are not more alik. Nor have two eggs a lesser difference. Like Vibius and Pompy.
Two bees are not more like, or figs, or ants. Like as Eamelus mares, Neighbouring upon Identity. Narcissus to the thing for which he pin'd, Was not more like. Lilly. The spotlesse flower Which Juno's milk did spring. That had their colour from the milk Of Juno, when she sleeping nurst the great And stout Alcides. v. White. Lips. Ruby cherrilets. The sister corals that each other kisse. The sister rubies. The mooving leaves of coral. Soft warmer coral. Those leaves of damaske roses. The folding coral valve's of the moth. The melting rubie corals. Loves assured tests. The melting rubies on her cherry lip Are of such power to hold, as on one day, Cupid flew thirsty by, and stoopt to sip, And fastned there could never get away. Banks of blisses, Where love plants and gathers kisses. Soft coral gates. Lips fit to be th'utterers when The heavens would parly with the chief of men. That breath gums and spice Unto the east, and sweets to paradise. Lips where mines of rubies grow. Those speaking pomanders. The coral berries. Rosie twins. Warme porphyrie. Lips which like threads of scarlet show, Whence graceful accents sweetly flow. Tast her lips, and then confesse If Arabia doth possesse, Or that honey Hybla hill Tasts like those that thence distill. Which sich the blushing from the orient. That with delight and pleasure, Through a sweet smile unlock their pearly treasure. Congealed Nctar. Transplanted paradise. The ruby poals of our words. The two leav'd ruby gate, To which a pearl-portcullis make a grae.
Two swelling wels of coral round behem With smiling showes two rowes of orient gems, As sweet and red as early cherries. Two twin-cherries died in blushes Which those faire suns above, with their bright beams Reflect upon and pen. ashful pearls adding more rednesse to their native hew, By blushing at their own sweet beauty. Which never part, but that they show. Of pretious pearl a double row. Dian's lip Is not more smooth and rubeous. Melts in the touch. A lip Would tempt to an eternity of kissing. Those sister kissing cherries, Which sweetly blush for this, That they one another kisse. The wax whereon love prints a kisse. Loves rubie alcars. That sweet divided union. Litle. v. Dwarfe. Dwarfish,—Nature made thee To shew her cunning in Epitomie. Small printed things. Diminitives. Live. To see the sun adorne the darkesome earth. To enjy the prviedge of breath. To eed on aire. The fates still draw my lengthened thread. Mine eyes enjoy the benefit of life. Sll nature gives Lfe to my veins. Whilst breah gives motion to my oyled limbes. While memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Life. Thin smoake and empty shadow, wich the wise, As the fooles Idol, soberly despise. The fading rose, the running sand, the spurring post. The shadow of a dream. Light and inconstant aire. Fortunes bable. That waving brat, tost on the sea of fate. The pilgrimage of mans laborious dayes. The even-spun twine.
A span of failty, plung'd and orb'd about With floods of biternesse. That knot of soul and body, which nothing can unti but the eye of heaven. In which each gaspe of breath Are minutes posting to the hour of death. Short life, v. Ʋntimely death. Like that armed crue Grown from the dragons teeth. That to fate, Are tenanrs, to a shorter date. Like the beasts of Hippanis, Whose life in one day's spun, drawn out and cut: Long life. To count many years. Whose life doth swell the number of his years. To reach Thonus years, or aged Nestors, Or the wrinkled Sybil. Courteous fate Draws out his thread with an unweary hand To fill the number of his dayes. To groan under the burthen of his years. Whose long dayes even rust the ithe of time. Private life That peace of passions noble banishment. That close happinesse, without either pompe or envy. Whose ambition goes no farther than the border of his village. That prefers the liberty of the country, before the pleasures of the court, whom chains cannot tempt, though never so well made, and gilded over. That life without pompe or rumult, but with more solid joy and satisfaction. Whose armour is an honest thought, And simple truth his highest skill; Whose state can neither flatterers fear, Nor rine make accusers great. Lives of himself though not of lands, And hvng nothing yet hath all. That thnks glory a lye, and state, grave sport, And couny sicknesse above health at court. That seeks no higher prize Than in unenvied shades to it
And sing his Mrs. eyes That ast in hours, secure from courtly strife, The soft oblivion of a quiet life. No war disturbs his rest with fierce alarmes. Nor angry eas offend, He shuns the law, and those ambitious charmes Which great mens doors attend. Lives to himself, and glitteing titles shuns. He lives unenvied, honour crowns his ends. Which gentle peace Enjoy pure innocence, the rich increase, Of various gifts, what pleasure the broad fields, Caves, living waters, and coole Tempe yeilds, Lowing of beasts, sweet sleeps by shades obscur'd Woods, savage chace, the hardy youth, inur'd To live with little, whom no labour tries. Justice here left her last impression when She fled from the defil'd abodes of men. V. Sandys Ovids Metam. lib 8. page 295. Fab. Philemon. Baucis. lib. 11. page 397. Fab. Aesacus. Horace Epod. 2. Liver. The bodies sponge, the bloody conduit. The bue furnace. The concrete blood. The shop, the mint, the fountain of the blood: The bodies almoner. Dispenser of the blood. To looke. To chain their eyes to. To feast the eys upon. To surfet the eys upon. To read ore a thing. To traffick with the eyes. To run ore with eyes. To fix his gazes on. To river his eyes on a thing. So Clytie look't upon the sun, Till she turn'd Heliotrope. Mine eyes Have been attentive on this exercise. To peruse with eyes. To lend an eye. On him she claspt her eyes. To talk, to discourse with eyes. To addresse the ight. Survay with curious eyes. Close prisoner to the object. To own no other object. To shoot the eyes. To throw our eyes on. To tie the eyes. To weigh with Chrystal skales.
To view with captivated eyes. To oppresse with his eyes. To nayle the eyes upon. To drink with eyes the nectar of her sight. Center the scattered radiant of the eye Upon one object. To entertain the eyes, &c. Upon his face all threw their covetous eyes. To feed, to feast the greedy eyes. To crack the eye-strings with a fixed view. To cast lots. Their votes to the dispose of lots they strait refer, Electing chance for their blind arbiter. Loud. v. Noise. One that may be heard to th'Antipodes. That talkes as if he spake to the Antipodes. The moton sounded like to Nilus fall, That the vast aire was deafned there withal. As loud As thunder shot from the divided cloud. Love. The pleasing tyrant. Sweet captivity, The heavie lightnesse, serious vanity. The amorous fire. The merry sadnesse. Sighing-singing, freezing-frying, Laughing-weeping, living-dying. The marrow-melting flame. The cherisht fire, Which blindly creeps through every vein and dies The fluent blood, whence grosser vapours rise, Sadding the soul with fearful phantasies. The guilty flame betraying signes reveale. The sweet poyson. Imbosomed flame. The enamouring fie. The golden shaft. The knife that cuts the throat of joy. The Syren that doth shpwrack youth. A pleasing but disquiet guest, That is the habenger of all unrest. The warme fost. The freezing fie. The warring passion. The pleasing flame. Loves dlian fire, The glowng flame, that doth it self reveal. The wanton conquering flame. The first borne of the Gods. Refiner of inventions.
d fancie, scum the dregs of scattered thoughts. -chosen snare. Cradle of causelesse fear, itcher of the wit, rebell to reason. ayer of resolution, defiler of the thoughts. derminer of magnanimity. Flatterer of vice. to weaknesse. Infection of youth. dnesse of age. Curse of life. Reproach of death. ctionate Idolatry. passion more easily reprehended than refrained. domes golden hook. Child of likenesse. ntrolled passion. Plato's great Devill. res golden chain. Mastering Passion. Makes imagination the glasse of lust, and a mans self the tray∣ to his own destruction. Such insinuating fire, stole into each reverend fire, en beauteous Hellen her fair cheeks, w'd to the army of the Greeks. V. Sandys Ovid. Metam. Lib. 2. P. 78, Fab. Europa. To love or be in love. old man doth not love his heaps of gold, th a more doting superstition. Glaing himself within his Mistris eyes, ollowing her with a doting observance, grossing opportunities to meet her, Thrusting himself into such a yoke will make him sigh away Sundayes. Melting away before a female flame, ike waxen statues, which the witches ame, ll his words are overlaid with passion. oves Chaplain. That soaks his Mistris name, nd makes her name the toast to warm his drink, That to Volonus sends his frequent prayers, That god of Lovers. Volonus votarie. Cupid with his youthfull dart Transfix'd the Centre of her feeble heart: Close prisoner to his Mistris eyes, owns no other object. The treasure of his heart must lie the fair Casket of his Mistris eye.
He became A slavish prisoner to the conquering flame. Attach't by Portamour, Bayliffe to Cupid. Dissolv'd into affection. That combates with his Mistris eyes. Burnt by loves insultive flame. Proud of his triumphant chain. Courting his beauteous etters. Loving his sweet affliction. That know no heaven but in their Mistresse eyes. One of Cupids hospital that lye Impatient patient to a smiling eye. Pyrausta of his Mistresse eyes. That wasts his idle daies, In loose delights, and sports about the blaz Of Cupids candle, he that daily spies Twin-babes in his Mistresse Geminie. As stubble burnes, And hedges into sodain blazes turne, So springs he into flames, a fire doth move Through all his veins. A bullet by Balarian lingers flung, Increaseth so in fervour as it flies, And finds the fire it had not in the skies. That bears an Aetna in his breast. Like to the sulphurous match Which instantly th' approached flame doth catch. Whose melting eyes Have but one object. His thoughts ingrost by one, Who rivets on his love his eyes. As when we fire an heap of hoary reeds, Or catching flame to sun-dried stubble thrust, So inbred lust enrag'd his blood To fry in secret fires. His eyes Extract a fire wherein his bosome fries, Burning like Aetna with imbowell'd fire. Clasping his eyes upon his Mistresse face, Bearing a fuel, which her sun-like eyes Inflam'd, and made his heart the sacrifice. That in his Mistresse eyes Contracts the wonders of the skies.
frie with inward flames, views a face with an obsequious glance. k by loves arrow with the golden head, That in a curious strain Doth praise his fairest fair, d with queint metaphors her curled hair Curls o'r again. Protestations of love e me in coldest champions where o summer warmth the trees doth chear, me in that dull climate rest, h clouds and sullen Jove infest, Yea place me undereath the Carre oo near Phoebus seated far rom dwellings—Ile love ose smiles, whose words so sweetly move: hyaera breathing flames of fire, or hundred handed Gyas ire ll separate my soul from thine. rer to me than all those ruddy drops That visit this sad heart, Dubt that the stars are fire, Doubt that the Sun doth move, Doubt that truth is a lyer, nver doubt I love. Apollo Lyde never lov'd so well, No did Phileta's love so much excell. To his dear Battis. If I am any thing, 'is thine, The Poles shall move to teach me ere I start, And when I change my love, Ile change my heart, Nay if I wax but cold in my deire, Think heaven hath motion left, and heat the fire, h more I could, but many words have made That oft suspected which men would perswade: Take therefore all in this, I love so true As I will never love none else but you. Two Lovers. Who so unite. That two distinct make one Hermaphrodite, Whose loves within one Centre meeting have.
Pythagoras his Letter which doth love commend, Making of two at first one in the end. Fair course of passion where two Lovers start, And run together, heart still yoak'd in heart, Two souls that joyn in one desire. Iron and Loadstone, Hedrargyre and gold. Amber and straw, pearl-fish and sharpling, Sargons and goats. Sparage and rush. Elm and vine. Ivie and oak. Myrtle and olive, That with a smiling grace Twine wreaths of eye-beams from each others face, So graefull a receit of mutuall affection, that if she desir above all things to have him he feared nothing, but to misse he If he took her by the hand, and softly strained it, she think that knots of friendship ought to be mutuall, would with a swe fastness shew she was loath to part with it. Looking of babies in each others eye. The perfect abstract of all sympathie. V. Friend. Lovers Tears. Fresh tears stood on her Cheek, As doth the honey and nectareous dew Upon a gathered Lillie almost withered. The Dodonean Spring, That lights, the torches that are put therein, Lke dew upon the damask rose. Loves dew. Making his tears the instruments to wooe her The sea wherein this love should swim unto her, And could there flow from his two headed fount. As great a flood, as made the Hellespont, VVithin that deep he would as willing wander To meet his Hero, as did ere Leander, A stream of tears upon her fair Cheeks flows, As morning dew upon the Damask Rose, VVaters which whisper love, Blest with such a face, As tears became, and grief it self did grace, A beauteous and becoming woe. Golden storms. Fell from her eyes, as when the Sun appears. And yet it tains, so shew'd her eyes in tears, Her tears were black, mourning to be her tears,
VVhich as she spake th from those shining Chrystal Cysterns brake, stream of liquid pearl, which down her face, de milk white paths, whereon the gods might trac▪ o Jove's high Court. Love's Elixir, stilling from the Limbecks of her eyes The Deluge drowning beauties wold. wept th' Heliades their liquid amber. ock as the dew upon the Damask Rose, ho through that liquid pearl his blushing shows, d when the soft air breaths upon his top, om the sweet leaves falls easily drop by drop, s by her Cheeks, distilling from her eyes, e tear for joy anothers room supplies. if so many stars from thence had shot, if the eyes had meant to wash themselves, e they look'd on such Beauty. urning pleasure, delightfull sorrow, eas themselves did seem to smile Seas of melting pearls That raine from beauties skie. Lucifer. The star that wakes. The dewie morn, and last the heavens forsakes The sea-bath'd Hesperus, who brings ight on, and first displayes his golden wings, Radiant Lucifer, who day lts, and chaseth night away. Heavens brightest star that first doth call The early morning out. Dayes harbenger, the hench boy of the Sun, The father of the mornings purple-light, The usher of the day, The silver-wing'd post-boy of the Sun. The ancient-bearer of the day, That waves the standard of the glorius day, Who leads the stars, And dayes illustrious path prepares. The star that ushers in the day. The herald of the day, Aurora's Harbenger. The rosie watchman of the morn. enus sacred messenger. That bright star that last forsakes the skies.
Lucina. The gentle goddesse that makes swift repair. At the first hearing of child bearing prayer. The midwife goddesse. The President of birth. That goddesse courteous to the swelling womb. Lucretia. Clear light of Romane chastity. The Romane dame, Whom force might ravish, not the fact defame. Chast wife of Collatine, Mirrour of chastity, Natures mistake when she did place. The heart of man joyn'd to a womans face. That Romane Matron, which did choose no life Rather to have, than live a ravisht wife. Lust. Wilder flames. Hae above the rage of dog-dayes. Young desires. Tinder for the sparks of hell. The itchy warmth of the stew'd blood. The savage heat, loose affection. Flame, The unruly faction in the blood. The unreclaimed savagenesse of blood. Bestiall dalliance. The heyday in the blood, Unruly heat call'd love which truly is but appetite. Lustfull. That speaks not but from Aretine. Con'd all his Prints. Knows all the quirks within Loves labyrinth. A profest critick in lechery. Like Hercules whose lustfull sprite, Kept heat for fifty maids one night. Salamanders living in the fire of lust. That will make her grave a brothell, And tempt the worms to adulterate her carcasse. A common tinder box, a goat, a floating goatish eye▪ Incubus, Succubns, Stallion. I do not think, but were the pox a woman, He would not stick to court it. As if he hd washed in Salmasis. Whose blood like kids upon a plain, Doth skip and dance Levalto' in each vein. Whose breasts are swoln with the Venerian game,
d warm themselves at lusts alluring flame, o dae to ask as much as men can think, d wallowing lie within a sensuall sink, read no books, but obscene Aretine, o the loose laws of their wild blood obey, enst with savage heat. e to lxions shaggie footed race, hen as the gaudy Nymphs pursue the chace, He That makes a flying vow to every she. full as Tarquin or base Messaline. s the debosht Catamite. A goat is cooler. cking damnation from a strumpets lips. That at nothing but Potato's, Eringo's and Cantharides, earying the night with wanton dalliance, ore prime than goats or Monkies in their pride, Whose eye rries with' piercing adultery. There is not chastity in any language without offence for to expresse his lust. His soul is the Bawd to his body. He is more violence to a modest ear than to her e deflowred. Keeping a Sew in his heart. Nothing is harder to his perswasion than a chast man, and e makes a scoffing miracle of a maid. The Pox onely converts them, and that onely when it kills them. With Fancy unconfind, And lawlesse as the Sea or wind. Lusty. Lusty as the early day. As the youthfull Morn, As the flower of youth. Lute. v. Musick. Musicks full interpreter. Wabling harmony, unfeathered Nightingale. Lybia. v. Africa, Lycaon. Savage, Arcadian, tyrant, VVhose house when Jove had overtun'd, VVith vengefull flames which round about him burn'd. He frighted to the silent woods did flie, Thei howls and speech with lost endeavour tries,
His self like jawes still grin, more than for food, He flaughters beasts and still delights in blood, His arms to thighs, his cloths to brisles chang'd A wolf not much from his first form estrang'd, So hoary hai'd, his looks so full of rape, So fierie ey'd so terrible his shape. Lyon. The King, the Emperour of beasts. The Forrest King VVhom rage nor courage suffers for to fle. To lye. His heart disguising with his tongue, His heart doth give his tongue the ly, The heart and tongue at jaing enmity. M. Mad. FIt to drink good store. Of pure unmix'd, brain-purging Hellebore. Frantick like those, VVhich in the Orgies tread the frantick round, Such was Agave, when in pieces she Tore her son Pentheus: So Athamas and Ino when the Snakes Crawl'd in their bosoms. Scarce Master, Mistresse, of his, her wit, Like a bull, By hornets stung, whom scratching brambles pulll The soul eclips'd, Like mad Grestes of his wits bereft, Or Dido when Aeneas had her left, Such fury as possess'd Phemonoe at Appius request, Like those whom Bacchus hath inspir'd, And touching with the vinie staffe hath fired Their bosomes—heav'd from off the hinge Of his right reason, unun'd and jarring senses, The Furies and distempered phantasie. Like one of Bacchus frantick, aging Nuns,
Or like a Tartar, when in strange disguise Prepar'd unto a dismal sacrifice. From reasons center straid. Passion did invade Reasons coole seas, and there prevailing made A strange distraction. Many degrees beyond the power of Hellebore. Magick. v. Charmes. Witch. Man. The worlds Epitome. The mortal Angel. That worme of five foot long. The food of wormes and times devouring rust. That heap of Atomes which with blood Nature hath kneaded into solid flesh. That litle world of living clay. Spark of heaven. Inch of living earth. Natures Epitome. Manual. Quintessence, model of nature. Walking tree with the rootes upward. Moving, walking, compacted dust, The worlds abridgment. The manual of Gods glory. The worlds contracted summe. The litle All. The joynt patentee, With smooth-fac't Cherubins. Whose first estate, Heaven copied from himself. In whose frame the great Three-one advis'd, And with a studied hand epitomiz'd The large, volumnious and perfect story Of all his works. In whose soul the all eternal drew The image of himself for earth to view, With fear and wonder, in whose soveraign eye, He breath'd the flames of dreadful majesty. Manifest. Whose clearnesse excludes it from all controversie. Unquestioned verity. That needs no dispute. Writ by the sun beams in the open light. Which he that runs may read. Which even the blind may see. Which all must see that do not shut their eyes. Many. Like casting bees in swarmes. Like dancing atomes on a ramers dy.
As candid pellets in congeaIed rain. Than Autumnes ears far more, Or leaves of trees, or sands on Neptunes shore, Unnumbered motes that in the sun do, play, When at some cranny with his peircing eye, He peepeth in some darker place to spie, Are not so many. More. Than there are sands upon the Lybian shore. More than the welkin poures Of candid drops upon the ears of corne, Before that Ceres yellow locks are shorne. Numbers that the stars outrun, And all the Atomes of the sun. Able to pose Arithmatick. As wandring Atoms in the empty skie, He that can number in November, all The wither'd leaves that in the forrest fall, He that can number all the drops in showers Which Hyads, Pleiads, moist Oryon powers, May count, &c. Past stars in number, or those sands that spread The vast seas bottom. Almost arriving to an infinty, bordering upon infinity▪ So multiply, That they mock the envying skie. Too large for all Arithmatick. Mount Gargarus hath not so many stems, You may first count Cenyphia's ears of corne, Or how much sweet Thyme Hybla doth adorne, How many birds cut the aire with their wings, How many fishes through the seas do swim, Bfore you number, &c. The flowers in spring time thou maiest sooner tell, Or Autumnes apples, or the snow that fell, Than, &c. More ears of ripe corne grow not in the fields, Nor half so many boughs the forrest yeilds, So many green leaves grow not in the wood, Nor swim so many fishes in the flood, So many stars in heaven you cannot see. As, &c.—Like trooping ants, In plnty hoarding for the time of want, More leaves the forrest yeilds not from the trees,
More beasts the Alpes breed not, nor Hybla bees. Nor are those billowes more, That proudly justle the Carpathian shore. Like cloudy threaves Of busie flies, when summers golden vailes Enrich the fields and milk bedewes the pales, As many they employ As Agamemnon once brought ships to Troy, Not Hybla's mountains in the jocund prime, Upon her many bushes of sweet thime, Showes greater number of industrious bees. Thn, &c. The pety litle king, Of honey people in a sun-shine day, Leads not to field in oderly aray, More busie buzzers. Swarme, tide of people. Which surmount Te language of Arithmaticks account. Abound Like blades of grasse, the cloth the pregnant ground. Nor ae in numbe more, The sands whereon the rolling billowes roare. March. v. Spring. The moneth that bears the warriours name. When first the sun Peeps through the hornes of the celestial Ram. That from his golden saddle Helle threw, And drown'd her in the sea, that bears her name. Making the dayes and nights of equal length. Marke. v. to Looke. To view with an observing eye. As jealous of the object. Marriage. To Marry. The nupials. The nupial solemnity. The Genial sheete. The tedious Ceremony. Love and Hymen urge the nuptial bed, The sacred fires with rich perfumes are fed, The house hung round with garlands every where, Melodious harps and songs salute the eare, When with nuptial kisse they smother Growing flames in one another. The unslipping kno. The nuptial twine,
The grlands on the marriage doore were worne, The linnen fillets did the posts adorne, The bidal tapers shone, the bed on high, With ivory steps, and gold imbroidery, The matron in a towred crown that led The bride, forbid her on the threshold tread, The yellow vaile cover'd her face to hide The fearful blushes of the modest bride. Coupling Hymen, with his nuptial bands, And golden fettes, had conjoyn'd their hands, The garland made, the bridal chamber drest, And jolly welcome had to every guest, Expos'd the bounty of the marriage feast, Wedlock had coupled their espoused hands. The Muses have consulted with the Gaces, To crown the day, and honour their embraces; Hymen begins to grumble at delay, And Bacchus laughs to think upon the day, The Virgin tapers, and what other rites Do appertain to nuptial delights, Are all prepa'd—Hymen attends The noble paire, and is prepar'd to yoke Teir promis'd hands, the sacred altars smoke With myh and frankincense, the wayes are strow'd, With Flora's pide, and the expecting crowd. Hymon spend all thy torches on this night. The God that sings His holy numbers over marriage beds, Hth knit their harts and hands. Marriage is lke rose water in a Christal glasse. More stings to make better musick. Bondage knit in love knots. The Antidote for lust. Mariage, which two doth so unite, That they are both but one Hermaphrodite. Modest Hymen shakes his torch. And chast Lucina smiles. The sacred Gordian knot. When maids must change their virgin state and name. The kno tied with the ongue, and not to be unloosed with the teeth. The bridal captives.
Two mutual souls to link in sacred chains. And with our tongues wee'l tie a Gordian knot. To put a free neck to the yoke of love. Chaining with holy charmes their willing hands, Whose hearts are linkt in loves eternal bands, The morning night dismaskes with welcome flame, When Jun, Venus, and free Hymen came To grac the marriage. The pallace rung with our confused joyes. They Hymen sing, the alters fume with flames. e maid now marriageable, honoured With her nuptial bed. To make a nuptial paire. The nuptial torch doth light him to the bed of &c. Hymen puts on his saffron weeds. To bind his soul in Hymens knot. The reverend man by magick of his praier, Hath us'd such chames that now they are Contracted into one, the holy lights, Smile with a chearful luste on their rites. Hymen weares His brightest robes, where some fam'd Persian shall Work with the wonder of her needle all. Toe nuptial oyes. v. Epithalamium. Martyr. e joyful martyr springs into the flame, As fearful to escape that death. Confims his faith, sealing it with his blood. With a triumphnt patience he bears His welcome death, Courring the flame, Meting the fire with a kind embrace. Munted to heaven up in a coach of fire. Whose head in heaven shall wear eternal crownes. Tuhs bone-fires. Mars. v. War. Te furious God. Wars vermillion God. H that rules in deeds of armes. That supples earth with blood. Armes potent patron. The president of war. ther of great Romulus. ves warlick son. Bellona's raging brother: Whose musick is the drum,
The trumpet, guns, and shrieks of dying men. That with unpartial sithe, Mowes down whole fields of men. The Cuckold making God. Venus bold champion. He whom unto the Gods, the sun betraid As in the nets with Venus caught he laid. Maske. The silken cloud. Beauties artificial clouds. Te cloud, that under it an heaven of beauty shroud, Te vaile that hinders the quick, busie the eye From reading ore the face. Beauties defence, vaile of deformitie. May, v. Spring, Flowers. When the Esterne morne, Doth with her summer robes the plaines adorne, And hangs on every bush a liquid pearle. Triumphant month. Te gaudy Queene. Whose early breaking day Calls Ladies from their easie beds to view, Sweet Mia' pride, and the discoloured hiew Of dewie brested Flora. Who from her green lap throwes The yllow cowslp, and the pale primrose. The month that doth inspire, Mirh and youth, and wame desire, Woods and groves are of her dressing, Hill and dale doe boast her blessing. Medea. That great enchantresse which once took such paines To force young blood in Aesons withered veines, And from groves, mountains, hlls and moorish fenns, Us'd all the heabs odain'd for th' use of men, And in the powerful potion, that she makes, Puts blood of men, of birds, of beasts, of snakes. The Colchion Queen. Jasons deserted wife. She that the aste to stay Of her prsuing father, in the way Strow'd her torne brothers limbs. Helpt by whose charmes, Jason brought once to Greece, The welthy purchase of the golden fleece, v. Ovids Metam. lib. 7.
Medusa. The snake-hair'd mother of the winged steed. The sterne eyed Gorgon which could turne to stone All that her view'd. Whose horid shape Perseus did safely eye In his bright Targets clear refulgencie, Her gastly head he from her shoulders took Ere heavy sleep, her and her snakes forsook, And thence Chrysaor and his winged brother, Sprung from the blood of their new slaughtered mother. Whose passing beauty was the only scope Of mens affections, and their onely hope; Yet was not any part of her more rare (So say they that have seen her) than her haire, Whom Neptune in Minerva's fane comprest, Joves daughter, with the Aegis on her brest, Hid her chast blushes, and due vengeance takes, By turning of the Gorgons hairs to snakes. Melancholy. Whose armes infolding tie A drowsie knot upon his carelesse breast. Whom inward melancholy hath made weary Of the worlds eys. So retired and solitary, as if his only comfort were the want of a comforter. Hands indented one with another. Onely rich in unfortunate remembrances, to whose heart even trifling ni, fortunes come. To make up the roll of a griev'd memory. Speaking by piecemeales, as if the tempest of passion unorderly blew out his words. As melancholy as a gyb'd cat, as a lodge in a warren, as a snaile, as an hoblouse, or a lug'd bear. Gven vr to silence and sadnsse. Sorrow is made by custome so habitual, 'Tis now part of his nature. Melancholy, the worst natural parasite, whosoever feeds him, shall nver be rid of him. With his hat like a penthouse ore the shop of his eyes, and his arms a crosse his thin bellied doublet, like a rabit on a spit, sitting like patience on a monument, smiling at griefe.
That surly spirit, That bakes the blood; and makes it grosse and thick. Dropping his tears upon one place, As if he meant to fret himselfe a grave. Drooping like over-ripened corne, Hanging the head at Ceres plenteous load, Fixing his eyes upon the sullen earth. That looks on all things as the history of Japan, or the affaires of another world. All whose pleasure is dependant Upon exteriour divertisements. One fallen cut with the world, and therefore resolves to be reveng'd of himself. Fortune hath denied him in somthing, and he takes pet, and will be miserable in spite. An arch enemy to an hatband. He is much displeased to see men merry, and wonders what they can find to laugh at. He never drawes his lips above a smile, and frownes wrinke him be∣fore forty. Loathed melancholy of Cerberus and blackest midnight borne. Melt. The pliant wax melts not before the fire, With such submission, nor the grassie spire, Crusted with ice, before the thawing ray Which Phaebus darts, when he divides the day Into its equal halfes. Like wax before the scorching flame. Or snow before the sun. Like waxen statues which the witches frame, When they are roasted by the charmed flame, Like melting bullets by the slinger cast. Melts away Like ice before the suns dissolving ray, As floods which frosts in cie fetters bind Thaw with the approaching sun, or southern wind. So the Hymean wax Relents with heat, which chaing thumbes reduce To plant formes. Memory. The eyes true register. The peasants booke. Times wealthy treasurer. Warder of the brain. The souls stomach. Treasure house of the mind. Mother of the Muses, Mother of experience. The souls exchequer.
Merhhants. Sons of Avarice who but to share certain treasure with a certain care, mpt death in the horrid Ocean. That proudly plough the troubled Maine. That climbe steepe mountains for the sparkling stone. rcing the center for the shining oare, And the Oceans bosome to rake pearly sands. Crssing the torrid and the frozen zone. idst rocks, and swallowing gulfes for gainful trade. The embarked traders on the floods. Who by trading claspe the sland to the continent, and k one country to another. Those excellent Cardiners, making their own country ing forth all things. Deceitful merchants take a mans purse, and never bid him stand. Mercurie. Joves son of fulgent Pleias bred. Joves winged pursuiant. Atlantiades. The God that bears the drowsie rod. Cyllenius, The winged legate of the Gods. Joves winged Herald, Embassadour. Maa's craty son. He that swaies the Caduceus. Pleion's Nphew. Heavens verger. The faithful messenger to Joves designes. Heavens considerate spie. The Argus-killing God. The crafty God that bears the rod of gold. The quaint tongu'd issue of great Atlas race. Heavens pursurvant whose brawny armes extend The wing'd Caducus. Great Atlas daughters son. The interpreter of the Gods. He that some ghosts do call from hell, And others drives unto that darksome cell. Wth winged feet that traceth through the aire. Merry. v. Glad. Joy, I do not feele the weight of clay about me: I am all aire, or of some quicker element. I have purg'd out all that was earth about me, And walk as free a soul as in the separation, Oe whose heart stands on the wind side of care. Never sad, but when she sleeps, and that is oft, too, broke with laughing.
Meteors. Comets. That play their fiery friscolls in the aire. The glozing meteors in a starry night, Prankt with the bristles of anothers light. Milke. The infants wine. The whiter blood. Te nectar of the dugge. Milkey way. By which the Gods resort Unto th'Almighty Thunderers high Court, With ever open doores on either hand, Of nobler deiies the houses stand, The vulgar dwell disperst; the chief and great In front of all their shining mansions sheate. The star-enaml'd Galaxie. Heavens Watling street. Hevens regent walks Fram'd of many namelesse stars. The milke which gusht from Juno's Whiter breast, In heaven that splendent pah, and circle drew, From whence the name, as erst the colour grew, And troops of unseen stars there joyne their light, And with united splendour shine more bright, And souls of Heroes from their bodies freed, Exchanging earth for heaven, their vertues meed, Shine in that orbe, their proper place of rest, And live Aehereal lives, of heaven possest. Minerva. v. Pallas. Bellon. Wars angry Goddesse. Joves fierce girle appears With a faire hand, but weilding of a spear. Joves daughter, wih th' Aeis on her breast. That turn'd the Gorgons haire to snakes, And then to make her enemies afraid, Bore in her shield the serpents which she made. Tritonian maid. Inventresse of the olive, and a verse Bstonian Virago. Minotaure. The Cretan monster. That uncouth prodigie, half man, half beast. The mothers foul adultery discry'd. Mnos resolves his marriage shame to hide In multitudes of roomes perplext and blind, The worke 'xcelling Daedalus assign'd. Which sence distracts, and errour leads a maze
Through subtle ambages of sundry wayes, s Phygian Meander sports about, The flowry vales now winding in now out, self incounters, sees what follows guids, His streams into his Springs, and doubling slides To long mock'd-Seas. Pasiph's beastly Love. age devouror of th' Athenian youth, Whose death was the Seas glory. Minutes. Times youngest children which divide the day, And with their number measure out the year. In various seasons. Aomes of time. Toose bits of time. Thrumbs, shreds, rags of time. Miracle. v. Admirable. Miserable. v. Lamentable That tread The mazes of perplexed misery. A living Corse. Level'd with low disgrac'd calamity. A multitude of walking grios, too sad a weight For reason to endure. There is not in the compasse of the light A more unhappy creature. Affliction is enamour'd on her parts, And she is wedded to Calamity. The May-game of the fates. As if thought by fortune fit onely to be made the Spectacle of miserie. Whose heart is nothing but a stage of Tragedies. Time seemed to forget her, bestowing no one hour of comfort up∣on her. Without any comfort or easement, but when the stars breath'd for a greater misery. Ripe misery had her harvest in him. The triumph of the hatefull destinies. Miserable below the reach of pity. In a state snk beneath the fear of a greater misery, Th fittest object for that poor comfort of calamity, pity. Never could any misery more justifie a vehement compassion. Enough to have taught sorrow to the gladdest thoughts, and have en∣ved it in the minds of hardest mettals. Misery enough to justifie excessive sorrow.
One whom the Fates have markt to be A feeler of th' extreams of miserie, A soul bruis'd with adversity. Groaning under the sad load of woes, Where life hath no more interest but to breath. Such misery As might have sprinckled even the gods with tears, And make the Stoick leave his Principles. Such misery as one would make a conscience to punish patri¦cides with, Who cannot look Beyond the prospect of consuming grief. Shipwrackt on the sea of his own tears, by the wind of his own sighs▪ There is nothing can sooner make a worker of miracles, see that there is something impossible for him to do than my ill fortune, Whose torments should men see, He had no mercy, that could wish for me A dayes breath more, All the happinesse he hath, is the security his bad fortune hath wrought him, which lightly cannot be made worse. He need not fear that any bad successe, Can bring him to more pitied distresse, Whose thread is spun Of black and dismall wooll, Even beasts had thy but reason for to see, And know her grief would mourn her misery, Than whom there's nothing can inferiour be, As if high heaven had laid some strict command Upon each star, some plague on her to pour, whole heaven against us have conspired, Or in our troubles they had else been tired, The powers have made a vow, Up to that height my sorrows to advance, That before mine all miseries shall bow, That all the sorrows mortals can surmise, Shall fall far short of my least miseries, Earth, which griefs onely animate. Misery is witty in our plagues, whose misery is grown to such an height, As make the earth groan to support its weight. Cloath'd in misery. The abstract of all misery. Whose storms of woe so mainly have beset her, She hath no place for worse, nor hope for better.
That tread Labyrinth of woe without a thread, Whose grief like to Medusa's head makes all, That hear it to a flinty substance fall, d work▪ such patience as none repine any grief, except as great as thine. Whose misery none can make known in the depth of his must lose his own, Whose comfort is, (if for him any be;) That none can show more cause of grief than he, Most wretched creature evr eye Beheld, or yet put on mortality. Clouded with woes fortunes foot-ball, tennis ball, A pitied subjct even to enemies, Malice could not wish greater misery. A Text fittest for grief to comment on. Modest. Whose Cheeks blush, As if modesty it self lay there wihin a bed of corall, Bright beams of beauty streamed from her eye, And in her cheek sat maiden modesty. A far finer man than he thinks on, that confutes his commenders, giving reasons to think they are mistaken, and is angry if they do not believe him, a bawdy jest shall more shame him than a bastard another, and if you take him by his look, he is guilty. Modesty, that cumbersome familiar of woman-kind. Her motion blusht at it self. When dishonesty comes near her ear, wonder stops it out, and saves vertue the labour. Monk. v. Anchorite. Moon. Nights horned Queen. The silver-fronted star. The Suns pale sister. The cold crescent. Nights gloomy patronesse. The Mistris of the Skies. Cynthia darts her borrowed rayes. Phoebus dark sister. The cold Queen of night. Regent of humours. The mother of the moneths. The lowest Planet. Bright Cyntha's Carre, Throne. The pale fac'd Emperesse of the night.
That common Calendar. Universall Almanack. The Queen of stars, Titans bright daughter. That sits upon the silver Throne; And holds the reins of darknesse gloomy Coach, Nights gloomy Charioter. The Soveraign buty of the night. Faint light through duskie clouds sad ynthia gave, Night wandering and pale waty star, Whom yawning Dragons draw in thirling Carres, From Latmus Mount up to the gloomie skie, Where crown'd with blazing light and Majesty, She proudly sits. Nights forked Queen. Endymions fair mistris. The monthly horned Queen. The unconstant Lady of the night, Which from the wave embatteled shrowds, Opening the West comes streaming through the clouds. With shining Troops of silver tressed stars Attending on her as her torch bearers, And all the lesser lights about her Throne, With admiration stand as lookers on, Whilst she alone in height of all her pride, The Queen of light along her sphear doth glide, The pale fac'd Lady of the black-ey'd Night, That tips her sharpned horns with borrow'd light. The fair directresse of the night, the silver Planet. The curious train of spangled Nymphs attire, Her next nights glory with encreasing fire, Each Evening addes more glory and adorns The growing beauty of her grasping horn, She sucks and draws her bothers golden store, Untill her glutted orb can suck no more. Nights bashfull Empresse, which doth often wain, Yet oft repents her darknesse, primes again, And with her circling horns doth re-embrace, Her brothers wealth, and orbs her silver face, The still Commandresse of the silent night, Phoebus pale sister, which strikes her silver horns quite Through the clouds. The lowest of Celestial bodies, And darts a beam upon nights swarthy face. Great Queen of shadows, governesse of floods. Cynthia seated in her silver chair. The Moon at full thought no scorn to be torch-bearer to a great∣ter beauty, guiding her steps whose motions bare a mind that bore in it self more stirting motions.
hat with long beams the shamefac'd night arrayes. Full Moon. The moon doth join er growing horns, and with replenish'd shine e views the earth, hen in a silvver orb her horns unite. Space of Moneths. o times her roundles Phoebe had compleat, Seven times had Phoebe from her wain ith Phoebus fire fill'd her horn again ith joyned horns 2, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Moons their orbs had filled. , 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Crescents now had made their orbs compleat, Their growing horns unite, nd had as oft withdrawn their eeble light. , 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Aged Moons grew young. , 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Crescents had full displaid eir joyning horns repleat with borrowed flame, e twice the Moon her shining Crescents fill, Thrice had the Queen of night Shifted her robes, and chang'd her horny light, re Phoebe thrice twelve times have fill'd her horns. Thrice hath the pale fac'd Empresse of the night, ent in her chaste increase, her borrowed light, To guide the vowing marriner. Seven times had Cynthia fill'd her wained light, The tenth moneth was in her bright Chariot thron'd Before the moons sharp horns were twice grown round, Untill seven Moneths had gain'd and lost their fire, When as the fair directresse of the night, Had thrice three times repair'd her waining light. Te horned Moon three courses did expire, Tice three times had the Soveraign of the night, Repair'd her empty horns with borrow'd light. Bright Cynthia's head had three times thrice epair'd the empty horns and fill'd the eyes Of gazing mortals with the Globe of light. Twice six moneths have run Their tediou courses. Thrice had the Moon renew'd her wained pride. Moore. v. Aethiopian. Morning. y in its cradle, day in its swathing clouts,
Infant day, day new hatcht from the shell. The day in dressing. The Infancy of day. The bloom, the bud of day. The blooming light buds from the blushing East. Day new apparrelled. Thy Morn with pearls of dew bedecks the plains. The prime of springing day. Nonage of the day. The Maidenhead of day. Pupillage of day. The eldest daughter of the light. Aurora rides And throws the light from off her Saffron whels, The wakefull morning from the East displayes Her purple doors, and odoriferous bed, With plenty of dew-dropping Roses spread. Clear Lucifer the flying stars doth chase, And after all the rest resigns his place. Early Sun-shine. Now the bright morning star, dayes harbenger Comes dancing from the East. When Titan saw the dawning ruddy grew, And how the Moon her silver horns withdrew, He bad the light-foot hours without delay, To joyn his steeds. The Goddesses obey. Who from their lofty mangers forthwith led His fierie horses with Ambrosia fed. The humid night Beyond th' Hesperian vale hath tane her flight: Aurora's splendor re-enthrones the day, Aurora doth her dapple cheeks display, And from the East doth usher in the day, When aged night Aurora's blushes fled, When from th' approaching morn the stars withdrew And that the Sun had drunk the scorched dew, Lucifer displayes Aurora's blush, and she Apollo's raies, The dewie confines of the night and day. When gray Aurora now had vanqusht night, When Sol had rais'd his beams above the flood, Now Lucifer exalts the day, to hell Old night descended. Day sprung, and mountains shone with early beams The morning night dismasks with welcome flame.
Now Lucifer awakes The dewit morne. The time, when light the gloomy nigh invades. Bight Lucifer his taper showes, The harbenger of day; T'enlightned world resignes to Phaebus sway. That time the light Begins his triumph ore the vanquisht night. Aurora now begins to creepe Out of her easterne cradle. Already in the ruddy east Bight Eycina with the beaming crest, Calls up Aurora. The day the suns bright son, Now awake doth first discover Mountain tp new glded over With his ruddy raies thereon; Then Aurora richly dight, In an azure mantle faire, Fring'd about with silver bright, Pearl dews droping through the air. Hung the gate with golden tissues. Where Hyperio's chariot issus About the houre when the heavenly teame Begins her golden progresse from the east. The dawne scarce drew the curtains of the east. The dawne usur pes upon the night. What time the sun first gilds th'Horizon with his radiance. Blushing Aurora sweetly peeping out, Chides in the stars. The sun begins to suck His early balme, and Iland spices. The glory of the next dayes light, Had chac't the shadowes of the tedious night. The darknesse flies, and light is hurld Round about the silent world. When the shrill cock proclaims the infant day▪ The day begins to disclose his comfortable beauties. The rosie morning drawes away The sable curtain, and lets in the day. Like Venus rising from a sea of jet. When as the shdy gloome Doth give the day her roome. Te rising sun Doth shew the victory that he hath won
Of cloudy night. The houre when we might Not speak a falshood, if we call'd it night, The morning having dispossest the night, Makes the skie wear her livery of light. The pale-fac't empresse of the night Hath resurrender'd up her borrow'd light. And early Hesper shoots his golden head, To usher Titan from his purple bed. When dewie cheek't Aurora's purple die, Dapples the beauty of the morning skie. Aurorora doth display Her golden locks, anu summons up the day. Titan heaves up his head, From off the pillow of his saffron bed. Titan now ready for his journal race, Hath rows'd his dewie locks and rosie face, Enricht with morning beauty. Phaebus hath now upheav'd his golden head, From the soft pillow of his sea-green bed, And with his rising glory hath possest The spatious borders of th' enlightned east. Gray lines do fret the clouds, the messengers of day. The winking Mary buds ope their golden eyes. The rising, breaking light. The stars are vanquisht by the mornings flame. The morning sun erects his beames, And rarifies the earth with peircing gleames, Lady of light, the rosie fingred morne. Sol with his face new wash't in cleansing waves, Enchac't the skies. The new fir'd sun Strikes the broad fields. The chearful Lady of the light, Clad in her saffron robe, Disperst her beams through every part Of th' enflowred globe. The mornings beauty now had glaz'd the skie. The rosie morne holds out her silver light, Now drew the suns bright steeds light from the hills. When Phaebus fiery carre Threw darkenesse of its wheels, When now the thirsty sun drank up the stars. When light doth shew
Her silver forehead, Aurora rose from her lov'd Tithons bed. Fair Nymph, whose chast and fragrant beauties run A course that honours and prevents the sun; 'Tis thou that breaking through th' enlightned ire, Com'st first abroad, and shakst day from thy haire. Aurora rose, And from her orient tresses threw the light, The morning sitting in a throne of gold, Survad the earth. The early riser with the rosie hands. Soon as the white and red mixt fingred dame Had gilt the mountains with her saffron flame. Now the next mornings light sprang from the east; And Sols bright raies the dewie shades deceast. Sols puffing steeds begin to breath out day From their inflamed nostrils. The modest morne on earths vast zone, The gladsome day doth reenthrone. The spring of day Bloom'd from the east. The dawning gray, The ensigne of a glorious day. The morne doth look out of her eastern gates, portalls▪ Casements, chiding the stars to bed. When the next day had with his morning light Redeem'd the East from the dark shades of night, And with his golden raies had over spread, And all the neighbour hills embroydered. When the next morning had renew'd the day, And the early twilight now had chac't away The pride of night, and made her lay aside Her spangled robes. The lily-handed morne Saw Phaebus stealing dew from Ceres corne. The mounting lark, dayes herald got on wing, Bidding each bird choose out their bough to sing. By this had Chantecleere the village clock, Bidden the goodwife for her maids to knock, And the swart plowman for his breakfast staid, That he might till the lands which fallow laid, The hills and vallies here and there resound With the re-ecchoes of the deep-mouth'd hound;
Each shepheards daughter with her cleanly paile Was come a field, to mike the mornings meale, The bees were not got out, nor scaly frie, Begn to leap, and cach the drowned flie. Aurora Kisseth the perfum'd cheeks of dainty Flora, The sun our Hemispheare hath repossest, The early rising lark sings up the ploughman. The Muses friend Gray ey'd Aurora ye Held all the meadowes in a cooling sweat, The milk-white Gossamores not upward snow'd, Nor was the sharp and useful steering goad, Laid on the strong-neck'd oxe, no gentle bud, The sun had dryde, the cattel chew'd the cud, Low levell'd on the grasse, no flies quick sting Infoc' the stone horse in a furious ring, To tear the passive earth, nor lash his taile About his buttocks, yet the smy snaile Mght on the wainsco, by his many mazes, Winding Meanders, and self-knitting traces Be follow'd, where he stuck his glittering slime Not yet wpt off, it was so early time, The careful smith had in his sooty forge Kndled no coale, nor did his hammer urge His neighbours patience, owles abroad did fly, And day as then might plead its infancy. The morne came out with sandals gray. Eous and his fellowes in the teame, (Who since their watring in the westerne streame, Had run a furious journey to appease The night-sick eyes of our Antipodes.) Now sweating were in our horizon seen To drink the cold dew from each flowry green. The morning now in colours richly dight, Stept ore the easterne thresholds. The day, drew from the earth her pitchie vaile away And all the flowry vales with carrols rung, That by the mounting lake were shrilly sung, The duskie mists rise from the chystal floods, And daknesse no where raign'd, but in the woods, The chast morne all her beauty now discloses, Ou-blshing all the emulating roses,
When the cock with lively dn Satters the reare of darkness thin, Of lisining how the hounds and horne, learly rouse the slumbering morne. The ruddy horses of the rosie morne O of the easterne gates had newly borne, Their blushing Mistresse in her golden chaire, Speading new light throughout o Hemispheare. The Lyrick larkes practise their sweetest strain, Aror's early blush to entertain. The day star late sunk in the Ocean bed, Doh now again repaie his drooping head, And tricks his beas, which with new spangled ore, Flame in the forhead of the morning skie. The day out of the Ocean main Began to peep above this earthly masse With pealy dew sprinkling the mountain grasse. The shining morne bewrays unto the gloomy world her face Before the lamp of light. Above the earth upreard his flaming head. When the rahe morning newly now awake, Sarce with fresh beauty furnished her brow, Her self beholding in the general lake, To which she paies her never ceasing vowes. Scarce hd the sun dried up the dewie morne, And scarce the heard gone to the hedge for shade. The early larke mounts from th sullen earth, And sings her hymnes to welcome in the light, The prime of day breaks through the pregnant east. The sun doth rise, And shus the lids of all heavens lesser eyes. With quivers Nymphes adone Their active sides, and wake the morne With the shill musick of their horne. When everystar fled from th' approaching sun bu Lucifer. Bright day dissolves the dmps of nigh. The Peades grow dim, each nearer star, Looseth his light, Bootes lazy car. Trnes to the plain complexion of the skies, And Lucifer the grea star darkned flies From the hot day. Arora now from Tithons purple bed Arose, and th' easterne skie discoloured,
Gave chearful notice of th' approaching sun. The osie fingred morne Kisseth each flower that by her dew is borne. Envious light, chides away the silent night. By this Apollo's golden harp began To sound forth musick to the Ocean, Which watchful Hesperus no sooner heard, But he the daies bright-bearing carre prepa'd, And ran before, as harbenger of light, And with his flaring beams mock ugly night, Till she orecome with anguish, care, and rage Threw down to hell her loathsome carriage. The nigh' dislodg'd, and now The morne is trimming of her virgin brow To court the sun, when from the western deepe, And Tehys lap his glimmering beams do peepe, To ascend his glorious carre. Daies porter hath unhing'd the painted doore. When the sun scaters by his light All the Rebellions of the night. When Chanticleere the bellman of the morne, Smmons up twilight with his bugle horne. The nights swift couse with silence is outworn, And gives a kind farewell unto the day; The wing'd musitians which awake the morne, With hollow throats and horned bills do play. The illustrious officer of day, First worshipt in the east, gins to display The glory of his beams, then buds unfold Their chary leafes, each dew-drown'd marigold Insensibly doth str it self, and spread, Each violet lifts up his pensive head. The evening of th' Antipodes. The early dawn enamelling the air. Heaven pays the good huswife, and puts her candles out When first the morning hath her mantle spread. The sable night's disldg'd, and now began Aurora's usher with his wndy fn, Gently o shake the woods on every side; While his faire mistresse like a stately bride, With flowers and gems and Indian gold doth spangle Her lovely locks her lovers looks to tangle,
When gliding through the aire in mantle blew, With silver fringe, she drops the silver dew. Aurora now her treasures forth had brought Edging the silver clouds with fringe of gold, And hangs the skies with arras rarely wrought, ouder'd with pearl and pretious stones untold, Yet weeps shee, for she thinks it all too small To welcome great Apollo to her hall. The glorious sun doth gild the day. ights chearul dame in safron robes did shine, Whose silver beams through every part dispest Of the terrestrial globe did now refine The thickned aire, and leavie forests peir't. Now sparkling Titan burnisht Neptunes waves, And spread his beams on earths enamel'd brest. The bashful morne doth long in vain Court the amorous Marigold, With sighing blasts and weeping rain, Yet she refuseth to unfold. But when the planet of the day Approacheth with his powerful ray, Then she spreads, then she receives His wamer beams into her virgin leaves. The blushes of the morne appear, And now she hangs her pearly store, Fihed from the easterne shore, cowslips bell, and roses leaves. The rapid motion of the spheers, Old night from our Horzon bears: And now declining shades give way To the reurne of chearful day. The morne doth now display The purple ensigne of ensuing day. The sun ready to ride. Nights duskie shadowes flie, And morning flecks the rose-enamell'd skie. Phebus now prunes himself. His way is strow'd with roses. The beauteous Harbenger of day sht from the Eastern pillow, where she lay Claspt in her Tythons armes, red with those kisses, Which being enjoy'd by night, by day she misses.
As soon as Titan gilds the eastern hills, And chirping birds, the Saints-bell of the day Ring in our ears a warning to devotion. Light now repaes the wrongs of night. When Sol with morning glory fills the eyes Of gazing mortals, whose victorious ray, Chacing the night rethrones deposed day. The illustrious prince of light, Riseth in glory from his Crocean bed, And tramples down the horrid shapes of night, The early bugle horne Of Chantecleer had summon'd up the morne. The easterne lamps begin To faile, and draw their nightly glory in. Ere the first cock his maens rings. By this the boad sa' Quirister of night Surceas'd her screeching note, and took her flight To the next neighbouring ivie. Birds and beasts Forsake the warme potection of their nests. And nightly dens, whilst darknesse doth display Her sable curtains to let in the day. Phaebe now to the lower world rtires, Attended with her train of lesser fires. The gray-ey'd anitor doth now begin To ope his easterne portals and let in The new borne day, which having lately hurld The shades of night into the lower world; The dewie cheek' Aurora doth unfold Her purple curtains, all besring'd with gold; And from the pillow of his Crocian bed, Don Phaebus raiseth his refulgent head, That with his all discerning eyes survaies, And gilds the mountains with his morning raies. In the flowry east Fair Erycina with her beamy crest Raiseth Aurora; and she starts with blushing, From aged Tithons cold armes quickly rushing, Opens the wide gas of the welcome day, And with a beck summons the sun away; Who quickly mounting on his glistering chaire Courseth his nimble horse, through the aire, With switer pace, than when he did pursue,
The lawrel changed Nimph that from him flew. The morne in russet mantle clad, Walks ore the dew on yond high eastern hill. The glow wormes uneffectual fire, begins to pale Aurora rising from her blushing wars, Doth with her rosie hand put back the stars, Now ore the sea from her old love comes she, That drawes the day from heavens cold axletree. When light ps through the glimmering eye-lids of the morne. Flame-snorting Phlegon's ruddy breath began, educing day, to gild the Indian. Aurora's saffron ray, On the Horizon doth renew the day. Auoa weary of her cold embrace With her old spouse, began in Inde apace To paint her portal of an opal hue. Before the worshipt sun Pears through the golden windowes of the east. The all chearing sun, In the remotest east begins to draw The shady curtains of Aurora's bed. The gray eyed morne smiles on the frowning night, Checkering the easterne clouds with streaks of light, And freckel'd darnesse like a drunkard reeles From sorth daies path, and Titans burning wheeles, When silver streaks do lace the blushing clouds. Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day, Stands tiptoe on the misty mountains top. The rising sun peeps ore the hills, & with a hearty draught Of morning dew, salutes the welcome day. Aurora now puts on her crimson blush. And with resplendent raies gilds ore the tops Of th' aspiring hills, the pearly dew Hings on the rose bud tops, and knowing it, ust be anon, exhal'd, for sorrow shrinks, And melts into a tear. The larke begins his flight, And singing startles the dull night From his watch tower in the skies, Till the dapled morne doth rise. The early lak, With other winged choristers of the morn, Chant forth their anthems in harmonious aires.
The morning strows roses and violets Upon the silver pavements of the heaven Against the coming of th' approaching sun. The morning had given the stars leave to take their rest. By that the next morning begins to make A gilded shew of a good meaning. Ere that the morning shall new christen day. The morning drawes dew from the fairest greenes Against th' approach of her burning lover, to wash her face withall. The morning winning the field of darknesse. The night grown old, his black head waxen gray. The morning steals upon the night, Melting the darknesse. The wolves have preyed, and the gentle day, Before the wheles of Phaebus round about, Dapples the drowsie east with spots of gray. Ghosts wandering here and there, Troope home to Churchyards damned spirits all, Unto their wormy beds repaire. The easterne gates all fiery red, Opening on Neptune their dispersed beams, Turne into yellow gold, his salt-green streams. Sol fires the proud tops of the easterne pines. And darts his lightning through each guilty hole, Out from the fiery portal of the east. When ruddy Phaebus had with morning light Subdued the east and put the stars to flght, When Phaebus harbenger had chas'd the night And tedious Phosphar brought the breaking light. When the plowman near at hand, Whistles ore the surrow'd land, And the milk maid singeth blithe, And the mower whets his sithe, And every shepheard tells his tale Under the hawthorne in the dale. Morpheus. v. Sleep. His dreaming pace was so, That none could say he moov'd, he moov'd so slow. His folded armes athwart his breast did knit A luggards knot, his nodding chin did hit Against his panting bosome.
He wore a Crown of poppy on his head, And in his hand he bore a Mace of Lead. He yawned, &c. The drowsie god. Lethargick Deity. Shape-feigning god, who of those brother sprites, With the most subtle art and cunning can, urp the gesture, visage, voyce of man His habit, and known phrase, and onely takes An humane form, Another shews a Snakes, A birds, a beasts, this Icelos they call, Whom heaven embowr, though Phobetor, by all Of mortall birth he's nam'd. But Phansies Of different faculty indues a tree, Earth, water, stone, the several shape of things That life enjoy not. The Lead-Mace-bearing Sergeant. Mountain. v. Hills. High. The rockie ribs of earth. Earths wars. Blisters. Mountebank. Wxing rich at others cost and smart. Grow famous Doctours purchasing promotions, Whilst the Churchyard swells with their hurtfull potions, Who, hang men like, fearlesse and shamelesse too, Are pray'd and pay'd for murders that they do. Play bootie with a sicknesse, Turn A Consumption to mens purses, and purge them worse thn their bodies. Setting up an Apothecaries shop in private chambers. Living by revenues of close stools and urinalls. Defeing sick mens health from day to day. As if they went to law with their disease. A fool to fill a close stool. The best cure he hath done is upon his own purse, His learning consists in reckoning names of diseases, in which he is onely languag'd, and speaks Greek ofentimes when he knows it no If you send your water to him you must resolve to be sick, for he will never leave examining your water till he hath shak'd it into a dis∣ease, then follows a writ to his Drugger in a strange tongue which he understands though he cannot constru, He tronslates his Apothecaries shop into your chamber, and the ey windows and benches must ake Physick. One that dares not come to a dead patient lest his carcasse should bleed. A sucking Consumption.
Impostors that do give To sick men potions that themselves may live. Skilfull to spur on nature to her end, That have an art to cure poverty. Quacking Leeches, Empyricks, Who by corosive plaisters oft make more, And deeper wounds than were receiv'd before, And by their Chancery cures make men worse, To heal the gashes of their crazie purse, Yo mourn v. Lament To shead from drowned eyes vain offerings to the dead, Who with remorselesse hands their bosome tear, And wailing call on him who cannot hear, She rudely tears th' adornment of her hair, And with redoubled blows her breast invades Her face as much, as grief would suffer fair, She sighs and shaking her dishevel'd hair, And with torn garments did present their woe, Her ruffled hair, As at a wofull Funerall she tare. Wringing her upheav'd hands. He dust upon his clouded forehea throws. So Seres mourn'd her daughters ravishment, So Philomel mourn'd her Virginity. The father and sad sisters did not more, Mourn him that slew the Clydonian bore, Her garments from her bruised breasts she tare, So mourned Venus drawn by silver Swans, Her lov'd Adonis. To cloud the face with grief. Trees shed their leaves, streams with their tears encrease, The Naiades and Dryades invest Themselves in sullen sable and display Their scattered hair in uncomposed curls. Feeding on tears. Hugging grief with strict embrace. Venting the sad tautologies of lavish passion. Loading the bosome of the fleeting air With sad complaints. Raise clouds of dust that fll upon their hair, Springs that long time before had held no drop, Now welled forth and overwent the top. Brds left to pay the Springs their wonted vows, And all forlon sa drooping on the boughs, The Springs and birds, trees with unwonted grones, Bewail her chance, and force it from the stones. v. Weep.
Multitude. v. Many. Murmure. v. Noise. The people such a murmuring make. when far off the roaring surges rake e ratled shore or when loud Eurus breaks Though tufted Pines. Muses. oddesses of verse. The sacred nine. amassian girls, Aonian Maids, Apollo' quire. he presidents of verse and sacred numbers. he learned maid which by the mossie banks f drizling Helicon in airy ranks, read roundelayes upon the silver sand, hilst shaggie Satyrs tripping o'r the strand, and still at gaze, and yield their senses thrall To the sweet cadence of their Madrigalls. he learned isters of the sacred well, Those virgins imps of Mneme which do bring Dws of invention from their sacred Spring. The virgin Choristers of Castalia. eet Maids of memory. Fair Thespian Ladies, That on the two topt mountains dwell And daily drink of the Castalian well, The heavenly sisters by whose sacred skill, Sweet sounds are rai'd upon the forked hill Of high Parnassus, they whose tuned strings, Can cause the birds to stay their nimble wings. And silently admire, before whose feet, The lambs as fearlesse with the lions meet, Which did the harp of Opheus so inspire, He from the Stygian Lake could safe retire, And did Amphions heart with vertue fill, That even the stones were pliant to his will. The sweet infusers of diviner strains. That sitting sing upon the flowry banks Of sacred Helicon in spangled ranks, Pierian Quire. Calliope, Clio, Erato, Tnalia, Melpomene, erpsicore, Evterpe, Polyhimnia, Urania. Musick. v. Sweet sounding. Break in sweet sounds the willing air. Well digested sounds. Speechlesse song, universall language. That innocent pleasure which the sphears Vouchsafe to make and gods do deign to hear. Melodious harps and songs salute the ar.
The wanton airs in twenty sweet forms dance After her fingers. The air and fingers meet. In sweet contention, raping the ears into attention. true concord of well tuned sounds. By unions married, each string husband to the other. Marrying his voice unto the strings. Making the Lute in his language shew how glad he was to b grac'd with the touch of her fingers. VVith the choice Musick of her hand and voice, Stills the loud wind, and makes the wild Incensed Bore and Panther mild. Harmonious airs: Break in sweet sound the willing air. Musick. Like an hostesse that hath no Arithmatick, but her brain to se down her reckoning. N. Naiades. THe fountain Deities. The fountain Queens. The watry Deities of the winding brooks, VVith fedgie Crowns, and ever harmlesse looks. Dance in the crispi channels. Hyale, Niphe, Rhanis, Psecas, Phiale, Crocale, Phaethusa, Lampetie Neaera, Arethusa, Doris. Naked. Disrobed, vnarraied, dismantled, vncloathed, vnmasked, vnvailed Name To christen, to confer, impose a name. Narcissus. The selfe enamour,d boy. That leapt into the water for a kisse, Of his owne shadow, and despising many, Dy'd ere he could enjoy the love of any. Once a Cpid, adde but wings. Who too much trusted to deceitfull springs. A flower, now to the floods inclines that so. He might by that which was his rune grow. V. Ovid. Metam. Lib. 3.
Nature Gods lievetenant, Gods▪ vice gerent. he mother of all things. at nere can stray so far, not to returne. changed inclination. Near As neare clamour might informe an eare Their eies their masters object were. Necessity Victorious rebell against strongest lawes, That lawlesse tyrant. olding in brazen hands as pledge of woes. ormenting beames, and wracks and more to daunt. pe hooks and molten lead do never want. hat iust excuse, vnanswerable argument, Neck. neck that polisht ivory weares ilver pillar whiter far, hn towers of polisht ivory are. Negro. V. Aethiopian Nemesis st goddesse of revenge, sterne Rhamnusia. other of fate and change. bearer of eternall providence, Daughter of frowning iustice. hich from black clos'd Eternity, rom thy darke cloudy hidden seate. he worlds disorders dost descry, Which when they swell so proudly great. Reversing the order nature set; Thou givest thy all confounding doome. Which none doth know before it come. Neptune The aged father of the floods. The wavie Monarch. The great sea Admirall. The trident armed God, Whose state Is next to Ioves. Great ruler of the floods. The king of surges. The Saphyr God of seas. The Monarch of the sacred floods. The father of the swelling Maine. Cerulean God. The God whose trident calmes the Ocean.
The god that earth doth bind In brackish chains, He that girds earth in cincture of the sea, Whose vast embrace ensphears whole earth, He that all lands Girds in his ambient circle and in air, Shakes the curl'd tresses of his Saphyr hair. The watry King that holds the three tooth'd scepte, The god that rides In his blue chariot o'r the surging tides, That makes the roaring waves shrink when they feel The heavy burthen of his pressing wheel, Whose threeforkt scepter rules the sea. Te Saphyr visag'd God. Great master of the floods, The unresisted power of the deeps, King of waves, He that unlocks The gaping quicksands, undermines the rocks Saturns warry son. Joves watry brother. Sea Deitie. Tattarean god. The universall Admirall. Nereides. That on the Dolphines back ride o'r the seas, Their finning coursers. Thet is virgin train. The Watry powers, goddesses, Deities. The Nymphs that float upon the watry seas. The wanton Nymphs within the watry bowers, That o'r the sand with printlesse foot Chace ebbing Neptune, That on their heads wear caps of pearly shells, Green goddesses of Seas, gray Doris daughters, That in low corall woods String pearls upon their Sea green hair, Psamathe, Thetis, Doo, Galenae, Clotho, Galaaea. Eucrato, Glauce, Leucothoe, Proto, Doris Spio, Cymodorea, Idya, Endore, Sao, Eunica, Dynamene. Thiaa, Pasithee, Eulimen, Cymathoe, Mlite, Pherusa, Phao, Agave, Poris, Nesaea, Erato, Panopa. Protomedea, Hyppothoe, Actaea, Lssiaissa, Pronaea. Euagore, Pantoporea, Autonone, Neso, Eione, Beoe. V. Hesiods Theogonia v. 230. 346 Glauconome, Alimeda. Hipponeo, Laomedia, Liagore. Cymo, Eupompe, Themiste, Euarne, Menippe, Petaea. Nemertea, Ocyroe, Cydippe, Tyche, Acaste. Clyie, Ianthe, Lycoris, Plexaure.
Nestor. That miracle of aged eloquence, He that three ages saw. Eloquent gravity. The Pylian sage. That liv'd to see a treble age. Net. Corded toyles, corded snares. Corded mashes Windowie toyles. Masht in the net. Never. The sun shall change his course and find new pathes To drive his chariot in. The loadstone leave His faith unto the North. The vine withdraw Those strict embraces that infold the elme, In her kind armes, ere, &c. First shady groves shall on the bllowes grow, And sea weeds on the tops of mountains show Their flimy chires. Heavens fies shall first fall darkned from their spheare, Grave night, the light weed of the day shall wear. Fresh streams shall chace the sea, tough plowes shall tear Their fishie bottome, &c. Before. Sooner fleet minutes shall back rescued be. Soonner expect the harvest from the sand. Sooner every star May in his motion grow irregular, The sun forget to give his welcome flame Unto the teeming earth. December sooner shall see primrose grow; And swift-pac't rivers in soft murmures flow, No more shall mead be deckt with flowers, Nor sweetnesse dwell in rosie bowers, Nor early buds on branches spring, Nor warbling birds delight to sing. Nor April violets paint the grove. The fish shall in the Ocean burne, And fountains sweet, shall bitter tune. The humble oake no flood shall know. Black Lethe shall oblivion leave. Love shall his bow and shaft lay by, And Venus doves wat wings to fly, The sun refuse to shew his light, And day shall then be turn'd to night, And in that night no star appeare.
No joy above in heaven shall dwell, Nor pain torment poor souls in hell, Can earth forget her burthen and ascend? O can aspiring flames be taught to tend To earth? Then &c. Can hills forget their ponderous bulks and fly Like wandering Aromes in the empty skie? Or can the heavens, grown idle, not fulfill Their certain revolutions but stand still, And leave their constant motion to the wind T'inherit? Then &c. Sooner the sun and stars shall shine together. Sooner the wolfe make peace with tender lambes. Sooner shall rigid Boreas first take wing At Nilus head, and boisterous Auster spring From th' icie floods of Izland—Then &c. You may sooner part the billowes of the sea, And put a bar between their fellowship. Sooner shut Old time into a den, and stay his motion, Wash off the swift houres from his downy wing, Or steal eternity to stop his glasse. Sooner the pibbles, on the hungry beach, Shall illop stars, and the mutinous winds, Throw the proud Cedars up against the sun. When Poe shall wash the topps of Matine hill, Or the sea swallow lofty Apennine, And strange effcts of love, new monsters joyne, That Tygers may from hindes seeke lusts delight, And the meeke dove is troden by the kite, When flocks the Lyons friendship entertain, And wanton goats affect the brackish main. Then &c. Sooner the mountains shall want shady trees, Sooner the ships shall not aile on the seas, And rivers make recourse unto their springs, The rivers shall recoile unto their springs, The sun shall from the west his course begin, The earth shall first with shining stars be fill'd, The skies unto the furrowing plough shall yeild, The water shall send forth a smoaking flame, The fir shall yeild water back again, First shall the birds that welcome in the spring,
All mute and dumbe; for ever cease to sing, The summer Ants leave their industrious pain, And from their full mouthes cast their loading grain. The swift Maenalian hounds that chasing are, Shall frighted run back from the trembling are. First nature shall become preposterous. No element shall hold his constant seat, Heaven shall be earth, and earth Joves stary house, Fier shall be cold, and water shall give hea, Summer shall give a snowie livery Unto the ground, and does shalllyons fright, Through aire the crowes whiter than snow shall fly, And the daies brightnesse turne into the night, The fish shall not inhabit in the flood, And silver swans shall take a jetty die, The chaing boare shall not then haunt the wood, With wings then oxen shall divide the skie, Marble shall then the wax in softnesse passe, The chicken then shall prey upon the kite, In the vast welkin shall the staggs seke grasse, The dog forget Arcadian wolves to bite, Stars shall enamel earth; and from the tree No leaves shall dangle, eagles court the dove, The highest mounains then shall levell'd be, And the fierce griffons shall the horses lov. V. Famous. Ever Incredible, Impossible. New years day, The birth and infant of the year. That day which is the prime To the slow-gliding moneths, when every eye Weas Symptomes of a sober jolity, And every hand is ready to present Affection in a real complement. When even the peasant thinks that he Cannot without a grosse absurdity, Be that day frugal, and not spare his friend Some gift to shew his love finds not an end With the deceased year. When every street Sounds with the trampling of presenters feet. When as the lowest fortune will not fear To give a welcome to the new come year
With some proportioned gift. The day old time doth turne his annual glasse. New. Infant, blooming, budding. That counts not many years. Scarce yet hath seen the publick light. Newes. Whose itching ears even smart to know the newes. Fames plumed birth. Sad Newes. v. Harsh sounding. Sounds like a mandrake torne out of the earth. That living mortals hearing it run mad. Klling, stabbing, wounding accents. Good Newes. v. Sweet sounding. The sweetest tidings, and the greatest wonder As ever broke in sunder, the lips of panting fame. Which to hear, There's none but would wish all his body eare. The happiest newes that ever beg'd an eare. Night. The nights black wings mask up the light, The obscure mantle of the night. The shady gloome. Whose sable wing In gloomy darknesse husheth every thing. Under her sable pinions folds the world, When Cynthia darts her borrowed raies, The lights black curtain, cypresse. The gloomy night With sable curtains had beclouded all. Daies elder sister. Best patronesse of griefe. Heavens surrounding steeds Quell their proud courage, turne their fainting heads Into the lower hemispheare to coole Their flaming nostrills in the westerne poole. When Morpheus with his leaden keyes Locks up the sences. Night sheds her poppy on the weary world, When leaden sleepe hath seald up all mens eyes. The time when mortals take their soft repose. The friend to secrets. The face of heaven studded with stars. The nurse of cares her curtains drawes. Nights heavie charmes
ad clos'd all eyes. When sleepe bestowes On men and on their cares a sweet repose. Night spangs the skie with stars. Light ies in the shady coverture of night. That obscure mantle that invelopes ight, When silent darknesse doth invite Our eyes to slumber. When night hath spread her dusky dampe. The sober suited matron. Daies sable herse. The ebon box wherein heaven puts her light. haebe's black coachman. Deceased lights black coffin. The black browd lady. Black ey'd empresse. That Ethiopian Queen. Negro Queen. Sart night her brows exalts with stars impal'd. The gloomy night on light extends her shades. The winter of the day. The earth borne shades had clos'd the world with night. The nights dew dropping shadowes hide The face of earth: The maske of day. Night laies her sable mace on earth. Sols glorious light Dives to the sea, and brings up drowsie night. The peaceful night treads busie day under her sable feet. The pndant spangles Beam from the skie, and drowsie sleepe entangles The eyes of mortals. Nights moist shades the earth doth hide, And Cyhi in her golden chiot rides, Dark night rusht down, and hid the face of earth With her spread sable pinions— Heavens eye doth gild the seas In his days journey to th' Antipodes. When heaven that was a Cyclops late before, Becomes an Argus. Over the pole, night her thick mantle throwes. The time the jetty charioter Hules her black mantle ore our Hemispheare. Mother of sleeps and feares. That with her sable mantle friendly covers The sweet stollen sports of joyful meeting lovers.
The day is sunke in hideous night, The black-ey'd night her able mantlehurld, And in thick vapours muffled up the world. Which in dull darknesse canopies the light. When nights black muffler hoodeth up the skies. The sun doth leave us to our rest, And Cynthia hath her brothers place possest. Now had the glorious sun tane up his Inne, And all the lamps of heaven englightned been. Virgins, now day is fled, Make pooe their garments t'enrich their bed. Which in a carre of Jet, By steeds of iron gray, whch mainly sweat, Moist drops on all the world, drawn through the skie. When we may The bright Celstial spheare sorvey, So rich in jwels hung, that night appears Like to an Aehiope bride. Now in the sea bright sol had hid his head, And stars appear'd, the moone her shadowes spread, Nights silent reign had ob'd the world of light, To lend in lieu a greater benefit. Repose and sleepe; when every mortal brest, Whom care, or grief permitted took their rest, Now nights black mantle had the earth orespread, And all the st of stars in Paebus stead, Though with lesse light adon'd the spangled skie. The night did rowning rise Into her throne, and from her humerous breasts, Visions and dreams lay sucking, all mens rests Fell like the mists of dath upon their eyes. Loves Mart of ksses. Venus day. Soft rest of cares. Night laies her velvet hand upon daies face. The aire with sparks of living fire is spangled, And night deep drencht in misty Acheron, Heav'd up her head, and halfe the world upon, Beath'd darknesse forth. The skie appear'd in sable mourning dresse, The ebon night brought in a coach of jet, Drawn by her sable feathered steeds, ravens. When Morpheus egeant of the night Had laid his mace upon the dying light.
And with his listlesse limbes had closely spread, The sable curtains of his drowsie bed. Darknesse had stain'd, The Chrystall brow of day, and gloomy night Had spoil'd and rifled heaven of all his light. Grim night lookt forth with grizly countenance, Her smoakie breath in duskie clouds doth fly rom her pale lips, and darkned heavens bright glance, evailing ore the earth and azure skie. When as the unversal shade, Of th' unspangled heaven and earth had made An utter darknesse. When as the heavens by the suns teame untrod, Hath took no print of the approaching light, And al the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright. Her body is confin'd Within a coleblack mantle thorough lin'd With sable surres, her tresses were of hiew, Like Ebony, on which a pearly dew Hung like a spiders web, her face did shroud Aswarth complexion, underneath a cloud Of black curld cypresse, on her head she wore A crown of burnisht gold, bshaded ore Wih fogs and roy mists, her hand did bear A scepter, and a sable Hemispheare. Death resembling shades of night Had drawn their misty curtains twixt the light, And every darkned eye. Sols horses now eat their Ambrosia Within the westerne meads, deposed day Surrenders up her throne, and yeilds her right Unto her Negro sister.—In the raging sea, The sun is drown'd, and with him falls the day, When Cynthia whips her drowsie teame. When the wings of night fans sleep on mortals. Now was ou heavenly vault deprived of the light With suns depart, and now the darknesse of the night Did light those beamy stars, which greater light did drk, Now each thing that enjoy'd that fiery quickning spark, Which life is call'd, were mov'd their spirits to repose, And wanting use of eyes▪ their eyes began to close. A silence sweet each place with one consent embra'
A musick sweet to one in careful musing plac't, And mother earth now clad in mourning weeds did breath A dull desie to kisse the image of our death. Earth thing with her black mantle night doth sconce, Saving the glow-worme, which would courteous be Of that small light: of watching shepheards see. The welkin had full niggardly inclos'd In coffr of dim clouds his silver groates. When Phaebe doth behold Her silver visage in the watry glasse, Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grasse. Night that from eyes their busie function takes The ear more quick of apprehension makes, Wherein it doth impaire the seeing sence But paies the hearing double recompence. Borne by swift dragons in an Ebon coach. The creeping murmure, and the poring dark, Fills the wide vessel of the universe. The Churchyards yawne, and hell it selfe breaths out Contagion to this world, When the Diurnal Charirioter had set His fierie brasse-hoo'd coursers to their meat, And o'r his golden glistering locks had spread The jetty hangings of his sable bed. Lights sable Coffin buries up the day, The night close mouner for the dying light, Bedews her cheeks with tears, When the wearied Sun is gone to rest, And darknesse made the worlds unwelcome guest, The sable mantle of the silent night, Shut from the world the ever joysome light. Care fld away, and softest slumbers please To leave the Court for lowly Cottages: Now when the night her sable wings had spread, And sleep his dew on pensive mortals shed, When visions in their arie shapes appear. Wild boars fosake their denson woody hills, And sleightfull otters left the purling rills; Rooks to their nests in high woods now were flung, And with their spread wings shield their naked young, When thieves from thickets to the crosse way stirre, And terrour frights the lonely passenger.
en nought was heard, but now and then the howl f some vle Curre, or whooping of the owl. w the hungry lion roars, d the wolf beholds the Moon, hilst the heavy Plow-man snores, with weary task foredon, the wasted brands do glow. ile the screch owl screeching loud, s the wretch that lies in woe, remembrance of a shrowd. V. Moon. Stars. Sleep, Midnight. ow it is the time of night, t the graves all gaping wide, y one lets forth hi spright, n the Church yard paths to glide, ow o' one half of the world, chie darknesse round is hurl'd. aures seem dead, and wicked dreams abuse he curtain'd sleep, now witchcraft celebrates ale Heca's offerings, he owl is abroad, the Bat and the Toad, And so is the Cat a Mountain, he Ant and the Mole it both in an hole, And the frog peeps out of the fountain, imes dead low water, when all minds devest To morrows businesse. The noon of night. When stars begin to stoop. Te stars had reach'd their middle height, When Titans ray Gves the Antipodes their noon of day, When morrals have Their Buial in their voluntary grave. Bed. y this the feathered Bellman of the night, nt orth his midnight summons to invite ll eyes to slumber. When far spent night perswades each mortall eye, To whom nor art nor nature graneth light, To lay his then mark wanting shafts of sight. Clos'd with their quivers in sleeps armoure. The noontide of th' Antipodes. The deep of night is crept upon our talk.
The dead wast of the night. The aged night is now grown gray. The midnight bell Doth with his iron tongue, and brazn mouth Sound on unto the drowsie race of death. The gaudy day Is crept into the bosome of the sea; And now loud houling wolves arose the Jades That drag the Tragick melancholy night Who with their drowsie, slow, and flagging wings Clip dead means bones, and from their misty jawes Breath foule contagious darknesse in the aire. The deepest silence of the night, And Luna in her crescent shined bright. Now 'twas still night, and weary limbes at ease, Slept sweetly, woods were husht and calme the seas. When the still night did gently kisse the trees, And they did make no noise. The moone-light sweetly sleeps upon the bankes. Nightingale. Making a thorne her prick-song booke. Woods musicks king. The forrest harmelesse Syren. Inchanting Syrens of the aire. Warbling Philomel. The forrest Lutinist. The yearly Augut of the spring. Nilus. Whose streams a thousand waies, In winding tracks, and wanton turnings plaies On Aegypts fertile brest. Which with his amorous folding armes doth seeme T'embrace smal slands, whilst his silver stream From several channels of it selfe doth meete, And oft it self with wanton kisses greet. The seven horn'd river, paper-bearing stream, Whose fruitful inundation, Aegipt with plenty crownes. The streams of Nile Augmented by the weeping Crocodile. Nimble. v. Swift. So free from dregs of earth, that you would think Hs body were assum'd and did disguise Some one of the celestial Hierarchies. Their very first matter was quicksands.
Nimble as fiery elves. if their veins ran with quick-silver, pricious spirits, a vein of Mercury in his feet, ike subtle snakes, can almost skip out of his skin, That can rise, nd stoop almost together like an arrow, oot through the air as nimbly as a star. short as doth a swallow and be here, nd there, and here, and yonder, all at once, Born Like Iphichus upon the tops of corn, Nimble as winged hours, o dance and caper o'r the ops of flowers, And ride the sun-beams. Niobe. VVhom all might call, The happiest mother that yet ever brought Life unto light, had not he self so thought, Of late env'd by those That were her friends, now pitied by her foes. The weeping marble. Never fate Poduc'd a greater Monument Of slipperie heights and prides descent. A seplchre without a body. A body without a sepulcher, Body and sepulcher unto her self. She that was made to know The utmost heavenly smiles or frowns could do. Noah's Ark. Holy Janus soveraign boa, Where Churches and all Monarchies did float, Tat swimming Colledge, and free hospitall Of all Mankind that cage and vivarie Of fowls and beasts, in whose womb destiny s and our latest nephews did install. The floating park, That did all kinds and shapes imbark. The sacred Ago. Noon. What time the Sun doth dine, The highest tide and flow of light. The summer of the day, The head-strong day, The parted day in equall ballance held.
And now the Sunne, the shortest shadows made, Now East and West the equall sun partakes, Now Phoebus with inflaming eye doth view The crannied earth. Now Titan bore his equall distant sight, Betwixt foregoing and ensuing ligh. When Phoebus from the height of all the skie Beholds the East and West with equall eye. When as the high pitch'd Sun invades The Earth with hottest beams and shortest shades, Now he that guides the Chariot of the sun, On his Ecliptick circle had so run, That his brasse-hoof'd fire-breathing horses wan The stately height of the Meridian, By this bright Phoebus with redoubled glory, Had half way mounted to the highest story Of his Olympick Palace. Now labouring men seeing the Sun decline, Take out their bags and sit them down to dine, The Sun was in the middle way, And had o'rcome the one half of the day. When as the Sun up to the South aspires, And seats himself upon dayes glorious Trone, Ascending through heavens brightest azure vault, The Sun is now upon the highest hill Of his dayes journey, Now the Mid day had made the shadows short, The Evening and the Morn of equall port. The Rosie Morn resigns her light, And milder glory to the Noon. North. The frozen pole, where winter which no spring can ase, With blasting cold doth glaze the Sythian seas. The frozen wain. The farthest shore, Washt by the Northern Ocean, Those whom dayes bright flame, Sarce warms—Their Northen Pole, VVhere a perpetuall winter binds the ground, And glazeth up the floods, VVhere Phoebus fire scarce thaws the Isickles. Cold Champions where No summer warmth the tree doth chear
Climates which a sullen air infest, where Galistho drives her frozn team. here raigns the greater and the lesser Bear, hich from their Poles view all things which they please, never set beneath the western seas, the Pole of the Parrhasian Maid, region under th' Erimanthian Bear. V. Cold. Boreas. Frost. Nose. The double doored port. here Zephyrus delights to sport. Arbitrator betwixt the eyes lest they should together by th' ears. Stands in bucklers place, To take the blows for all the face. Noyse. lted voices through the Palace rung, Confused noise did smite the gilded stas, pplusive murmures with a flood of air, justling waves against the rocks. noise made Mars wounded by Diomede, Throwing about their rude confused sounds. Clamour flew so high, er wings struck heaven and drown'd all voice. ith tumult broke the air. Such a shout Made Polyphemus when his eyes went out. Driving affrighted Ecchoes through the air, ike the loud rattle of the drumming wind. Like Canons when they disgorge Their fierie vomits. So Aetna roars when &c. v. Aena. Their shout not that can passe, VVhich the loud blasts of hracian Boreas, On Pini Offa makes and bows amain The rattling wood, A noise horrid and as loud, As thunder makes before it breaks the cloud, Their noise not that of Thracian Boreas, Amongst the Pines of Oa can surpasse, Nor that which Nilus falling water makes, Precipitated from the Cataracts. A noise that did the wounded air with terrour fill.
Such noise doth make, Enceladus, when he his tomb doth shake, Enough to make an Earthquake. Like he roar of a whole herd of lions. As loud a noise as make, the Hurrican, The River trembled underneath his banks To hear the replication of his sounds. No longer hold Their bursting joies, but through the air was oll'd, A lengthened shout, as when th' Artillerie, Of heavens discharg'd along the cleaving Skie, With such a foul great noise, that you would say, Surely some great Arcadian asse did bray, Whose noise appalls Worse than ten Irish Funeralls, As when confused cries, In dead of night rend the amazed Skies, That may be heard to the Antipodes. V. Murmure. Shout. Nuptialls. v Marriage. Nymphs. The wanton rangers of the wood. That in the Coral woods string pearls upon their hair. The beauteous Sylvan Deities. That trip upon the Mountains, Or delight in groves and fountains, That dally on the flowry hill or vallie. The buskin'd Deities. Nereides, Nayades, Dryades. Hmadryades. Oreades. O. Oak. VVHere stately Oaks are in no lesse account. For height or spreading than the proudest be, That from high Oeta look on Theassaly, So fairly drest With spreading arms and curled top that Jove, Ne'r braver saw in's Dodonean grove.
es that to fate are Tenants of a longer date, nce dangle Acorns, cradled in their husks. es sacred Tree. Chaonian tree. Obscure. ling, posing, perplexing, puzling, abstuse Enigmaticall, requiing a resolution from the Delian Oracle, rdian language. Knoty speeches. here all is vel'd, that he that reads divine, uching the sense at two removes. Language that fits the ear, d mouth of Oedipus to speak and hear, Language that walks in mists and shrouds. s meining in the bosome of a cloud, Darker than Plato's numbers. Carcinus Poems. Archimedes Problems. Mysterious language. lian verses. Observe. v. Mark. Argos Io. To behold with an intentive observing eye. To look with eyes that own no other object. To behold with gazefull jealous eyes. Look. Old. In the downfall of his mellow years. Nature hath brought him to the door of death. Nature in him stands on the very verge Of deaths confines. Descended into the vale of years. Struck with the rod of time. A face imprest with aged Characters. Her teeth dance in her head like Vitginall Jacks. Autumnall face. Whose face doth show Like stately Abbies ruin'd long ago. When a man is daily betwixt the affliction of diseases, and the apprehension of death. That hath nothing but ice in his veins, and earth in his visage One of four score, three night-caps and two hairs. A chilly frost surpriseth every member, And in the midst of June he feels December. There is nothing, wherein we may see more lamen table marks of the inconstancy of humane things, than in the spoils, and ru∣ines of her face. Trembling limbs, shaking voice. A bald-head, and childish dropping nose. Uarmed gums. Loose cheeks and wrincles mad, As large as those, which in the woody shade
Of spatious Tabraca, the mother ape, Deep furrow'd in her aged cheeks doth scrape, When age by times imperious law, With envious prints the forehead dimmes, When drought and leannesse, suck and draw The moisture from the withered limbs. Old croan that hath outliv'd her teeth. That hath three hairs, four teeth a brest, Like grashoppers, an emmets crest. A skin more ugged than her coat, And dugges like spiders webbes, His Temples like the swans soft feathers are, A charnell house of bones, which yet quick, Have quite outliv'd their own Arithmetick. Her teeth are fallen out, but her nose and chin, Intend very shortly to be friends and meet about it, When deeper years Hath interwoven snow amongst our hairs, When we are bruised on the shelf Of time, and read Eternall day-light on our head, When with the rheum, The cough and Piick we consume Into an heap of cynders. One foot in the grave, Charons boat. Daily expected by their winding shee, Whose head is covered with an hoary fleece, On whom age snows white hairs, Whose every wrinckle tells him, where the plow Of time hath furrowed, to whom ice doth flow In every vein, whose aged head wears snow. The living snow. The live sepulcher. The head which age hath cloath'd in white, Old as the withered ram Medaea lew, VVhose age she in the caldron did renew. Ready to stoop into the yawning grave. The tomb Yawns to devour him. VVhose chill blood and dull declining years, &c. A man whom hoary hairs call old, Upon whose front time many years had told. Arrested by crooked age. Prest with a burden of so many years
As make him stoop under his load, A man whom palsie shakes, And spectacles befriend. When We are become, but statues now of men, And our own monuments expecting every day, When courteous death shall take their life away, Age doth power upon his head a silver shower. Grizly hairs gins to cast th' account of many cares. Upon his head. Decrepit dayes, When creeping age shall quench thy sprightly fires, And breath cold winter on thy chill desires, When ebbing bloods neap-tides shall strike thy limbs With trembling palsies, when dry age bedims The Optick sun-shine of thy bed rid dayes Whose bones and veins may be An argument against Philosophy, To prove an emptinesse. A man declin'd to his Preterperfect tense, In the autumn of his mellow age, The glasse accuseth to the face, Their want of beauty, Whom rotten teeth and wrinckled face, And head of snowie hairs disgrace, Cold age hath frosted his fair hairs, Whose hairs do wear the sober hue of gray, Envious time th delv'd her paralels within her brow, orty winters have besieg'd the brow, And dig'd deep trenches up in beauties field, When able curls are silver'd o'r with white, Time hath spilt snow upon your hair, Whose hairs contend with snow, That wears snow on his shaking head. e in his hear. All whose revolting teeth are fled, Now carefull age hath pitch'd her painfull plow Upon the surrow'd brow, And snowie blasts of discontented care Hath blanch'd the falling hair, That bears in his look the Chronicle of many years ago. A memento mor, One whom death hath forgot.
How many crows hath she outhv'd? She Nestor. Of a mellow age. Rotten ripe. That talks behind a beard, As his beard him, not he his beard did bear. Having satisfied the tyranny of time With the course of many years. Like a weather beaten Coduit of many Kings raigns, A breathing Chronicle. Hands prisoners to the palsie, Winter faces whose skins slack, Lnk as an unthrifts purse, but a souls sack, Whose eyes seek light within, for all here's shade, Whose moths are holes, rather worn out than made, Whose every tooth to a several place is gone To vex their souls at Resurrection. Living deaths head, more antick than ancient. Old age. Crooked age. Deaths twilight. Deaths slumber. The bloodlesse age, when times dull plow Doth print her fuows in the aged brow, VVhen Ladies in their glasse Look for their own, and find another face. The gray summe of years. The winter of our life, VVhen golden haits do turn to silver wire. Nature hath crost her fornoon book, and clea'd that score But scarce gives further trust for any more. VVth silver hairs speaking experience. Gray hairs the Pursivants of death, bed-rid dayes. Fosty hairs. Chair dayes. Decrepit dayes, VVithering the face, hollowing the heumie eyes, And makes a man, even a mans self despise, VVhen death displayes his coldnesse in the cheek, Times colder hand leads us near home. Deaths Calends. When as the Castles two leav'd gates be bar'd, When as he mill-stones language is not heard, When horn-mouth'd Bellmans shall affright hy slambers, Thy untun'd ears shall loath harmonious numbers, Each obvious molehill shall augment thy fears, And carefull snow shall blanch thy falling hairs, When as thy sinews silver cord is loos'd, Thy brain god bowl is broke, the undispos'd, And idle livers ebbing fountain dr'd, The bloods Meandring cisterns unsuppli'd,
When black-mouth'd time Of sullen age approach'd the day, When dying pleasures find a full decay, VVhen as the Sun and Moon, and stars apper, Dark in thy mircrocosmall hemispear, VVhen as the clouds of sorrows multiply, And hide the chystall of the gloomy Skie, VVhen as the keepers of the crazie tower, Bepalsie stricken, and the men of power, Sink as they march, and grinders cease to grind, Diststfull bread, and windows are grown blind. Old things. As if they had been made Long time before th first Olympiade, Old as Evanders moher. Fit for an Antiquaries Library. A good old man. v. Earls. Chracters set out by Ed. Blount. Chap. 29. Omens. Such as were seen Before the Romanes on th' Amathian plain, With their own Countries blood their swords distain, Sad presages, irregularities of natures, As ominous as was that voyage when VVhen Caesar did ail from Greece to Italy In the small Bark. The ominous aven with a dismall chear, Through his horse beak of following horrour tells, Begeting strange imaginary fear, VVith heavy ecchoes like to passing bels, The howling dog a dolefull part doth bar, As though they chim'd his latest buying knell, Under the Eves the buzzing screech owl sings, Beating his windows with her fatal wings, And still affrighed with his fearfull dreams, VVth raging fiends and goblins that he meets, Of falling down from steep rocks into streams, Of tombs, of burills, and of winding sheets, The melting stars their sulphus su ft shed, The Centre pants with sudden throes, And trembling earth a sad distemper shows The sun arighted hides his golden hed From hence by an unknown Elyptick fld,
Irregular heavens, abortive shades display, And night usurps the empty throne of day, The Meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven, The palefac'd Moon looks bloody on the earth, And lean-look'd Prophets whisper fearfull change, As doth the raven o'r th' infectious house, The Skies hung with prodigious signs, As if the Scorpion would drop down Out of the Zodiack, or the fiercer Lion. The croaking ravens Fag up and down beating the air With their obstreperous beaks, The yawning graves have yielded up their dead, Fiece, fiery warriours fight upon the clouds, In ranks and squadrons, and right form of war, Which drizzle blood upon the Temples top. The noise of battel hurtled in the air, Horses do neigh and dying men do groan, And Ghosts do shrick and squeal about the streets, Lamenings heard 'ch air, Strange skreams of death and prophesying, With accents terrible of dire combustion, And confused accents hatch'd to wofull time, Th' obscure bird clamour'd the long liv'd night, Some say the earth was feaverous and did shake. Heart thrilling groan first heard, he round his bower, And then the screech owl with her utmost power, Lbou'd her loathed note, the forrests bending with winds, as Hecate had been ascending, As if some divelish hag were come abroad With some kind mothers late delivered load, A uthlesse, bloody sacrifice to make To those infernall powers that by the Lake O mghte Syx, and black Cocytus dwell: Swords in the spangled heavens did then by night, In th' East and West extend their blazing light, Ashs in showers upon the earth did fall, Lstre deserts the Sun in height of all, His towring pitch. The Moon did then look red, And ers of blood from her dark Chariot shed, Had ocks did groan. Ar'd troops of foot and horse Incounter in the air with horrid force.
Prodgious events. Presaging signs. Portents of dire calamity and woe, Affrighting voices in the air were heard, The Sun himself in threatning forms appear'd, Sometimes as if he wept, his glorious head, With a blue Rainbow round environed, Smetimes quite dimm'd, as if he fled the sight Of men, and meant to make eternal night. The windie spirits through earths torn caverns break, ods change their courses, beasts 'gainst nature speak, The air that night was fill'd with dismal groans, And people oft awaked with the howls, Of wolves and fatal dogs, ill boding owls, Night jas and ravens, with wide sttetched throats, From yews and hollies send their balefull notes, The shrieches, wailings, and all cries were heard Of every fatal and affrighting bird. Oracle. Where the cleft ground inspires, Oraculous truth. The gaping earth exhales Prophetick winds, Tripodes keepers of fate. A voice so shrill, As all the caves capacious throat might fill, The lawrel falls from thia's frighted hair, The god possest With a full spirit her inspired breast, Her hair upright throws down, The sacred ornaments, and Phoebus crown, Her neck turns wildly round, and down she throws All Tripodes she meets with as she goes, And with an inward fire she burns To crave the Oracles advise, To the undoubted Oracle resort. The Delphian Phoebus did possesse In killing rage his wretched Prophetesse, Making sad death the punishment and hire. Of the poor soul his fury did inspire. An hideous voyce, Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving, A nightly trance or breathed spel, Inspires his pale y'd Priest from the Prophetick cell.
V. Mays Contiuation of Lucan Lib. Oratour. v. Eloquent. Orgies. Treading a frantick round. Bacchus mad Trieterick, The time in wild disguise, Scythonian matrons use to solemnize. Lyaeus three years feast. The Bacchides their leavie javelins wave, Woemen with men the base and nobler sort, Together to those unknown ites resort, On high Cyhaerons sacred top which rings With frantck songs, and shrill voic'd Bacchaualls, In Libers clebrated Fstivalls, Now on Edonian Pangaeus they tread, Now on the Thracian Pndus lofty head, Their oins a sacred Pnthers skin evests, With rffled hair the maons hide their brests, And brandish leavie javelins lightly born. The Priest proclaims a solemn feast, The Dames and Maids from usuall labour rest, Wrapped in skins, their hair-laces unbound, And dangling tresses with wild lvy crown'd, They leavie spears assume, High Rhodope with Timbrels rings, Vines shade their brows, the rough hide of a Dear, Shog at their sides, their shoulders bear a spear. Orpheus. The Thracian haper. The Thracian singer that once with his Lyre, Taught the deaf stones to hear him and admire, When Thracian Orpheus tok His Lyre, and genlly on it stook, The learned stones came dancing all along, And kept time to his charming song, With artificiall pace the warlck Pine, Th' Elm and his wife, th' lvy Twine With all the better trees, which erst had stood Unmov'd, forsook their native wood, The Lwrell to the Poets hands did bow, Craving the honour of his brow, And every loving arm embrac'd and made With their officious leaves a shade.
The beasts too strove his auditors to be, Forgetting their old tyrannie. The fearfull Hart next to the Lion came, And Wolf was shepherd to the Lamb, Nightingales harmlesse Syrens of the air, And Muses of the place were there, Who when their little wnd-pipes they had found, Unnequal to so strange a sound, O'rcome by grief and art they did expire, And fell upon the conquering Lyre, The gods interpreter who sung so well, As by his songs to bring his wife from hell; For while he sung and struck the quavering strings, The bloodlesse shadows wept, nor flattering springs Tempt Tantalus, Ixions wheel stood still, Their Urn the Belides no longer fill, The vultures feed no, Tityus left to grone, And Ssyphus sate lstning on his stone, The Furies vanquish'd by his verse were seen To weep, that never wept before, hells Queen. And King of darknesse, yield to his powerfull plea, V. Ovids Metam. Lib. 10. Ovid. The Roman Opheus. Hmer. That smooth'd old Poets with his fluent vein, And taught the new a far more numerous strain, Tis doubtfull whether he whom Sulmo bre, The world commanding Tyber honoured more, Than his oul exile the defam'd O Rome. The pates Poer. From times first birth that chants the change of things, The flames of love in Elegiack sings. With crses doubtfull Ibs he insnares, Epistles dictares, fraught with lovers cares, In swanlike tunes deplores his sad exile, His verse the Roman festivals compile, Of fishes sings unknown to Laine rs, Computes the stars that glide in heavenly sphears, His paper fills with Epigrammick times, The tragick Stage in high cohurnals climbs, Whips Poetasters that abuse the times, Loves Antomedon. Master of the art of love.
Pelignian glory. Sulmo's great renown, Whose picture in the dayes of old The Roman Ladies wore in rings of gold. Owl. Minerva's sacred bird. Nictymene which masks her shame in night, About her all the winged troops prepare, And with invectives chace her through the air, Nights fatal bird labouring a loathed note, The Shrieking Harbenger of death, That roosts all day within an Ivie tod, Or in the Sea-liffes or the dampie caves, In Charnel-houses or amongst the graves, The broad fac'd Quiister of night. The bird of night and shame. The fatal Bell-man that gives the stern good-night. The sad companion of the night. Night wandring bird. Palla's howling bird. P. To paint the Face. To counterseit the seal of nature. That prank old wrinckles up in new atire, To alter natures course, prove time a lyar, Abusing fate, and heavens just doom reverse, On beauties grave to set a crimson herse, With a deceitfull foil to lay a ground, To make a glasse to seem a Diamond, That paint their perboil'd faces, And seek by greater shames. To cover their dsgraces. A varnish'd countenance. That wear a fairer mask. A horse might mire upon their face. A face as full of lies, As Gypsies, or the running Lotteries, She reads over her face every morning, and sometimes blots out white, and writes red. The face Phyitians Which desire To scorch their lovers hearts with painted fire.
ygmalions statues in true flesh and blood, And with the signe of beauty feed the fire. Pale. s if all his blood turn'd whey, From her clear face the sprightly vigour fled, Her affrighted blood Forsakes her cheeks. Pale fear repells the blood, And the unculed haire like bristles stood. So Piramus grew pale When he mist This be, saw the bloody vaile. oxe was not paler than her changed look, And like the lightly breath'd on sea she shook. So pale was Thisbe, when she softly rears Her Pyramus, and fills his wounds with tears. A chill cold checks her blood. Death looks lesse pale. An inward cold Shot through her bones, her changing face appear As pale as boxe bedewed with her tears. Blood from her visage fled, usurpt by palenesse, As he that bare-foote treads a way All pav'd with serpents. Ashie pale, As evening mist sent from a watry vale, More bloodlesse than a walking ghost. Fear steals the colour from her cheeks. The natural ruby of the cheek is gone, Blancht all with fear. Pale as the colour which in leaves in seen, When they by Autumne's frost have nipped ben. That pale and meager look Like those that wander by the sable brook Of Lethe, or those ghosts from graves escape. Pallas. v. Minerva. She that rules in deeds of armes. Wars triumphant maid. Jove's blew-yd daughter. Mans Fauteresse. Unconquered Queen of armes. She that supples earth with blood. The maiden Queen that hath the azure eyes. Heavens martial maid, That wears Joves shield fring'd with his nurses haire. Divine Athenia. Armes potent Patronesse.
Tritonian maid. Joves brain born issue. To whom Joves pregnant brain was mother. By Vulcan cleav'd in twain. The fire-eyed maid of smoakie war. Palsie. Unjoynted nerves. The joynts in gimmers. Continual ague. Pan. The God whom pines do crown. The King of sylvan, rural Deities. The God of sily sheep. The father of the flocks. The mountain goat-fooe God. He that first taught to joyne the pipes with wax. Arcadia's halfe goat God. Paradise. v. Pleasant place. Epitome of pleasures. Inclosure of delight. The garden conscious to the first mans sin. Parnassus. The Muses forked hill. With two tops reaching to the skie, Twixt east and west equally distant lies. To Bacchus and Apollo's Deities Sacred, to whom in mixed sacrifice, The Teban wives at Delphos solemnize Their trietericks, this one hill alone Appeard when all the world was overflowne, And stood as middle twixt the earth and skie. Young Phaebus there with shafts unused slew The speckled serpent, that in wait long lay His banish' mother, great with child to sly. Where all the Muses sit in soangled ranks, Tuning their ditties on the flowry bankes. There springs the Poets fount, Where they to drench their ravisht lips are wont. Passion. v. Fury, Anger. The souls feaver. Tyrant of the mind. The Judgments tempest. Herricano of the soul. When passion hath the fairer judgement collied. The civil war in reasons commonwealth. The earthquake of the lesser world. The shipwrack of the soul. Strangler of reason.
The violent perturbations of the soul. Dry drunkennesse. Whirlewind of the soul. As if the brest inclo'd the easterne wind. Patient. VVell poys'd humours, in whose composition nature en'd most Geometry. Nature forgot to gve him gall. As if he meant to do fortune a spight, by taking from her he pleasure she sought to take in his misery. Sout only in the asses fortitude. Making misery it self amiable by a pious and patient de∣portmnt. Patroclus. Achilles faithful friend. Actors brave Nephew: enaeuis stout son, VVhom Hector slew, clad in Achilles armes. The occasion of Achilles just revenge, And Hctors cruel death. Peace. The drowsie sword lies snorting in the sheath. Now anus gate is shu. Concord that all tings doth infold In her white armes and the worlds safety holds. The cold sheath'd swords thir thirst of war Have coo'd. Calme dayes when rest Hath rockt asleep sluggish security. The busie spider weaves her take VVithin the belly of the plumed cask. Fair peace descends, and with her silver wings Cuts through the yeilding aire. Old Janus now hath lockt his temples gate. Justice and faith do kindly kisse each other, And Mars appeas'd, sits down by Cupids mother. No war or battles sound VVas heard the world around. The idle spear and shield were high up hung, The ooked chariot stood staind with hostile blood. The trumpet spake not to the armed throng. Glorious peace Triumphs in change of pleasures. Dear nourse of arts, plenty, and joyful births.
When the very name of king, is a general fortification over all his kingdome. The silver drops from peace's dewie wings, Supprest dissention's flame, Auspicious peace Claps her triumphant wings. Peacock. The star-embellisht fowle which Juno lves, Jun's star'd coursers. The bird that in her train bears Argus eys, Which with her wheeling taile, doth brave the skies, And slights the stars, viewing her Argus eyes. Pegasus. Gorgonean horse. Meduaean horse. The winged courser of Bellerephon, Spangled with fifteen stars. From whose hoofe did spring The chrystal waters of the muses well. Which with his brother, Sprang from the blood of their new slaughered mother. The horse on which Bellerephon did ride, VVhen by his hand the fierce Chymaera dyed. Aurora's winged courser. That God begotten steed, the horse of fame, Whose bounding hoofe, plow'd that Botian spring, Where those sweet maids of memory do sing. Penelope. Uysses constant wife. The chast Icarian wife, That liv'd a widow though she was a wife, As chast unto her mate, As all her wooers were importunate. By honest craft her wooers to deceive, What all the day she works, by night unweaves. The Queen of Ithaca, whose precious name For chast desires, is dear to us and fame. Perillus. Unhappy maker of the brazen bull. That had the first experiment Of that sad torment which he did invent. And in that bull recev'd a burning grave, Which he to the Sicilian Tyrant gave.
Phaeton. bus unhappy son. t great incendiary which set all on fire, ruling ill, what he did ill desire. Whose sisters mourne, tragedie till they to poplars turne. v. Ovids Metam. 2. lib. Phaenix. Which makes one narrow roome, er une, her nest, her cradle and her tombe. The beauties of the first returne rom spicie ashes of the sacred urne, er own selfes heire, nurse, nurseling, dame and ire. Which when she rests Her aged carkasse in her spicie nest. The quick devouring fire of heaven consume, The willing sacrifice in sweet perfumes; rom whose sad cyndars balm'd in funeral spices, A second Phaenix like the first arises. The bird which in the glowing ast With sweets doth make her tombe and nest. Who the wane Of age repaires, and sowes her self again. Nor feeds on grains or herbes, but on the gumme Of frankincense and jucie Amomum. Now when her life five ages hath fullfill'd, A nest her horned beak and talons buld. Upon the crownet of a trembling palme, Bestrew'd with Casia, spikenard, pretious balme, Bu'd Cynnamon and Myrhe, whereon she bends Her body, and her age in odours ends; This breeding corps a litle Phoenix bears, Which is it selfe to live as many years, Grown strong, that load now able to tranfer Her cradle, and her parents sepulcher. Devoutly carries to Hyperions towne, And on his flamy altar laies it downe. So ae, That nature never yet could give a paire, One finds a cradle in the others urne, She dies to live, as the sun sets to rise. Th' Arabian wonder that in spicie fume
Renews her self in that she doth consume, O happy! thine own hir: what ruines all Addes strength to thee; restor'd by Funerall, Age, thou not dying, dies. The ages gone Were seen by thee, the revolution Of time thou knowest; then when the tumid main Swallowed the Mountains in his lquid Plain, When Phaetons errour set the world on fire, None touch'd thy safety, nor didst thou expire, With stifled earth. The destinies nor draw, Nor cut thy thread, nor subject to their law. The Bird of silver Ganges. Philomel. v. Nightingale. Ccropian bird. Pandionian bird. Prognes unhappy sister. v. Ovids Met. Lib. c. Philosophers. v Learned Aristotle. Who through the mists Low nature casts doth upper knowledge spie, That unfold All natures close. These plodders in the Mine Of nature. Whose more purged ear, Is washt as 'twere with truths sharp vinegar. Natures great Secretaries, Physician. Gallens adoptive sons. The bodies botchers, cobers, That flay a man before they kill him. Podalirius, Machaon, Chyron, Aesculapius. v. Mountebank Phoebus v. Apollo. The god of Patara and Delos stood, Who with pure waters of Gastalian flood, Bedews dishevell'd, hair walks Lyrian groves, And through the woods that bred him, gently roves, Phoebus with radiant bow divine, Gracious among the Muses nine, Who doth with heaven inspied art To crazie bodies health impart, Who in his chariot bright, Doth call forth day and shuts up night, And other and the same doth come. The Delian Deity. God of archerie. The god that bears the silver bow, And throws the light from off his radiant brow.
The God that bears e silver bow, and strikes the quavering strings, God of light. The Delphian archer. dayes eternal king. Joves bright son. king of achers. Muses sacred king, ose praise in Delos Isle doth ever ring. s first founder, whose arts excellence racted natures chiefest Quintessence. na's quiver'd darling. The radiant God. Pythian Knight, from his beams doth lend his sister light: Picture. be poesie. The fancies eldest daughter. birth and creature of the pen. Pity. melting pity creeps into his heart. at poore comfort of calamity. Place Pleasant. ture her selfe did there in triumph ride, d made that place the ground of all her pride, hose various flowers, deceiv'd the rasher eye, taking them for curious tapestry. silver spring forth from a rock did fall, at in a dought did serve to water all. on the edges of a grassie banke, of trees grew circling in a ranke, faire, so fresh, so sweet, so green a ground, e piercing eye of heaven, yet never found. Places hich hold the worlds delight in their embraces. here trees do groane under their fruitful burthen, the same season nature there doth bring hes of Autumne, pleasures of the spring. VVhere th'early spring, wealthy stock of nature brings. nsplanted paradise. Transplanted Tempe. Elysium. such luxurious plenty of all pleasure, seem'd a second paradise to be, o lavishly enricht with natures treasure, hat if the lasting soules which do possesse ' Elisian fields, and live in happy blesse.
Should happen this with living eyes to see; They soon would leave their lesser happinesse. And wish to live, return'd again. Where eyes may surfeit with delight. Where every tree a fruitful issue bears Of mellow apples, ripened plums and pears, And all the shrubs with sparkling spangles shew, Like morning sunshine tinselling the dew, Here in green meadowes sits eternal May, Purfling the margents, whilst perpetual day. So double gilds the day, as that no night Can ever rust th' enamel of the light, Where Flora laies forth all her pride. There was no stint, no measure To th' old mans profit, or the young mans pleasure, The only place worthy our wish. Furnisht with all faire objects, that may deliver Delight to th' admiring fancie. Which richly payd the pleas'd beholder thanks In its sweet situation. A valley grac't with natures art and care. As fertle as the soyle of Arabia. As pleasant, as Thessalia Tempe faire, On which from heaven no blustering tempests fly, Nor Zephry blowes but sweet and wholesome aire. A long whose side the mossie mountains rise, And lift their swelling tops above the skies. Down through the mist of this faire valley glides The Chrystal flood with glancing silver hue. Whose roaring streams on golden channels slide With murmure sweet in Thetis bosome blew, Of brooks supply'd with liberal store besides, Which tops of towring mountains still renw. In midst of this fair valley doth arise A mighty mounting rock of wondrous height. On whose ambitious back, as in the skies, A City stands impregnable to sight. A castle on his lofty crest espies The valleys round about the mountains height, Below the rock the glancing river glides, In whose cold streams, he cooles his hoary side. VVhen Ttan doth ascend unto the south.
Ascending through heavens vault of brightest azure. Those lofty turres seeme to have desire To view their beauties pride, while they hve leasure, Then set they all the rolling flood on fire, Whose trembling billowes shew their golden treasure, The smiling sun illustrates them with beams, While as their beauty, beautifies their streams. A place for pleasannesse, not unfit to flatter solitar∣sle, for it being st upon an insensible rising of the ground, as you are come to a pretty hih, before al∣most you perceive that you ascend, it gives the eye lord∣ship over a large cicuit. It seemes a pleasant picture of nature, with lovely light∣somenesse and artificial shadowes. With such a rise as doth at once invite A pleasure, and a reveence from the sight. They who abstract paradise from the earthly globe, make that part of heaven, which is this places Canopie. As if nature there had meant to make a place where the beholders are beholde, and sufficiently paid in their gratefull prospect for the pains of their view. Where lands untill'd are yearly fruitfull seen, And th' unpruned vine perpetual green, Sll olives by the fertle branch are borne, And mellow figgs their native trees adorne, Honey from elmes distill, the gentle fountaines. Descend with purling noyse from lofty mountaines: There milkey goats come freely to the pale, Nor do glad flocks with dugs distended faile, The mighty bore, oares not about the fields, Not hollow earth doth poisonous vipers yeild. Adde to this happinesse the humid east Doth with no frequent showers the field infest, Nor the fat seeds are parcht in barren land, The heavenly powers both empering with command, No barke comes hither with Argoan ore, Nor landed wanton Colchis on this shore. Cadmus with swelling ailes turn'd not this way, Nor painfull troope that with Ulysses stray, Here amongst cattle no contagi are. Nor seele flocks drowthy power of any star. When brae did on the golden age intude,
Jove for the pious did this place seclude. Where every object charmes the wandering eye, And bids the soul gaze there eternally. The smoake by which the loaded spits doe turne, For incense might on sacred altars burne. The nked rocks are not unfutful there, But at some certain seasons every year, Their barren topps with lushious food abound, And with the eggs of various ouls are crown'd, Ripe fruits and blosoms on the same trees live, At once they promise, what at once they give. So sweet the aire, so moderate the clime, None sickly lives or dies before his time, Heaven sure, has kept this spot of earth uncurst, To shew how all things were created first. V. Hom. Odys. Calipso's vile. Dubartas Eden. V. Brownes Pastor. lib. 2. song 3. Sad, Melancholy place. The thick growne briar, And prickled haw-thorne, woven all entire, Together clunge, and barr'd the gladsome light From any entrance, itting only night. All overgrowne with mosse, as nature sate To entertain grief with a cloth of state. Bfore the doore to hinder Phoebus view, A shady box-tree grasped with a yeugh, As in the place behalfe they menac'd war Against the radiance of each sparkling star. A place as wofull as my verse, A stage made for some wofull Tragedy. Where none do tread, Except the ghosts of the disturbed dead. Where the trees answer to the sighing aire. A charnel house All cover'd ore with dead mens ratling bones: With reekie shanks, and yellow chaplesse sculls. A gloomy vale Wrapt with unpleasant shades of yeugh, And cypresse sprung from Lovers grave, On which the croaking raven with other birds Of night do sit, and hollow their sad accents. Such as may fitly sympathize with mourning. A murmuing brook of wronged virgins tears.
A bed of mosse hered from vaults, and charnel houses, where e dead inhabit. An uncouth cell, ere brooding darknesse spreads his jealous wings, d the night raven sings. Detested vaile, trees though summer, yet forlone and lean, come with mosse, and balefull missiltoe: e never shines the sun, here nothing breeds, lesse the nightly owe, or fal raven. thousand feinds, a thousand hissing snakes, thousand swelling toads, as many urchins, ich make make such fearful and confused cries; any mortall body hearing it, ould strait fall , or else dye presently. , Grove, Cave. Darke. Silent, Plague. growes the time, nor with her wonted chear, Or usual dressing oh the spring appear. o cleansing gale of Zephyr mooves the aire, hile rising foggs obscure the welkin faire. ithout his showers contagios Auster blowes, d painted summer no kind fruit bestowes. or does the sun as yet inflam'd with ire, nd down that wholsome and prolifick fire, e us'd to do, but beams of mortal heat, nd from the bosome of; the twins as great Combustion kindles here, as if he then on the Nemean Lyons back had been, ithin the farthest easterne lands from whence hy breakes, breaks forth the fal pestilence, s if with rising Titan it begun, nd follow'd thence the moion of the sun, o Europe then doth hot contagin flie, ing through every part of Italy. Death apace, his pale chariot sides through all the land; o age nor sex escape his vengefull hand, oung men in prime of all their strength are stck, nd yeild, the sucking in ant wht he took om nature, soons summoned to rep om those soft limbes untimely lees away.
The new-come soul, before it can be growne Acquainted with the tender mansion. The aged man, not because aged goes, But only cause he had a life to loose, The mourning grave becomes a marriage bed, To brauteous maides preposterously dead. One father wailes his son, another all His houshold carries in one funeral. And for so many debts one mourning serves, If one be left to mourne, no care preserves, Nor antidote can save from this disease, Their greatest hope is but to die in peace. For oft the fiety sicknesse did invade Reasons coole seat, and there prevailing made A strange distraction, worse than losse of breath, For which their friends wisht as a cure, their death, The face oft burn'd, no moisture had the eye, Nor could by tears expresse their misery, Some while their dearest friends they do intombe, Before that pious office done become Themselves a funeral, death makes him to be, An herse, that came a mourning obsequie, Nor doth this venemous contagion, Worke the destruction of mankind alone, The sheep and catel perish, as if growne On earth quite uselesse, since the men are gone, Wastly the lawnes, the fields of tillage now Ae desolae, while the forsaken plow, Nor men, nor cattel scarce can exercise, Te oxe in midst of all his labour dies, And leaves behind his mourning fellow now Dismist from toyle, and service of the plow, Who takes no comfort now in shady woods, In flowry meadowes, or clear Chrystal floods, That destiny allots for him, remains Although at rest, the warlick horse disdaines The pleasant streames, and sick forgetteth quite His food, and th'honour of a race or fight, Even roads and vipers die. acquainted growne With venome far more mortal than thier owne. Doggs, oxen, sheepe, and savage beasts first die, No birds can from the swift infection lie.
d swains amazed see their oxen shrinke ath the yoke and in the furtowes sinke, e fleecie flock with anguish faintly beat, t fall their wool and pine away with heate, generous horse that from the race of late, n'd with honour, now degenerates indfull of the glory of his prize, nes at his manger and there deedlesse dies, e bore forgets his rage, swift feet now faile he Hart, no bears the horned heard assaile, l languish, woods, fields, paths no longer bare, fil'd with carkasses, that stench the aire, h neither dogges, nor greedy fowle (how much be admired) nor hoary wolves would touch, raves the plague amongst our country swains, w in our large and populous city raignes, first their bowels broyle with fervour stretcht symptomes, rednesse, hot wind hardly fecht. Their furr'd tongues swel, their dry jaws gasp for breath, d with the aire inhale a swifter death, ane could endure or coverture, or bed, on the stones their panting bodies spread. old stones could no waye mitigte that hear, they beneath those burning burthens sweat, one cure attempt; the sterne disease invades The heartlesse Leech, nor Art her authour aides The near ally'd, whose care the sick attends, themselves, and dye before their friends. f remedy, they see no hope at all only in approaching funeral. Thee sisters speedy hands cannot suffice or breaking threads hath ty'd the destinies. ly tians skill himselfe doth still engage. Unto the hallow'd ground, The owling widow hugh she lov'd him dear, dar not follow, her dead husbands biear. V. May's Edward 3. lib 4. V. Seneca's Tragedies Oedipus, Act. 1. Planets v. Stars. The swimming Islands of the heavens. The wandering lampes. The rolling seaven. , Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.
The wandering spangles of the skie. The floating stars. Please. Nothing can strike the roving fancy more. Nothing presents delight In suller measure. Satisfie a curious desire. Correspondent to the wish Tickling the wanton fancy. Such joy it gives, as when soft pleasure warmes Joves melig bosome swath'd in Venus armes. Pleiades. The seven Atlantick Nymphes. Sterope's bright heard. Atlas bright daughters Whose rising bring The wealthy pleasures of the painted spring. Pleione's issue. The watry powers, Whose rising melts the clouds to dropping showers. Plow. To rend the gleabe with crooked plough To cheveron the ground in ridged hills. The plowshare rip his mothers wombe To give the aged seed a living tombe. To lance earths bunchy back. Earth furrows up her brow and stormes to fele The cutting gashes of the wounding steele. Ploughman V. Swaines VVhose hands have made a vow. And sworne alleageance to the peacefull plow. That with his plow Doth give the earth a new, but forrow'd brow, That as he tuggs along, Sweetens his labour with some tural song, That to his merry teame, VVhistles his passions. Pluto. v. Hell. The king of shades. Th' infernal King. VVho rules the tripple worlds inferiour part. The nights sad king. Black prince of Acheron. VVho Geryon, and Ttyus bound VVith sable river, doth surround, A stream on which each man must saile From royal scepter to the flaile. Hells black monarch. Proserpines sad mate.
C grim son in law. King of Erebu. Infernal Jupiter. Adamantine king. Ses black son. That rules the grizly land, That keeps the wide door'd house. Poesie. The language of the sphears and angells. Speaking picture. Poets. Great Genius of brave verse. Orpheus learned race. Great sons o Phoebus, whose lips are wont To drench their coral in the font Of forkt Parnassus; you that be The sons of Phaebus, and can flee On wings of fancy to display The flaggs of high invention. The inspired traine. That search for purling springs, Which from the ribs of old Parnassus flow, On whom Mlpomene with mild aspect, Doth all her favour at his birth reflct, Soft quires. Princes of numbers, That commit at once incest with nine sisters. The darling of the Delian Deity. Sacred Bards. The Muses fairest lighs. The leaned shades. Great soules of numbers. Wits general tribe; Heirs to Apollo's ever verdant tree. Dear sons of memory Whose vocal notes tun'd to Apollo's lyre, The Syrens and the Muses did admire. The Nymphs to him their gems and coral sent, And did with swans and nightingales present. Whilst larel sprigs anothers head shall crowne, Thou the whole grove maist challenge as thy owne. Cities for Homer strove, Muses for thee. VVhose victorious rime Revenge their masters death, and conquer time. Could Virgil hear his lofty strain, He would condemne his works to fire again. VVhose learned pen is dpt in Castalie. The willowes and the hasel copses green, VVere often seen Fanning their joyous leaves to his soft laies, On whom from their high tower, The Gods celestial divine raptures power.
The Muses preists, writ in the Muses rolles. The thread-bare tribe. Apolo's broode. The learned Chorus, The laurete crue, That on the horses spring do use to bowse, And sleep upon Parnassus forked browes, Whose images the clasping twine Of ivie girdles. Great herald of the Muses. That in accents bing. The Gods breasts down, and breath them as thy sing. That tast the dwes of Hippocrene. Great hei of fam. Fill'd with Phbean fire, Worthy to be crown'd with a wreath of stars. Delphick Quire. Rch pregnant fancies. Parnassus brood. Those that hear Phaebus sing, Bathing their naked limbs in Tuspian springs. The graduates in the threadbare mystery. The vertue of the twiforkt hill Inspires the avisht fancy, and doth fill The veins with Pegasean fire. The learned authors of immortal straines. Whom mighty numbers do inspire. That sit in shadow of Apollo's tree. At every close their language meet, In sentences of suble feet. Poetaster. Betattered rimers. Ivie poets. Fustian poets. Frippery poets. Reteiners to the Muses. Whose workes are but a greater blot. A widemouth'd poet, tht speaks nothing but bladders and bumbast. Half-codled poets. The Muses haberdashers. The common scriblers of the times. The Muses pedlas. The paper blurrers of the times, Whose highst praise it is to trot in rime. The needy poetasters of the age. The sneaking tibe tha wite and drink by fit, As they can steal or borro coyne or wit. Their brainly all in notes. Lord how they'd looke! If they should chance to loose their table booke. Their baies like Ive cannot mount at all, But by some neighbouring tree, or joyning wall, Who poing on, their spungie brain still squeeze, Neglect the cream, and only save the lees.
pping their flying quill, they clip fames wing, Hescon a puddle not a spring, t are and sour their faces, nay to ven ir bains, they eat their fingers excrement, d scratch their heads as if they were about, it wit so hidebound is, to scratch it out, That for every jest they bring, danger must their buttons or bandstring. t takes such pains to make a verse, t at the birth of each he twists his face, if he drew a tooth, he blots and writes, en looks as pale, as some that go to fight, nts sometimes an hour one rime to get, h the whole kennel of the Alphabet. ius, Maevius, paltry poets, hose wit is but a tavern timpany, shavings and the chips of poetry, Unbak'd poetry, ch as the dablers of the time contrive, hose invention comes like bird-lime from freez, ll brains and all out. per pedlars. Jaded wits. Murderers of paper. he dgs of wit. His verse runs like the tap, and invention as the barrell ebs and flows at the mer∣y of the spiggot. he presse is his mint, which stamps him now and en a six pence. is rses like his cloaths, miserable cento's and ches. Earls Char. 45. Pope. reat Admiral of the Romane sea. omes Arch-flamin. That wears the triple crown. omes speaking Scripture. ers proud successour. Poor. v. Beggar. tunes dwarf, prest with the yoke of wringing poverty, man of narrow fate. Shallow, lank fortune. n under unthrifty Planets. Crusht fortunes, Of having no store of any thing but want, lean revenues. age in a plain frame, One whose fortune is out at heels, out at elbows, ke on the wheel of fortune. ortunes shoe-soal, next to beast. Gods
Whose presented akednesse outfaceth, The winds and all the persecution of the Skie, That eas the coated onion and the salt, Poorer than Irus. Earls Char. 67. Porcupine. That carries on his back an host of Pkes, Brisled with bodkins, arm'd with awls and darts. Like the Stymphalides. On whose fide doth grow Both string and shafts, the quiver and the bow, We armed see With nothing but her own Artilerie, Who seeks no forraign aid with her all go, She to her self is quiver, dart, and bow. Pox. Unwomanly disease, Which plows up flesh and blood, And leaves such prints of beauty if he come, As clouted shoon do upon floors of loome. That honey-combs of smoothest faces makes, And of two breast, two colanders, Love shot those darts And made those pits as graves to bury hearts. Poyson. The surfet of Echidna. Cerberus foam, Heca' banefull seeds; banefull weeds, Such as grim Cerberus when dragg'd from bell, By the Tyrinthian Heroe vomited, For Theseus such Medea did prepare. Echidna's gore. Such washt the fatall robe, Which Deinira sent to Hercules. The fierie venome deep into his marrow and scorch'd entrals creeps, Which quite drunk up all moisture that should flow Into his vital parts, his palate now And tongue is scortcht and dry, no sweat could go From his tir'd joynt, from eyes no tears could flow. Though he in midst of Tanais did lie, Padus or Rhodonus he would be drie. Worse than any comes From the fel aspects, foul infectious gummes,
Which doth breath, aths secret errand. What an hot summer's n my bosome, That all my bowels crumble up to dust, Bid winter come, d thrust his icie finger in my maw, Or let all rives take their course. Though my burnt veins, intreat the North, To make his bleak wnds kisse my parched lip, d breath me some cold comfort. v. Hot. Prayer. ous airs, pious orgies, pious orisons, ch was Deucailon, such was Pyrrha's prayer, To Themis drown'd in water and despair. To ear the trembling hands, Then to the stars his hands advancing cryes, To throw the eyes to heaven, He vows to heaven addrest, With eyes and hands to heaven advanc'd he prayes, In accents cloath'd with reverence. With such a fervent grace, as if Devotion had borrowed her body to make of it self a most beautifull representation, with her eyes so lifted to the Skies, as if they had begun to flie thitherward, take their place amongst their fellow stars. To pay our pious debts to heaven. T pour out the eyes in a petition, The Churches banquet, angels, God breath in man returning to his birth, The soul in paraphrase, heart in pilgrimage. The Christian plummet sounding heaven and earth, Engine against the Almighty, sinners tower, versed thunder. Christs side-piercing spear, Gdnesse of the best, Heaven in ordinary, man well drest, The milkie way, the bird of paradise. Church bells beyond the stars heard, the souls blood. The land of spices, something understood, To invade gods ear with welcome importunity. Prayse. welling encomiums, elogiums. To strew praises in their way. o exalt unto the stars.
Prejudice. The Jaundies in the eyes of the soul. V. Forms of commending. Presently: Before the air had cool'd his hasty breath, Ere the quick motion of the eye, Sooner than thought could change its present object. Pride. The Magistrate of sins. That solemn vice of greatnesse. That rude vice Of ignorance and pitied greatnesse. Primrose. The first born issue of the eeming spring. The eldest children of the spring. The springs maidenhead. The firstlings of the winter year, The first appearing beauties of the Spring. The springs first Infants. Prison. Prisoner. The grave of the living, the worms that gnaw them, their ow thoughts, house of meager looks, and ill smells, where to be out a elboows is in fashion, and a great indecoum not to be thread bare▪ Where a doublet with buttons is more out of fashion than trun l breeches, wearing out their life like an old suit, the faster the bet∣ter, it teacheth much wisdome too late, and a man had better b a fool than come thither to learn it. So cursed a piece of land that the son is ashamed to be his fa∣thers heir in it. Banisht at home. The dunghill of the Law, upon which are thrown the ruines of the Genty, and the nasty heaps of decayed bankrupts. The University of poore Schollars, wherein three arts are chiefly studied to pray, to curse, and to write Letters. A place where all the inhabitants are close fellows, and fast friends, sure men, and such as you may know where to have them. A enement which none will take over their heads. Old men and young men there are much alike, for neither go far. Prodigies. v. Omens. Profound. v. Obscure Craving a mind, from earth and ignorance refin'd.
Promercheus. That fetht from heaven the living fire. That on the Scythian mountains snowie top Doth th'Eagle with his growing liver feede. Jpeus bold son that brought from heaven, The sparke of life from Phaebus chariot wheele, For which on Cucasus he chained lies, And with his heart the eagle satisfies. Shaper of man. Prophecie. Prophet. His brest Was by a prophecying rage possest. And the included God inflam'd his mind. To have an entheated breast. Enthusiastick. Gods interpreter. Toucht with adiviner fire, Sees long before, what others will admire Many years hence. Whose words are oracles. Whose soul receives a clear and holy light, Convey'd by the still visions of the night. Heavens familiars. Entrusted with heavens secrets. Gods sacred heralds. Inspired Soules. Sacred Bards. Proserpina. Bright Empresse of th'Elysian sdes. Ceres fair daughter. Queen of Erebus. The Lady of the infernal ghosts. Persephone. Te Stygian goddesse. Queen of Phlegethon. Pluto's sad wie. The sad fac'd Goddesse. Hecate. By Dis stollen from the plains of Scily. V. Ovid. Met am. lib. 5. Prosperity. That lolle on beds of roses. Flowing in a golden swim. ladulgent fortune smiles on him. Finding no want of any thing but want. Living in fortunes sunshine. A prosperous gale anns courteous wind upon the swelling sayle. V. Happy. Fortunate. Protesilaus. By instinct of fate The first that fell in Greece and Toy's debate. That boldly leapt on the Sygaeum shore. Deceiv'd by sly Ulysses, who before,
Appear'd to have trod upon the fatal strand, But lighted on his shield first thrown to land. Proeus. Gray prophet of the sea. T juggling sea-god, Blew scalie god that in the sea doth range, Who now a man, a lion now appears, Now a fell boar, a serpents shape now beas. A bull with threatning horns now seems to , Now like a stone, now like a spreading tree, And sometime like a gentle river flows. Sometimes like fire, averse to water shows. Proud. v. Ambitious. Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in his eyes, Misprising what they look on, Which as he goes Kics at the earth with a disdainfull scorn, Whose brow is cloath'd with proud disdain, Upon whose surly brow state sits in scorn, As if he meant to tear from heaven their stars, If it be true the giants ere made war against heaven, he had been a fit ensign-bearer of that company, whose thoughts fly a pitch beyond ambition. Looking at himself through a multiplying glasse, and the bigger end of the prospective, He that rides on a winged horse to tell him of his good parts shall come too late, to bring him stale news of what he knew too well before. One of tolerable parts, but intollerable pide. Pre. v. Bright Pure as the brightest beams sho from the sun At his full heigh. Pyrates. That play the parts of tempests in the sea, That with the sea contend to try, Whether can shew a greater cruelty, Sea-vermin, Seas water rats. That act the part of empests in the seas. Pythgoas. The first that called himself Philosopher.
mian wiseman. That held the transmigration of the soul, first his Funies five years silence taught. V. Ovid. Met. Lib. 5. Q. Quake. v. Tremble. s doth the trembling earth Beat by the sea Gods rident, sudden fear unnerves his quaking thighs Phaeton, when from the arched Skie, earth at such a distance he did eye, Europ quake, when on the back, the lov'd bull she rode. A death resembling cold g'd her heart and vitall heat controll'd, yblis quak'd when her repulse she heard, ees unknitting, one another strook, yrtha entred to her fathers bed, joynts pale horrour shook. sudden fear his bloudlesse veins did fill, in a shivering extaie I stood, knees are mutual anvils, as the guilty prisoner fearfull stand, ding his fatal Theta in the brows him who both his life and death commands, from his mouth he the sad sentence knows. iking through her limbs she finds, e leaves saluted by the winds. Queen. partner of the throne. Princely consort of the royall bed, She from whose blessed wombs increase, es present joy, and future ages peace. Quiver. arrows ivory garden. Clattering hinges. painted prison of the darts. archers Magazine. The Nymphs bright armoury.
R. Rage. v. Anger. Fury. HIgh wrought blood. Her face deck'd anger, anger deck'd her face. So ran distracted Hecuba along the streets of Troy. Rain. The muffled heavens dissolve themselves in tears. Sad issue of the weeping air. The watry issue of the falling cloud, Big bellied clouds delivered of their load, Empty their watry womb water still'd in heavens great Limbec The liquid silver from the welkin gushing. The straining of the squeezed clods, spungie cloud. The falling rain. That gives green Liveries to the Plains, The spungie clouds grown big with water, Throw their conception on the worlds Theater, Down from the hills the rained waters roar, Whilst every leaf drops to augment their store. The moist conception of big-bellied clouds; The hand of heaven the spungie cloud doth strain, And throws into earths lap a shower of rain, When the assembling clouds do meet and pour Their long provided sury in one showr, Congealed vapours melt again Extenuated into drops of rain. Now Cynthia her full horns Doth spend in showers. The South winds tear The showring clouds. Jove unlocks the clouds. The issue of the melting cloud. That which the clouds congealed bowells keep. The waty burden of the groaning clouds, Jove opes the showry flood-gates of the Skies, Jove opes the Cataracts of heaven. The heavens set ope their sluces. Disgorging of the drunken cloud. The justling winds shatter the brittle sides
Of spungie clouds and make them weepe. That in a gentle shower, Drop tears into the bosome of the flowers. The lost clouds power o the sea, their uselesse shower. Drenching showers, Which thickned aire from her black bosome poures. ad clouds with frequent tears thmselves impaire. Rainebow. v. Iris. So way clouds gilt by Apollo show The vast skie painted with the arched bow. The many-colour'd messenger that here oth disobey the wie of Jupiter, Who with her saron wings upon the flowers useth honey drops, refreshing showers, And with each end of her blew bow doth crowne The buskie acres, and the unshrub'd downe. The painted cloud which formes Thauantias bow. The painted bow, which so adoes the skies, And in one arch doh boast so many dies. Thaumantes painted daughter. Heavens ename'd Arras. That sacrament which doth the earth assure A second deluge it shall nere endure. In whse many colou'd hue, Here we see wtchet deepned with a blew, There a darke tawny with a purple mixt, ealow and flame, with streaks of greene betwixt, A bloody stream into a blushing run, And ends still with the colour which begun; Drawing the deeper to a lighter staine, inging the lightest to the dee'st again, With such rare art ach mingles with his fellow, The blew with watchet, green and red with yellow; ike to the changes which we daily see bout the doves neck with vriey; Where none can say (though he it strict attends) Here one begins and there another ends. Ram. Which whilst they butting stand; aise from their feet, a cloud of numeous san, The captain of the leecie traine;
Which back retire, To come again with her more impetuous ire. Rash. A man too quick for himself. Whose actions put a leg still before his judgement, and out run it. Every hot fancy or passion is the signal that sets him for∣ward, and his reason comes still in the reare. One that hath brain enough, but not patience to disgest a businesse, and stay the leasure of a second thought. All deliberation is to him a kind of sloth, and freezing of action. He does not enter, but throwes himselfe upon althings. A man whom fortune must go against much to make him happy, for if he suffer'd his owne way he is un∣done. Raven. Which seldome boading good, Croake their black auguies from some dark wood: Read. To travel over with the eyes. Her eyes these lines acquainted with her mind. Had scarcely made. Reap. The sweatfull harvester with bubling brow, Doth reap the interest of his painful plow. The reaper panting both with heat and pain, With crooked raisor shaves the tufted plain. The industious harvester. Scoched all day with his own scalding hear, Shaves with keene syth the glory and delight Of motly meadowes. Reason. Queen Regent of the sences. The soules eye. The Queen that rules the commonalty of passion. Rebellion. Atheisme against Gods on earth. Open treason. None his ensignes bore, But who the badge of some knowne mischief wore. Recreation. A second creation, when wearinesse hath almost annihi∣lated our spirits. The soules breathing, almost stfled with continual busi∣nesse.
Labours sauce: Labours allay. Delightful physick. Waking sleepe. Pleasing cordial. Red. Purple, crimson, scarlet, damaske, blushing, Stammel, vermillion, coral, cherry, ruby, Red as the blushing rose. Reede. Dancing unto the musick of the wind. The winds gugaw, bable. Dnglng fringes of the banks. Report. v, Fame. When same the wide-mouth'd daughter of the earth: Newly disburdned of her plumed birth. From all her turrets did her wings display, And pearched in the ears of &c. Earths black babling daughter, she that hears, And vents alike both truth and forgeries. ering often cheper than she buyes. She spread the pinions of her nimble wigs, Advanc't her trumpet, and away she springs. And fills the whispering aire, which soon pssst The spacious borders of th' enquiring east. Fame sounds with brazen breath. Fame fills With his report, one of her listening quiss. The lavish breath of fame Gives language to her trumpet, and proclaimes. That lying gossip. Blatant beast. That Mushrom growing without roote. Creeps through a village, goes through a towne, runs through a city, flies though a country, the farther the ster. Encreasing snowball. Resurrection. When the loud trumpe all wake the sleeping ashes from the dumpe Of their sad urne, that blessed day wherein The glorified metamorp of'd skin Shall circumplexe and terminate that fresh And new refined substance of the flsh; And the transparent flsh discharg'd from groans, And pains, shall hang upon new polish bones, When as the body shall reentertain, The cleansed soul, and never part again.
When as the soul shall by a new indenture, Possess her new built house, come down and enter, When as the body and the soul shall plight Inviolable faith, a ever fight. When death shall be exil'd, and damn'd to dwell Whin her proper and true center, hell. Revenge. Now had Rhamnusian Nemesis possst In all her blackest formes the vengefull brest Of fierce &c. Burnt with revengefull fury. Then fury rounded in his eare revenge, Pleasing revenge tickle th' enraged blood. Thasty revenge for satisfaction pants. Rhetorick. v. Eloquence. Rich. Fortunes greedy minion. Fortunes gyant, Whose store meets his desires, and outgoes his wish. Finding no want of any thing but want. Both the Indies spread their laps to him, Into whose chest the yellow Tagus flowes, Whilst his plate-fleet in bright Pctolus rowes. The Hesprian Orchard's his. All Peru in a chest, As if both Indies did supply his store. As if he did in bright Pactolus swim, Or Tagus yellow waves did water him. As if he had God Fortunatus purs, Or Amalthea's horne. That bears The wealth of worlds, the bowels of the East, And all the richest treasures of the West, The sands of Tgus, all Pctolus ore, With both the Indies. Spices snarcht from the Canary Isls The gumms of Egypt, or the Tyrian fleece, Did in his native purple, with what Greece. Colchos, Arabia or proud China yeilds, With all the metalls in Guiana's fields, The wealth of Babylon and Lydia. Wears speaking pockets. That command The storehouse of earths hid minerals. Cffers guilded with Ducates. Rich as Choesus, Crassus, Midas, Licinius, Achaemenes. That in his graner stores What hath been swept from fruitfull Lybian flores.
Wealthy as Attalus. Richer by far Than th' Arabs untoucht mines or Indies are. That swim in golden lard up that their chin. Is borne up by thefatnesse of the flood. A man of myriads. Wallowing in wealth. Whose spring tides of gold, many degrees transend his wish. Ride. v. Horse. He beats the ring, and cheeks the foamy jwes, As if, Centaure like, he had been one piece with his hors, was o more moved than one is with going on his own legg, and so commanded in effct his horse, as his own limbes, though he had both spurs and wand, they seemed rather markes of soveragnty than instruments of punishment. His hand and leg commanding without threatning, and rather remembring, than chastising, at least if sometimes he did, it was so ollen, as neither our eyes could dscerne it, nor the horse with any ding did complain on it, he ever going so just with his horse, either otthright, or turning, as if he borrowed the horses body, and nt him his mind. Kidiculous. v. Foole. Able to justifie excssive laughter. The fixed figure for the time of scone, To point his slow and mooving finger at, Enough to make a stoick forfeit his gravity. Enough to make Heraclitus burst into laughter. When the storck might honestly enough have broke the lawes of his philosophy, and lost his gravity without lightnesse. At which the Stoick might Chce a loud laughter, and yet not be light. A subjct fit to be the stoole of laughter. River. Whose gurgling stream frizadoed on the gravel. In wose soft streams, swns wash their silver wings, Fanning the bosome of th' enamoured Nymph. Which both held the eyes open with her zure streams, And yet sought to close them with the purling noise, It made upon the pibles it ran over, Making sweet musick with the enamel'd stones, And gives agentle kisse to every sedge, He overtaketh in his pilgrimage,
And so by many winding nookes he straies Wth willing sport to the wild Ocean, To whose gentle falls Melodious birds sing solemne madrigalls, Whose streams on purling pbbles murmure keepe, Which may invite and summon gentle sleepe; Where waves call waves, and glide along in rankes, And pratle to the water-edging banks, Her sad kings fishers tell their grieved tales, And fish enrich the brooke with silver scales. The Nimh came from the veines Of our fist mother having taken pains, In scouting of her channel all the way, From where she first began to leave the sea. Which writhes in knots, and gives a gowne of greene Unto the meadowes, and to play is seene, And drive the rushie mills that in his way The shepheards make. That come From the swelling Thetis wombe. The wanton river which the meadow dresses, With silver collar of her turning Esses, SS. Upon whose best, which trembled as it ran, Rode th faire downie silver-coated swan, And on the banks each cypresse bow'd his head To heare the swan sing her owne Epicede. The Oceans sons, That to their old es strict embraces run, Hasting to pay their tribute to the sea, Like mortal life to meet eernity. The silver tide, That wantons up and downe, and gently slide In soft Meanders, through the fluid veins Of the green-breasted, stream-embroider'd plains. A Christal river on her bosom slid, And passing seem'd, in sullen muttering chid. The aged flood came bravely from his cell, Down from his head hung dangling silver tresses, From every haire, a Chrystal stream doth fall, And when he sweats, a roaring stream there passes. His wrinkled brow a pearly dew distilleth. His sea-green eyes with endlesse tears still filleth, The Nymphs with dancing round about him tript,
Against the sun their a zure mantle shone From wave to wave the wanton fairies skip, The sheals of fish here swim, there leap anon. rke how she court the banks, whilest they, As amorously their armes display, Pembrace and clip her silver waves, See how she stroakes their sides, and craves An entrance there, which they deny, Whereat she frownes, threatning to flie Home to her stream, and gins to swim Backwards, but from the channells brim, Smiling returnes into the creeke, With thousand dimples in her cheeke. Chiding the stones that stop his speedy course. With unusual pride, And dimpled cheeks rolles sleeping to the tide, Rides in his chaiot. A thousand waies In wanding trcks the wanton river plaies, And with his amorous folding armes doth seeme Pembrace small ands, whirst his silver stream, From several channels of it selfe doth meet, And oft it selfe with wanton kisses greet. Whose silver streams do dally With the smooth bosome of the wanton sands, Whose winding current parts the neighbouring lands. And often washeth the bloved sides Of her delightfull banks with loving tides. All along the flower-enamell'd vales, The silver stream on pearly sands doth glide, And to the meadowes telling wanton tales, Her chystal limbes lasciviouly in pride, As ravished with the enamoured gales, With often turnings casts from side to side, As loth she were the sweet soyl to forsake. It an upon so fine and delicate ground, as one could nor easily judge whether the river did more wash the gravell, or the gravell urifie the river, running not forth right, but continually win∣ding, as if the lowest streams could returne to their spring, or the river had a delight to play with it selfe. The banks on either side seming armes of the loving earth, that faine would embrace it, and the river a wanton Nimph, which still would slip from it, either
side of the banke being fringed, with most beautifull trees, whic resisted the suns darts from over much piercing the natural col¦nesse of the river; amongst the rest, a goodly cypresse, who bow¦ing the faire head over the water, it seemed she lookt into it, an dressed her green locks by that running river. Lacing the fuitfull valley. Dirce, Amymone, Pyrene, Tanais, Caicus, Ismenus, Peneus, Erymanthus, Lycormas, Xanthus, Meander, Melas, Eurotas, Euphrates, Orontes, Phasis, Ister, Thermodon, Ganges, Alpheus, Sperchius, Tagus, Pactolus, Danubius, Cayster, Hebrus, Strymon, Rhene, Seine, Rhodanus, Po, Tyber, Thames, Tent, Humber, Avon▪ Twede. Rock. The rock repelled the Oceans pride, By his owne poysure firmely fortified. Against whose naked breast, The surges tilt a rock. Whose chalkie sides the beating waves do mock, An huge aspiring rock neighbouring the skies, Whose surly brow imperiously commands The sea his bounds that at his proud feet lye; And spurnes the waves that in rebellious bands Assault his empire and against him rise. Under whose craggie government, &c. Whose hanging head ore-looks th'unfathom'd deep. The Oceans surly neighbour. The waters with an amorous noyse Leap up and down, and in an amorous dance, Kisse his dull cheeks that scorns their fond embraces, And darts them back, till they with terrour scatter'd, Drop down again in tear. That beetles ore his brow into the sea. VVhose high and bending head Looks fearfully on the confined deepe. On which the sea oft throwes his angry waves, And foames to see the stones neglect his braves. The vaulty rock Breaks the proud billowes which her large sides knock. So have I seen a sea confronting clisse, VVhose surly sides have felt the angry whiffe
Of the cold North, and with disdainfull pride, y his own poisure firmly fortifi'd, stle the saucy winds and spurn away he crowching waves that underneath him lay, Till the revengefull sea now discontent, And weary of his craggy government, gins to undermine him, and doth ride, Sometimes at tilt against his chalkie side, Spitting her frothy venome which doth flaw is tagged limbs and like a cancker gnaw His vaultie ribs untill she work away. The rubbish that on his foundation lay, At last when angry fates his ruine call, And the rejoycing waves expect his fall, Clapping their envious hands, he storms to see Their malice feasted in his miserie, He bows himself and with a stately frown, And a noise worthy of his bulk falls down, And with a dying valour shatters all Hs jeeting foes, that laugh'd to see him fall. Rose. The summers breath their masked buds discloseth. On whose soft cheek a deep Vermillion dwells, With such a purple light it shone, As if it had been made of fire, And spreading would have flam'd anon, Which in their early pride, But half reveal, and half their beauties hide, Which opes her ruby bosome to the sun, And drops away, when he is from her gone. Venus sacred flower, whose beauty is as short as sweet, The sading flower, which with the suns uprise Her bud unfolds, and in the evening dies. Run v. Hast. Swift. Short breath from panting bosomes scorching flew, To throw the feet, With hasty steps they run. More swift than Mirh or Daphne in her chace, The fet carce touch the ground.
S. To sacrifice. HOnoring the Deities with the large expence Of blood, free gifts and heaps of Frankincense. The blood Gush from the oxen in a purple flood, And on the altar spout their streams of gore, Who praying new born flames with incense fed, And bowls of wine on marble altars shed, They holy fumes present to all the gods, The entrals laid On burning altars, to the gods convey'd An acceptable smell, The sacred flames Sbean gums devour, And blaze on altars cround about with flowers, Scaling the Welkin with their sacred fumes, The crooked horned rams now at the shrine, With their perfumes do cloud the sun, With thankfull incense all the altars smoak, The altars do with joyfull incense flame, To feast the altars with blood and odours, With prayer to mix perfumes, And sacred fires, with incense feeding pray. Congested incense burns, And chearfully with horns gilt offerings pay Religious vows. On the altars pour the wine. Girt with tapers hol shine. With fire he feeds the altars, richly feasts The gods with gifts, whole Hecatombs of beasts, Their horns with ribbonds wreath'd imbrew the ground, The ax doth beat the ox, his curled crown, With Wine being poured betwixt his horns falls down An hunded bulls with garlands crown'd Are pid to Jove, The sacrificed beasts the ground shall beat, And bright Religious fires the welkin hea, Send gratefull incense up in pious smoke
We will choke The fires with weighty lumps f richer gums, d send perfum'd clouds to the heavenly seats a continued thankfulnesse, h smoakie Hecatombs, and mealy showers, They pay their rites unto the sared powers. Sad. A sadnesse dwells upon the cheek, sting the tender Roses growing there, a confused conflict of the mind, ars drowning sighs, and sighs drying up tears, olumes of sad despair writ in his looks e legible. Sorrow looks ou at his eyes, Those eyes look through their tears. v. Sorrowfull. Sappho. he Lesbian Lyrick. The Lyrick maid. The Lesbian tenth Muse addd to the nine. The Lesbian Poetesse. That doted on the Lesbian boy. Satyrs. The troop that frolick on the lawns, That load their shaggie sides with bells, Which as they shall strike a time, their dance do make a chime, rions shaggie footed race, The goat-hair'd gods, that love the grassie mountains. The wanton gods, the lecherous deities, Rurall Dities. Countrey gods. Satyricall. v. Critick. ttering snaks in every line. That shoot malicious noise and vomit gall, Full of gall, hurlink and wit As mad men stones, not caring who they hit. Lycambean stile. To sail. North winds invite to seas, and prosperous gales ng in their shrouds, they hast to trim their sails, And fell with Sicilie on the sixth day, To brest the surge, to slice the swelling sea, They hoise their sails, And plow the foaming brine with prosperous gales, Neptunes moist wildernesse they plow, To ride upon the broak back of the sea.
To beat the oamie ocean with their oars, Riding in triumph on the brisled wave, They sat and plied Their polisht oars, and did in curls divide Their white head waters. The foamie seas beneath their labour shook. Ransack the seas, The gently fanning blasts made dandling play Upon our sails.—Our oars we ply. Slice up the foam, sweep the blew waves on high, And with our nimble oars, We brush the flood, and glide off from the shores. The waves do shreek to feel Their slicing Oars, and at each cut they roar, Belching their angry foam upon the shore, Slicing their wavie way. To urrow up the briny sea, The keel begins t' obey Her gentlerudder, leaves her quiet key Divides the streams, and without wind or oar, She eas'ly glides along the moving shore, Her swelling canvas gives her nimbler motion, Otstrips the tide, and hies her to the Ocean, Forth to the deep she lancheth and outbraves The prouder billows, rides upon the waves, She plies that course, her compasse hath enjoyn'd her, And soon hath left the lessen'd land behind her, That guide their winged wains On th' azure forehead of the liquid plains, Which when the proud bark feels, Scorns the salt waves should kiss her urrowing keel And trickt in all her flag, her self she braves, Capring for joy upon the silver waves, The frolick wind playes with the pregnant sail, And courts her linnen sides. To sweep Neptunes smooth face, and cleaves the yielding deep The Sails conceive and grow big bellied with the wanton winds, To plow the bosome of the floods. Full Sails. Wing his successefull course. The crooked vessell chases the drenching seas. He bids them lanch the ship withot delay, And fit her tacklings. The Seamen call aboard in double ranks, Reduce their oars uprising from the banks.
h equal strokes.—from shore, he Vessel drives, and thence her object bore, er following eyes the flying ship pursue. Sails. anvas wings, flags, pennons, banners, streamers, linne gs, linnen sides, swelling canvas. Sailour. A pitch'd piece of reason, calkt and tackled, and onely studied to pute with tempests. wisdome is the coldest part about him, still pointing towards North, in a storm it is disputable, whether the noise be more or the elements, and whether first will leave of scolding. coach-men, Sea-waggoners, that drive their winged wains O th' azure forehead of the liquid plains. Schollar. v. Learned. Student. Scylla. Chaybdis urly opposite, which in her covered caves, With sharp fang'd mouth, sucks the ships from the waves. ward a man, downward a comely maid, Whose lower parts like an huge Whale are made, All of wolves wombs, and Dolphins tails are said To be engenderd. Sea. The wavie angry, curled deep. The curled Main. The bubling ball. The swelling Main-Brine. Deep. The boyling gulf, The floating globe, Masse, The boundlesse moat, The rivers Rendesvous. The brinie ball, Neptunes Royall seat, most Skie. Thetis large cells. Thetis large way bowers. The hnging thin, sad lippery water-ball. Neptunes watry front, the watry camp, plain. The silver brine. The brinie regions. Lower heavens. The glassie deep, watry wildernesse. The place where salt and fresh waves meet. Nereus wavie round. Th' insulting Main. The rging, aged, deep, toyling Main. Neptunes soft skies. Fishie skies, fishie world. The huge whalt-bearing lake. Fishie Monarchy. Nepenes confluence. The worlds vast moat. Neptunes liquid soil. The watry floor. Neptunes vast, watry Regiment. Mother of Rivers.
That bound which to the worlds extreamest ends, Endlesse her self, her liquid arms extends. The stable of horse-fishes, the stall of kine-fishes, the stie of ho fishes, the kennell of dog-fishes, the Ape of the land. The watry desart, solitude. Inconstant deep. Which with spread arms stands ready for the tender Of daily tribute, which the swoln floods render Into her Chequer, whence as worthy kings, She helps the wants of thousand lesser springs. The briny lake. Tempestuous desart, The rugged element, That spatious cistern whence doth flow Refreshing streams, rivers and springs That fill earths dugs the hills, Thetis glassie bower. Where in Corall groves. The wanton mermaids sporting with their loves. Blue Thetis boundlesse arms. Neptunes liquid belt, Thetis wet Empire. The floating kingdoms. The weltring waves, oozy channel The kingdome of the watry Jupiter, Where thousand dangers sleep In the smooth bosome of the deep, Paved with native Jewels, The watry kingdome whose ambitious head Spits in the face of heaven, The beachie girdle of the Ocean. Secret. v. Silent. Uncrannied, free from the bold intrusion of an eye, Unwitness'd imbosom'd, cloystered, enchested, boxed, wound up in mind, sequestered, lurking, Free from all mens superintendency. Sectary. Meteor of flame and zeal. Ignis fatuus of Religion. Religious Alchymist. Diseased Apocrypha, corrupting the Tx, A piece of ill directed zeal. Affecting singularity, beyond the Churches unity. Sences. The cinque ports of the soul. The understandings portalls. Temptations in Cinque port, shops of vanity.
e subtle Organs of delight. September. The time wherein just Libra weighs he hours and makes the nights equall with dayes, When the year resigns. he glorious sun up to the watry signs, Which through the clouds looks on the earth in scorn, The little birds, yet to salute the morn, on the naked branches set their foot, The leaves now lying on the mossie root, d there a seely chirping do they keep, though they fain would sing, yet fain would weep, raising fair summer that too soon is gone, Or sad for winters too fast coming on. Sepulcher. v. Grave. Tomb. Serpent. v. Snake. A glittering comb, his slppery head invests, stead of eyes two sparkling rubies swell. ps up the air, and sinks into himself, He hurls His wanton body into numerous curls, Yreath'd into scaliy folds, bound up in simie toists, Hiffing within their knotty curls, Gathered in folds shoots out his forked tongue. Swindging the scaly horrour of his folded tail. Serving man. Cast behind his Master, as his sword or cloak. For his head he hath little use of it, but to keep it bare. He hath wit enough if he can comprehend common sense and a encher. One that keeeps the best company, and is none of it, For he knows all the Gentlemen his master knows. Sexton. The last of tailours, that ne'r takes measure, whilst there is hope of a new suit. That gives deceased bones their quiet mansion. Deaths bed maker. Conversing with the graves. And Charnel house. Shade. The native Screen. The leavie coverture, A place to shun The scorching fury of the sun.
An awfull shade, The meeting boughs exiling Phoebus made, Natures green network. Leavie Canopie, Which fortifies the visage from the sun, The bushie tops do bid the sun forbear, And checks, the proud beams that would enter there, Whose leaves still muttering, as the air doth breath With the sweet bubling of the Spring beneath, Doth rock the senses whilst the small birds sing, Lulled asleep with gentle murmuring, Where lightfoot Fairies sport at prison baies. The pleasing lining of the trees. Where the trees so lovingly enterlaced one another, that th could resist the strongest violence of eye-sight. Where beauty might beguile the sun from looking on her. A rampier against the sunns rage, Where the shadows seem to woe The love-sick passenger to come and sit, And view the beauties nature strows on it Where every tree Embrac'd his neighbour to an unity. Nature in leavie Nework arbours made, Sconce from the suns distempers. A bulwark from the suns invasion, The shelter from the suns offnsive rage, The leavie vales which Phoebus beams keep out. Shadows. The fleeting shades which run In full extent unto the setting sun. Those coy brown nymphs which flie if you pursue, Which if you flie make hast to follow you. Shame. v. Blush. His fair cheeks covered with pale sheets of shame. Sheep. That gentle beast Whose udders swell with Nectar and invest Exposed man with their soft wooll and are Alive than dead more profitable far. The curled bleating flocks, Whose fleecy loins bear thri∣ving burdens. The shepherds fleecy train, bleating charge. The prey lambs with bleating oratory Crave the dams comfort. Fleecy numbers.
eecie troopes. The shepheards skipping traine. Shepherd. v. Swain. In secure silence wears away his time. And better is acquainted with himselfe, Than others, who so great a stranger is o city ollies, that he knowes them not. e sits all day upon some mossie hill, His rural throne, arm'd with his hook; his scepter, A flowry garland is his country crowne: The gentle lambs and sheepe his loyal subjects. Which every year pay him their fleecy tribute. Thus in an humble statelinss and majesty, e tunes his pipes, the woods best melody. en that want but little, because they desire not much. Wih whose face the sun hath had too much familiarity. That on his scrannel oaten pipe doth sing His rural ditties. Amorous Shepheards and gamesome. Dorilus. Philiides. Celandine. Col clout. Doridon. Thenot. Pies. Nlkin. Duddy. Hobbin. Alexis, Sylvan. Teddy. Rowly. Perigot. Willy. Philocel. Cleon. Theylis. Strephon. Claius. Roger. Rocket, Rollo. Remond. Dover. ptol. Thomalin. Jockin. Philos. Cladon. Palinode. Wernock. Shepheardesses. Kala. Phillis. Amarillis. Chloe. Phloe. Marina. Marinda. Fda. Rosaline. Walla. Pastorella. Sylvia. Dorinda. Melina. Lycoris. Galataea. Laurinda. Lalage. Neaera. Shining. v. Bright. Beming, sparkling, glittering, spangling, radian. Brighter than the vestal fire. ike Tgus, or Pactolus golden sand. Throwing, darting a piercing beam. Whose luster far excells All that is found in mines, or fishes shells. Ship. Hulke, pinnace, gally, carrack, barke, fregate.
Floating bowers, castles. VVooden horses. Sa-coaches, sea-wagons. Floating houses. Linnen winged sea fowle. VVater-treaders. The winged pine. Bridging the Ocean. The birds with woven wings. Skarfed barke. Sea horse. The billowes tennis ball. The waves shuttlecocks. Thin-rib'd bark. Reeling vessell. Crooked vessell. VVinged castles of the sea. Bottome. Skiffe. Cray. Scallop. Flying towers Bring home to us, and make both Indies ours. Shipwrack. v. Tempest. The ship as it were tearing out her own bowells, to feed the sea greedinesse, leaving nothing within it, but despaire of safety, an expectation of a loathsome end. Some sate upon the poupe, weeping and wailing till the sea swal¦lowed them, some more able to abide death, than fear of death, c their own throats, to prevent drowning, some prayed, & there wan¦ted not them which cursed, as if the heavens could not be more an¦gry, than they were. A monstrous cry begotten of many voices was able to affect with a fear, a mind that had not prevented it by reason. The precious wares give more, And makes addition unto Neptunes store, Spice all the waters, and enrobe The roaring billowes with the rustling silke. The Tyrian goods Enrich the wealth-devouring floods. v. Sea fight. Shoote. To send an arrow from the wanging bow. To discharge the bow. A winged flight, The archer drew, which flew as swift as sight. He took the arrow by the nock, and to his bended brest, The oxie sinew close he drew, even till the pile did rest Upon the bosome of the bow, his strength an orb did make. To make are sigh with darts. The nock stands to the string, so strong she drew, That both the horne ends meete. The feather'd wood they from their bowes let fly. To set on wing a dart. And in his side he lodg'd the dart. The arrow takes a sad rest in his heart. The barbed head shot through his breast.
Shoulder. Where neck and brest their native closure take. Shout. v. Noyse. Loud. To tear the aire. A voice that purchas'd every ear. Loud exclamatons cleave the yeilding aire. Sibyll. Aged Prophetesse. Cumaean mad. Euboan virgin. Amphrisian Prophetesse. Persian, Libyan, Delphian, Cumaean, Erythraean, Samian, Hel espontan, Tyburtine, Albunean, Cuman. That on loose leaves left writ their prophesies. The frantick prophetesse. Who in her deep steep rock doth prophecie, And all her notes and names in leaves she writes, And what in leaves she written leaves, indites meeter modules, and locks in her cave, And there untoucht they lye in order brave, But if the door being ope the wind displace them, And out of door the whilking puffs do chase them. She never cares to catch them in again. Sicknesse. v. Feaver. The moth of nature. The fighting humours. The harmony of nature out of rune. The bodies tempest, earthquake. The dissolution of the bodies league. That wholly puts a man into the hands of the phisitian. That makes all the chaires and stooles in his chamber ke phisick. Deaths harbenger. Sighs. To Sigh. The legates, interpreters, issue, daughters, off spring, mbassadours, &c. of imbosom'd griefs. That sad warme aire. Sobs every accent part, And sighs ascend from her astonisht heart. His burning sighs inflame the aire. Sad sounds, aires, breath. Those killing accents. A deep-fetcht breath, which seem'd of power to ki The breast that held it. Ters and sighs, The stormes and showers of nature. From the hearts center hal'd. That gently whispering wind.
My thoughts imprison'd in my secret woes, Wih flamy breaths doth issue oft in sound. As if the heart wedg'd with a sigh, Would rend in twain. The burning breath. Those sad disturbers of the quiet aire. Dube language of the soul opprest. Teaching the angry wind to sigh. Grinding a groane. Cloying the bosome of the idle aire. Her sighs in stormes arise, And ill aboding tears burst from her eyes. Signe. Bdge, token, livery, cognisence, argument, witnesse, Testimony, symptome, symbol, crisis, signal, remonstrance, Probate, hierogliphick, embleme, character. Silent. Silence. The grave of thoughts. As silent as the house of sleepe. No crested fowles shrill crowing here awake The chearful morne, no barking sentinel Here guards, nor geese, who wakefull dogs excell, Beasts tame or savage, no wind-shaken boughs, Nor strife of jarring tongues with noises rouse Secured ease No door here on their creeking hinges jard As still as midnight. Clamour grew dumbe, unheard was shepheards tongue, And silence girt the woods, no warbling tongue Talkt to the Eccho. Sayres broke their dance, And all the upper world lay in a trance. Silent as death. As the shade, where chaos lay before the winds were made Only the curled streams soft chidings kept, And litle gales that from the green leafe swept, Dy summers dust in fearfull whispering stird, As loath to waken any singing bird. To be Silent. Silence ties up her tongue. Now silence lockt the organs of her voice. To lock his thoughts within his silent breast. The secrets of nature. Have not a greater gift of silence. Give it an understanding but no tongue. My tongue shall never take knowledge of a word Delivered to me in nature of your trust.
I am Harpocrates. When you discover secrets to him you hide them. Concealed in eternal night. My tongue shall be close prisoner to my heart. To silence she her lips confin'd. To seale the lips. Silk-wormes. Those little weavers that their tske so ply, And work so fast on leaves of mulbery, The Persian wormes, whose weary summer toyles So long hath been the rusling Courtiers spoiles. Sing. Song. v. Sweet sounding. Sweetly breake the yelding aire. With her voice embalmes the aire. Sonnets, laies, roundelaies, carrolls, canzons, warbles, Descants, stanzos, well-divided breath. Harmonious aire. Skin. The bodies alabaster sheath. The native shit. The bodies oldest clothes. Silenus. The foster father to the God of wine. Who when he reele from his dull asse, the cries Of Satyrs eccho, rise up Faher rise. Who weakly hangs upon his tardy asse. That ald bigge bellied Satyr. That with a reed holds up his eling limbs. Sisyphus. That rolls in vain The stone which rolled up, falls down again. Sleepe. The peace of minds from whose abodes. Care ever flies, restoring the decay Of toyle-tyr'd limbes to labour burthening day. The siken fumes hat do the sences bind, The rescue from all cares, In soft slumbers binding every sence. Pains asiest salve, which doth fulfil, Al offices of death except to kill. The drowsie publican Robbing a man of half that litle span, Nature hath lent his life. Sergeant of the night. Whose charge it is, those breaches to repaire,
Which nature takes from sorrow, toyle and care, Rest to the limbes, and quiet she confers. To troubled minds. She which of fumes, and humid vapours made, Ascending doth the seat of sence invade. That steeps The weary temples in the dew of sleepe. Thou charme to all our cares, that art Of humane life the better part. Wing'd issue of a peacefull mother, Of rigid death the elder brother, Father of dreams, of life the port. Daies sweet repose, and nights consort. To kings and vaslals equal free, The labour tyr'd refresht by thee. Who man, whom death doth terrifie, Inu'st continually to die. Astraeas drowsie son. Deaths leiger-embassadour, drowsie brother, The sleepy counterfeit of death. That shorter death. The king of rest. Arrester of the sence, Morpheus bayliffe; The ape of death. Drowsie image of cold death. Natures opium. Care charmer sleepe, son of the sable night. Brother to death in silent darknesse born. Whom night breeds in her gloomy wombe, Now borne, with ease and silence feeds. That strikes all with her horny wand. Glad in cotton, shod in wooll. Rubbing his eyes with poppy, and doth presse. The yellow night shade and blew gladiols juyce, Wherewith his sleep-swol'n heavy eyes he glewes. Drawn by dull bears within a noyselesse coach. The sweet refresher of the wearied sence. As quiet as the dead of night. The respit of the vitall spirits, The certain knot of peace, The baiting place of wit, the balme of wo. The poor mans wealth, the prisoners release. Th'ndifferent judge between the high and low. Soft nuse of nature. Dull God that on the high and giddy mast
Seales up the the ship-boyes eyes, and rocks his brain. In cradle of the rude imperious surge. He that knits up the ravell'd sleave of are. The death of each dayes life. Sore labours bath. Balme of hurt minds. Great natures second course. Chief nourisher in lifes feast. Peacefull sleepe, All care and anguish doth in Lethe steepe. When sleep his poppy on the temples shds. The humble God that dwells In cottages and smoaky cells, Hates gilded roofes and beds of doune, And though he fears no princes frowne. Flies from the circle of a crowne. The powerfull God, That his leaden charming rod, Dipt in the Lethean lake Over wakefull temples shakes. Great son of night within an ebon cell, Where softest slumbers do delight to dwell, Binding the scattered sence with silver wand. Amid whose ebon cave a downy bed High mounted stands, with sable coverings spread, Where lies the lazie God dissolv'd in rest, Fantastick dreams which various formes exprest, About him lay. v. Sand. Ovid Met. lib. 11. p. 382. To sleepe. Now Morpheus leden key lockt up the sence. Morpheus the drowsie sergeant of the night Laid on his eyes his sable mace. Sleepe bathes himself within her eyes. More proud than Phaebus of his throne of gold, Is the soft God, those softer limbes to hold, Nor would exchange wth Jove to hide the skie In darkening clouds, the power to close her eye. Te God of sleepe Whiskes a wet branch of soporiferous dew, Whose stigin strength he ore his eye browes threw, Which soon his rolling eyes with sleepe ore-laid, The leaden God sits on his eyes. Sweet sleepe did then the weary limbs compose. Then heavy sleepe the eye-lids did surprize, And drew those fringed curtains of the eyes.
Struck by sleepes horny wand new dipt in Leth, In drowsie flight, Morpheus with lazie wings doth on them light. Sleepe, Their drowsie lids doth in his Lethe steepe, To pay their drowsie vowes at Mopheus shrine. As if he had drunk Lethe, and made even, with heaven. The dew of sleepe descends And locks up her faire lights in pleasing slumbers. To recommend themselves to deaths elder brother. Swallowing sleepe with open mouth, making such a noise with all, as none could lay the stealing of a nap to her charge. Making their pillowes weak props of overladen hea▪ Sleepe begins with heavy wings To hatch upon the eyes. As fastly lockt up in sleep, as guillesse labour, when it lies starkly in the travellers bones. On their eyes daeth-counterfeiting sleepe, With leaden leggs and baty wings doth creepe, Sleepe gives a soft attachment to the sences. Sleep drawes the fringed curtains of her eyes. Sleep payes her nightly tribue to her eyes. Whose eyes are stroakt with Hermes drowsie rod. Sleep opprest his heavy eyes. The eyes vaile to the God of sleepe. Sleepe enchains the sences. Nighs heavy charmes Had l'd his eyes. Sleep with brooding wings, Sft slumbers on his heavy eyelids flings. Night shed her poppy on her eyes. The night had clo'd her fieled yelids. Sleepe creeps upon her yeilding sences. They give the rest of night to soft repose. Charm'd, lull'd with sot slepe. They drown the night in slepe. Death doth embrace him in his leaden arme▪ The meeting eyelids conclude a peaceful league. In sleepes wherein the last trumpe scarce could wake The guiltlesse, dead, clay. Soft sleepe doth close His guarded eyes, with undisturb'd repose.
Sleep through his power diffus'd. is golden humour. orpheus had wav'd his Mace o' both his eyes. Soft-finger'd sleep, silken codage binds the weary sense, Sleep surfets on their weary eyelids. Till sleep The juncture of their joynts and nerves did sleep his dissolving humour, And all that all his labour could comprise, Quickly concluded in his closed eyes With drowsie charms, ind sleep bewitcheth thee into his arms, mbring in a melting rest. Slow. As the slow pac'd-Snail. The Tardy asse. A Totoise speed, a Spaniards stride, ke the musing Alderman. The plotting States-man, Slow as the river Tras. Moves with such speed, As prisoners to a Psalm, that cannot read. Smooth. As the polisht marble. As sleekest Parian stone. Soother than Chrystall ice. As smooth as oyl. As Monumental alabaster. Smooth as the stream, where none can say, He doth this drop to that prefer. Smooth as the Eunuchs cheek, chin, Such looks Jove wore, when in the shape of bull He did Europa court. Smooth as the face of waters first appear'd, tides began to strive, or winds were heard. Smooth as the brow of love. Snake. v. Serpent. Two gliding snakes extending, Their speckled breasts, and flamie main all bending Above the main their ugly odious ail, And backs with fearfull folds do wrigling trail, Their gogling eyes flashing forth blood and fire, Their hissing mouths, sharp tongues do stench expire. The scaly monster roling on the sand Inspatious windings.
The severall snakes that out of Lyba's flime Are bred, might all have been combin'd in him, Nor could Medusa's head had all the blood, In one place faln produce a greater brood, Whose speckled belly with more spots is deckt, Than various Theban Marble takes. Ennamell'd skin, Which hissing from his den appears Amazing both at once, the eyes, and ears. Fire from his threatning eyes, like lightning sho, And Stygian blasts exhal'd from his dire throat. Snow. In silver flakes an heavenly wooll doth fall. The feather'd rain. The hoarie heaps. The silver gray which shivering winter beas, The falling showers congeal'd by freezing winds▪ Cold down, that makes the fields look old, The drift wind shakes Black clouds in peces, pulling plumie flkes From their soft bosome, Jove in a silver shower. The watry fleece. Snow periwigs the hills. v. Winter. Socrates. He whom Apollo wises thought of men. Sophroniscus prudent son. The grave Philoopher. Whom the cold draught of hemlock forc'd to die. Plato's great master. The Masons learned son. Xenocrates great master. Instructor of the learned Xenophon, The patient husband of the scolding wife. Xantippes patient husband, Whose Copper image Athens did adore, Admiring dead, whom they contemn'd before, Who with convicting reasons did strike dumb (Instructed by his great Daemonium) All his opponents. The Pagan Martyr. Soft. As the childhood of the Morn. As the lust full bed, Soft as young down, Trim'd up and made for Queen Semiramis, To whose soft seisure The cygnets down is hash, and spirit of sence, Hard as the plowmans hand. Soft as the down of Svans. Have you felt the wool of Beaver, Or the nap of velvet ever,
Or the down of thistles? These it doth excell as much the softnesse of the touch, As they do urchins bristles. ft as the airie plumes of thistly down, oft as Euganean wooll. Soft as the Ladies hand, oft as the velvet hand of sleep, s bath'd in the soft streams of Salmacis, Of a yielding pliancy. Soft as the pliant wax. ofter far than tufts of unwrought silk. ofter than Beavers skins, Which when the hands do touch, they find from thence, ch pleasure they contract, and lose all snce. Soft as the balmie dew. Soft as the hand of love. Soft as the godded swan, or Venus dove, Soft as the down of Phoenix. As cotton from the Indian tree, Or prety silkworms huswifer. Sorrowfull. v. Sad. Melancholy. Setting forth in a darkned countenance, a dolefull copie of his oughts, and that he was going to speak, Carrying in his countenance the evident marks of a sorrowfull eak mind supported by a weak body. An heart full of unquiet motions. king a piteous war with her fai hair, With such vehemency of passion, as if his heart would climb up to his mouth to take his tongues office, As if he were but the coffin to carry himself to his sepulcher▪ Sasoning his words with sighs. A face wherein there lies Clusters of clouds, which no calm ever clears, Whose every gesture accused her of sorrow, Inecting each thing she looks upon so with her griefs, that all hings about her seem'd to mourn to see her. In whose eyes sad discontentment sits. Bearing a plurisie of griefs about her. A living coffin to her cares. In silent sorrow drown'd. Excesse of sorrow scarce gives way To the relief of words. Anchor'd down with cares in seas of woe. A living coarse.
Suffering sorrow to dresse her self in her beauty. Shunning all comfort, she seem'd to have no delight, but in king her self the picture of misery. Bearing sorrows triumph in her heart. His senses carried to his mind no delight from any of th objects. In the book of beauty nothing to be read but sorrow. Sitting in such a gvn over manner, one would have though lence, solitarinesse, and melancholy were come under the ens of mishap to conquer delight, and drive him from his naturall  of beauty. Giving grief a free dominion. A face whose skin's in sorrow dy'd. With a countenance witnessing she had before hand passed thro so many sorrows, that she had no new to look for. Sorrow melts down his lead into my boyling breast. An heart as full of sorrow as the sea of sand, Sits her down on the bare earth, As her grief and sorrow were so great, That no supporter but the huge firm earth Could hold it up. Grieving no lesse than did that Theban wife To see brave Hectors body robb'd of life. Drawn by Theflalin hoses, Whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandring stars and makes them stand. As wonder wounded hearers, So Priam griev'd, when e too late did find The Grecian horse with armed men was lin'd. Sad Agamemnon had such eyes, When he beheld his daughters sacrifice. Distilling even th' Elixar, and the spirit of tears, And mov'd without a soul, So swift Achilles lookt, then when he sent His lov'd Briseis to Alcides tent. Deep sorrow sat upon his eyes, drown'd in discontent, Whose heavy heart the height of sorrow crown'd, Tears were but barren shadows to expresse The substance of his grief. Vail'd with sorrows wing. A heart as high in sorrow as ere creature wore, And with a voice that floods from rocks might borrow, That feels a tempest in his soul, the soul eclipsed▪
With a face as sad, grief could paint, wanting no art to borrow, edlesse help to counterfeit a sorrow. ing beneath the tyranny of grief. ds still, some pitying God him to marble. aetontiades, Niobe. Orpheus for Euridice, Andromache Hector and Astianax. Egeus for Theseus supposed dead, for her sons. Daedalus for Icarus, Progne. gone leading her blind father Oedipus. Autonoe for Actaeon, compared with this sorrow, deserve not the names of grief. V. Miserable. Tears. Sighs. Weep. Souldier. v. Valiant. That layes his head, aps on some rude turf, and sadly feels nights cold damps wrapt in a sheet of steel, Whose ears cted in the language of the drum, chase brave employments with their naked sword, march all day in massie steel, the armed throng, glory vying child of fame, from deep wounds sucks forth an honour'd name, thinks no purchase worth the stile of good, what is sold for sweat, and seal'd with blood, for a point, a blast of empty breath, aunted gazeth in the face of death. perfume their heads with dust and sweat, Though his sword went faster than eye sight could follow it, yet own judgement went still before it. Wars dustie honours that . by the genius of the camp. husbandman of valour, his sword the plough, ming with more prints in his body, than pence in his pocket. t walks in clouds of powder and blue mists, ead of wealthy bracelets on their wrists, ear chain shot—That in the field, at a breach hath taken on his shield, darts than Romane Sceva, that hath spent ny a cold December in no tent, such as earth and heaven make, that hath been, cept in iron plates, not long time seen, n whose body may be plainly told
More wounds than his lank purse doth alms deeds hold, The twigs of the rod of war, wherewith God scourgeth a want nation into repennce. When the sword is once drawn, he wisheth all scabbards cut in pie Soul. The heavenly spark, the better part of man. Of a fair lodging, brigher guest. The bodies inmate. The rationall and nobler part. The bodies Tenant, The best first part, the Monarch of the breast. The bodies best perfume. Souls departed. Spirits which have thrown away All their envious weights of clay, And by their glorious troops supply The glorious winged Hierarchy, Whom their great Creators sight, Inebriateth with delight. Spirits imparadised. Freed souls. Uncaged spirits, Flidge souls, that leave their shells. Uncased, unorganed, unsheathed souls. Ghosts repurified, unhoused, uncloathed souls, That have put on the glistering Pall Of immortality. That clothed be In garments wove of immortality. Divorced, infranchised, refined souls, That have put off their gowns of clay. Harsh sound. The bells in pestilence ne'r made like sound, The croaking raven, or the engendring toad. The mandrakes shriek not half so harsh. Killing accents. No harsher news did ever strike the ear. Heart-wounding news. Sinking the soul with the report. Where truth is worse than any forgeri, Where we may curse the mouth that doth not lie, Where fame goes off with a most sad report, Oh wound us not with sad a tale, for bear To presse our grief too much, we cannot hear, This all at once, such heavy news as these Must gently sink into us by degrees, Let us digest This first, then try our patience with the rest, Practise us first in lighter griefs that we
grow at last strong for this Tragedy, it in whispers and uncertainty, some new unauthoriz'd bzze without ason or warrant to confirme our doubt. South. Where Auster vailes, d heavens with clouds, and earth with showers assails. Sew. The cunningest painter might have learn'd of her needle, which h so pretty a manner made his careere to and fro through the h, as if the needle would have been loth to have gone from such istresse, but that it hoped to returne thitherward very quickly a∣in, the cloth looking with many eyes upon her, and lovingly em∣acing the wounds she gave it, the shears were also at hand to be∣d the silk that was grown too short. And if at any time she  it to her mouth to bite it off, it seemed that where she had been g making roses with her hands, she would in an instant make ses with hr lips, the lillies seemed rather to have whitenesse of e hand that made them, than the matter they were made of, and  they grew there by the suns of her eyes, refreshed by that aire hich an unawares sigh might bestow upon them. Like artificial Gods creating flowers. Sparke. s fire his strength being wasted, hides his head n the white ashes sleeping, though not dead. Who ever saw a dying sparke of fire, ke in warme embers, till some breath inspire orc't revival, how obscure it lies, And beeing blowne, glimmers awhile and dies. eping in his ashy bed. Speake. To breake the yeilding aire. His tongue begun his taske. His lip he thus unlocks, unseal. o present the aire with. To salue the ears. To cloath the thoughts in airy garments. To forme a speech, to shape a voice. And wings gave to this speech. To digest his thoughts in words. As if a God did break The aire amongst us, and vouhsafe to speak.
He straight divides The portals of his lips, and thus repl'd, His lips such accents break. To unseal the red virgin wax. To break the bars of silence. Open once more those rosie twins. Opning the cherrie of her lips. The conceptions of the mind discharge their birth. Spider. Industrious Spinster. That weaves the waving tiffany, That on high rafters layes her thin spun net To catch the buzzing flie, That weaves her own Lawn hanging canopie, Ingenious spinner, twining with her feet What from her bowels comes. Spinne. To twine the carded wooll, The carded wooll, With following twine their busie fingers pull, And with soft murmures draw the teased wool, From their small spindles twerl the twining thread. A Spring or Fountain. Chrystall riverlings purl on the pebbles, The lesser daughters of the sea. Edged with poplar trees, Where Chrystal springs do wooe the meeker ground, And makes the pebbles dance unto their sound, The Chrystall spring Got newly from the earths imprisoning. The Chrystall current of the plains, The water turns in many a ring, As if it staid to hear the wood quire sing, The water so transparent, pure, and clear, That had the self enamour'd boy gaz'd here, So fatally deceiv'd he had not been, While he the bottome, not his face had seen. A Chrystall rill, Gently diburd'ned from a swelling hill, Which from the green side of a flowry bank, Eat down a channell, where the wood nymphs drank. That smileth as she floats, And in her face so many dimples show, And often skips, as it did dancing go,
Whose fretful waves beating against the hill all the bottom with soft mutterings fill. The murmuring brooke That wantons through the meadowes. Sweet springs in which a thousand nimphes did play. oft rumbling brooks that gentle slumber drew. By whose falls, elodious birds sing madrigalls. babling spring that trips upon the stones, nd with soft murmure rocks the sence asleepe. The Christal Nymph. The flowing deity. bubling spring with streams as clear as glasse▪ n chiding by, enclos'd with matted grasse. A Chrystal spring, Presenting the impartial shapes of things. The spring. regnant with flowers, now the spring Like a new bride appears, hose feather'd musick only bring Caresses, and no requiem sing. On the departed year, The earth like some rich wanton heire, Whose parents conffind lie, orgets it once lookt pale and bare, And doth for vanities prepare, As if spring nere would die. hen temperate breath, es to the glad fields truitful birth. h' enamour'd spring soft blushs blowes. Upon the roses cheeks. The south inspires, Life in the spring, and gathers into quires The scater'd nightingales. Now th' astonisht spring, ears in the aire the feather'd people sing. The easie spring icht with odours, wantons on the wing f th' Easterne wind. ir Mistresse of the earth with garlands crown'd, out her flowry wealth. The trees put on their leavy hats, Then glad earth gives new liveries to the trees, When sturdy Aries ushers in the spring.
Now each creature joyes the other Passing happy dayes and houres, One bird reports unto another, In the fall of silver showers, Whilst the earth our common mother, Hath her bosome deckt with flowers, Whilst the greatest tofch of heaven, Wth bright raies warmes Flora's lap, Making nights and daies both even, Chearing plants with fresher sap. When proud pyde April drest in all his trim, Hth put a spirit of youth in every thing, That heavy Saturn laught and leapt with him. The summers front. The foyzen of the year, When nightingales do hush the silent night, When nightingales do sing the sun asleepe. And a wild musick burthens every bough. The winter-starved earth, By nature teeming labours towards her birth, Still as the day upon the dark world creepes, One blossome forth after another peepes, Till the small flower, whose roote is now unbound, Gets from the frosty prison of the ground, Spreading the leaves unto the powerful noone. When gardens prankt with rosie buds do spring, Whilst Flora dallies in her flowry bed, Whom Zephyr courts, and sweetly to her sings, Wping away the tears Aurora shed. When vernal blasts and gentle windsappear, Such as blow flowers, and through the glad boughs sing Many soft welcomes to the lusty spring. In verdant weeds fresh earth the spring arraies Flora with tapestry checkers the fields. The trees and earths embroyderer, Phaebus in his yearly race, Pranketh in perfumed robes, All these goodly nether globes. Paving the ground with flowers. The morning of the year. From the awakened rootes the buds do grow, The fragrant spring with flowry chaplets crown'd
he year in its sucking infancy bloome▪ hen flowers paint the gaudy fields. When balmy showers ck the soft best of fragrant meads with flowers. The quickening spring, hen birds are tutoring their young to sing. The jocund spring, herein the leaves, to birds sweet caroling, nce with the wind. When May cks up the filds in holidayes array, hen well▪appareled April on the heele Of limping Winter teads. he ram that bore fair Hellen once away, made the dark night equal to the day. ir coloured flowers in the meadowes spring, nd now the birds their untaught notes do sing. The seed which long time in the earth hath laid▪ s now shot forth into a tender blade. The birds salute the growing spring. The jolly tide, hen the earth in all her pride, And the lady of the May imm'd up in her best array, ath invited all the swains, With the lasses of the plains. The warme sun doth thaw the earth, And gives the fleet-wing' swallow birth▪ aking within the hollow tree, The cuckoe and the humble bee. The flowry prime, hen lavish nature in her best attire Cloathes the gay spring, the season of desire. The time that the Lady Flora useth to cloath our gran∣me earth with a new livery, diapred with vaious flow∣s, and checquer'd with all delightful objects. A season no lesse proper, than propitious to lovers. Now winters gone▪ the earth hath lost er snow white robes, and now no more the fost, Candies the grasse, or casts an ice cream Upon the silver lake, and chrystal stream. But the warme sun thawes the benummed earth And makes it tender▪ gives a sacred birth
To the dead swallow, wakes in hollow trees, The drowsie cuckoe, and the humble Bee. Now do a quire of chirping minstrels bring In tiumph to the world the youthful spring, The vallies, hills, and woods in rich array, Welcome the coming of the long'd for May. The smiling spring Danceth on Zephyres rosie wing; And with a pregnant flowry birth Doth retresh the teeming earth. The gound doth smile at the springs flowry birch, The spring crown'd with the glories of the earth, Rides on the heavenly ram. When Zephy's muskie kisses breath, Fresh honour on the smiling trees. When the earth begins to put on her new apparrel a∣gainst the approach of her lover, and the sun running an even course, became an equal arbiter betwixt night and day. VVhen every thing doth make a gleesome boast. The birds chant melody on every bush. The snake lies olled in the chearful sun, The green leaves quiver with the fanning wind. And make a checkerd shadow on the ground. Now snowes are quite dissolv'd, fiesh grasse we see, To cloath the fields and leaves on every tree, Earth angeth hiew, the swelling waters sinke, And with soft current slide within their brinke. Aglai naked dares upon the ground, VVith Nimphes, and her bright isters dance a round. South winds the spring attending still, Balme the seas, and sayles do fill. Now rost makes not the meadowes hoare, Not winters snow swollen rivers ror. The lucklesse bird her nest doth frame, B wayling ys and the shame, of Cecrops house. The shepherds of rich flocks rehearse, And to their pipes chant rural verse, Seeking his godhead to appease, VVhom flocks and hills Arcadian please. The long'd for sun, Peepes through the hornes of the celestial ram.
The winter to the spring be queaths The rule of time, and mild Favonius breaths, A quire of swans to that sweet musick sing, The aire resounds the motion of their wing. VVhen over plains they fly in ordered rankes, To sport themselves upon Caysters banks. VVhilst every bushie vaile, nd grove, and hill, sounds of the nightingale, The sun breaks up earths rugged chains, herein rude winter bound her veins, The naked trees get crisped heads, And colour'd coats the roughest meads, And they with growing glory rise, That lately fetter'd were with ice. Stagge. v. Swift. Upon the bink Of some smooth stream about to drinke, With shame remembers that he fled (Surveying thre his armed head.) The scorned dogs, resolves to try The combate next, but if their cry ades again his trembling eare, e strait resumes his wonted fear, Leaves the untasted spring behind, nd wing'd with fear, out flies the wind. Whom fences long with held rom meadowes where the spring in glory raignes. ow having level'd those unpleasing chains, nd treading poudly ore the vanquisht flowers, in his hopes a thousand joyes devoures. The long-liv'd beasts. That bears th branched hornes. Whose life four times exceeds the cowes. The knaggy-horned beast. Stars. eavns sparkling fires. Heavens fiery sparks. angles of heavens canopies. The burnisht lamps. Those freckles in the beaueous face of heaven. The burning tapers of the skie. Heavens bright torches. The bright eyes of the firmament. eavens twinkling pride. Heavens golden studds. twinkling spangles of the firmament. The gilt nails in the wheele of heaven.
The heavens bright crescents. The powdered embroidery of heaven. eavens golden bosses, ingots, beads. Immortal synod of the glorious skie. The twinkling eyes That with disordered order gild the skies. The gilt studs of the firmament. The wandering armies of the skies, Which march above in blew gold tinsell'd lawne, Tilting at ours their many-pointed eyes, The common people of the skies. Heavens clear fires, Which with the moone succeede when day retires. The spangling light, That sparkle on the brow of shady night. The glorious wonders of the skies. Th'Almighties mystick characters. The powdering of heavens azure tapestry, The flaming letters of the book of heaven. The sparkling beauties of the night. Heavens shining pendants. Nights giudy jewels▪ The sparkling diamonds of the skie. The skies bright sentinels. The starry senate of the night. The parliamnt of stars. The pretty wonders of the skie. Nights rich expnsion. The golden issue of the skie. The skies enamelling. Annaling of the skies. Wel ordered Armies of the skies. Nights spangled host. The mos silver-rssd torch bearers. The servants to the humerous night. The glitering sparkes. Bight squadrors of the skies. Whose light undarkes The gloomy shdowes of the night. And in a silent story, Dclare the greatnsse of their makers glory. By ordered courses driven In golden coaches through the lists of heaven. Hesperus beauteous herd. The numerous train of spangled Nymphes. The silver spangles of the glorious skie. That hang upon the dusky cheekes of night As a rich jewel in an Aethiops eare, Those lampes of living fire to fixed motion bound.
The welkins silver-groats. Diana's starry nymphs. Those firy Oes that do engild the night. The floore of heaven Is thick in laid with pattens of rich gold. The blessed candles of the night. Heavens unnumbered sparks. The starry jewells of the skies. The night-borne creatures of the skie. Mysterious letters in heavens silver page. The meaner beauties of the night, Which poorely satisfie our eyes, More by the number, than the light, Like common people of the skies. The starry chains whose blazes play In knots of light along the milky way, That through their chrystal casements peepe. The litle drops of light, that in their orbes do glow. Which travel in their motion so, That we their names and courses know, And he that on their changes looks, Would think them govern'd by our books. Rich spanges that adorne the skies. Which though they shine for ever fixed there With light and influence relieve us here. A falling Star. As when a falling star falls from the skie, Or seems to fall to the deceived eye. A streaming star from heaven did nimbly glide, The melting stars, their sulphurous surfet shed. Flaming jelly. Blazing star. v. Comet. Stinke. Like old saturns socks. Such breathing Cadmus dragon threw In the infected aire. More loath'd than Lerna, or the Stygian lake, Whose consuming sent, Would poyson thoughts, although it had no vent To bing it forth. As Cerberean Avernus. As the oame of Cerberus. Stoick. Whose visages do cream,
And mantle like a standing pond. That do a wilful stillnesse entertain, Only to be drest in an opinion Of wisdome, gravity, profound conceit▪ That cruel sect which seeke to bereave us of one halfe of our selves in seeking to free us from all our passions, and affections; and instead of making a wise man have raised a statue. Delighting in long breath'd accents, which he prolates with such pauses that before he be at the period of a sen∣tence, a man may reach a second thought. Vineger aspect. Who all easie passion flies: The dry brained portick, whose Ahenian breast, Transcendinng passion, never was opprest With grief. Marble braines. Flint brested stoicks, they whose marble eyes, Contemne a wrinckle, and whose soules despise, To follow natures too affected fashion, Or travel in the regent walke of passion, Whose riged hearts disdain to shrinke at fears, Or play at fast and loose with smiles and tears. Stomach. The bodies kitchen. Natures cooke. Digestive fire. That greedy tyrant. Exacting Publican. That varies still his tribute with the day. v. Glutton. To Stone. To give at once both death and grave. To cush with an hard shower. Strange. A thing more strange, than on Niles slime the sun Ere bred, or all which into Noas arke came, A thing which would have posed Adam to name. Stranger than seven Antiquaries studies. Than Africks monsters, Guinas rarities. Stranger than strangers. To Study. Spends many a gray goose quill unto the handle, Buries within their sockets many a candle, Blots paper by the quire, and dries up inke, As Xerxes army did whole tivers drinke.
Sets his brain on the Strappado, ling the brain into invention, With more discoursing in his head, an Jove when Pallas issued from his brain, o call a Councell of his wits. entering the squeezed brain. Rub the brain. o ask the brain, to beat the brain. he brain in labour, travail. he working soul projecteth thousand wayes. Student. he that hath sworn allegeance to his book, watcheth Moons and grows more pale than they, aborious as Cleanthes, whose breath as well, s writings of the oyl and candle smell. Styx. Which through obscure abodes preads his dull streams, the terrours of the gods. The sacred streams by which the gods do swear, Which oath who break are for an hundred years, xiled heaven, and not invited come o Joves high table, nor of nectar drink. Whose waters are of so cold a temperature, That no hing but a mules hoof can endure. Summer. Sol leaving now the gentle twinnes With Cancer and thirst panting Leo Innes What time the groves are clad in green, The field drest all in flowers, And that the sleck hai'd nymphs are seen To seek them summer bowers, The verdant Meads do dresse themselves in green. Sols Palfries having past the twinnes, Are posting hotly towards Cancers innes. Wheat ears the brows of naked summer crown, When fields in flowry mantles are array'd. Dayes burning eye, lakes Cancers crooked clawes in servour sie. The lusty youth of year. The noontie of the year, When all things vigorous appear. The Summers day. Perfects the Embryon blossomes on each spray, The dogstar rains his maladies.
And robs the high and air-invading alps Of all their winter suits and snowie salps, When cherry trees inticing burdens bear, Green plush the meadows wears, lora at her own beauty wondring stands, When Flora layes forth all her pride, When the sun gallops in his full career On the back of the scalding Crab. Now bright Andromeda's refulgent Sire Shews to the world under his hidden fire, Now Procyon, and the raging Lion swayes, And Phoebus brings forth dry and parched dayes. The shepherd tir'd with his faint flock doth hie, To find cool shades, or troubled current nigh And rough Sylvanus thickets, while the shore Becalmed stands from seas tumultuous roar, The furious dog stars heat Upon the parched corn long since hath beat With its fierce scalding influence, and made The beasts to seek the spreading elms cool shade, Now Cepheus plainly shews his hidden fires. The dog star now his furious heat displayes The lion spreads his raging ire, The sun brings parched dayes. The shepherd now his sickly flocks restores, With shades and ivers, and the thickets finds Of rough Sylvanus silent shores, Are free from playing winds, When Cancers star encreaseth light, And lenghens ou the dayes. Summer now of the dog-star boasts, Of angry constellations honour'd most, From whose strong heat Egyptians still begun To mark the turning circle of the sun, When as the sun mouts on the lions back, When Syrius doth first appear, The time which with a full hand to us brings, All that was promis'd by the hopefull spring, The labouring sun hath wrought his track Up to the top of lofty Cancers back. The Icie Ocean cracks, the frozen pole, Thaws with the heat of the celetial coal.
Sun. Phoebus, Sol, Hyperion. The Father of the light. The dayes illustrious eye. The lights bright chariot. The worlds great lamp. Taper. The dayes great eye, The burning stone of Anaxagoras. Dayes bright flame. Sols blazing throne. Heavens Christmas candle. The never dying lamp, taper, torch, candle. Titans golden ring. Great Titans carre. The good old Planet. The worlds surveyor Generall, That Prince of light that takes his morning crown, And in the Evening layes his glory dow. Phoebus burning throne. The dayes bright champion Sols orient shrine. Greatest torch of heaven, The bright surveyor of the heavens, That each day goes his golden pilgrimage, Whose flaming hair Doth every day gild either Hemisphere. Dayes gloious Prince, the father of the year. Fountain of light, heavens richest gem. Heavens golden headed Charioter. Lord of heat viceroy of nature, King of lights, By whose male force is all we have begor. Te curl'd pae waggoner of heaven. mperor of light, King of Planets, Soveraign of the stars, Monarch of dayes and years. The Persian Deity. Father of winged time. The worlds surveying lamp, Which with his hot steeds guides the winged day. He who alone can tame Those Steeds which from their nostrils vomit flame. The tardie year I measue, I am he, Who see all objects, and by whom all see, Dyes lofty going flame. The King of flames, Monarch of light, great Hyperions golden throne▪ That opes the pleasant sweets of May. That runs the gloious round. Unweaied traveller, The Soveraign of heavens golden fires, That hth his forehead circled in With many clear beams, and shrp pointed ray, And drives the puple chariot of the day. Who in his flamng chariot rides, And with perpetuall motion time divides, Great King of day, from whose far darting eye, Night wandring stars with fainting splendour fl.
The worlds bright eye, Careering daily once about the skie. The lights bright chariot. Heavens burning Axle-tree. The prince of planets with his locks of amber. The glorious governour of day. The bold fac' lampe. Phaebe's bright brother. The illustrious soveraigne of the day. That hath the guidance of the day. Instated all alone, Amidst the planets in his burning throne, Distributeth abroad with large extent, Light both unto the stars and firmament. Whose heat and light, Makes creatures warme and bright. Great glory of the skie, That gilds the streams with heavenly Alchimy. That all the world doth lighten with his ray. Phe Pythian knight. Illustrious officer of day. That strips the mountains of their snowie shirts, The Ocean of light. The Persians shining God. Phaebus bright chariot by Vulcan wrought, The beam, and axle tree of massie gold, On silver spokes, the golden fellies roll'd, Rich gems, and chrysolites the harnesse deckt, Which Phaebus beams with equall light reflect. That eye of day, That in twelve measur'd houres doth survey The moity of earth. Natures lusty Paramour. Who by the clear extension of his light, Chaseth from earth the impious sons of night, Whose beams the various formes of things display, Like multitude of figures wrought in clay. Sun Rising. v. Morning. Sun Set. v. Evening. Surgeon. That hath some businesse about the building of the litle house of man, whereof nature is as it were the tiler, and he the plaisterer. His gains are very ill got, for he lives by the hurts of the com∣mon wealth. He differs from a physitian, as a sore doth fom a disease. He is a reasonable cleanly man, considering the scabs he hath to deal with.
Swains. v. Shepherds. That barb the fields and to their merry teams Thistle their passions. ched all day with his own scalding heat, ved with keen sith the glory and delight. motley meadows, ich with their whistling hearten on their team, All whose theam of their oxen, and their team. e piping lads that sound their sprightly strains, hilst they their fleecy troops drive o'r the plains. Swannes. VVhich claps her silver wings, d in the sedges of Meander sings, VVhich many a day. n the streams swelling breast hath had its play. d on the panting billows bravely rides, hilst Countrey lasses walking on the sides, mire her beauty, and with clapping hands, ould force her leave the streams and tread the sands, hat adde harmonious pleasures to the streams, ffling their plumes, come gliding on the Lake. The air resounds the motions of their wings, hen over plains they flie in ordered ranks o sport themselves upon Caysters banks. at on Caysters bank when death doth come, h sweetly sing an Epicedium, That sadly sings mournfull dirge to the silver springs, hich carelesse of his song glide sleeping by, ithout one murmure of kind Elegi. Swear. if they meant t' unstar the sphears with oaths, at oft names God in oaths, and onely then. VVhose best of Rhetorick is a full mouth'd oath with a grace∣e grace. V. Forms of protesting. Sweat. ds of sweat stand moist upon thy brow, ke bubbles in a late disturbed stream, e watry bubbles of the painfull▪ brow, face froth'd o'r with sweat, ir bosomes bath'd and steep'd in frothy sweat▪
Drown'd in the native deluge of his sweat, The sweat came gushing out from every pore, And on his head a standing mist he wore, Springs of sweat, did in his forehead rise. Sweat embalms His varnisht forehead. Sweet smelling. Zephyrus breaths not with a sweetergale, Through groves of Sycamore. A breath compos'd of odours. Sweet as Panchaian fumes, As the sweet sweat of tosesin a Still, Or that which from chas'd Musk cats pores doth tril. As th' Almighty balm, of th' early east. Like the Sabaean airs, which as they fly, Perfume with sweets the morning Majesty. Like to the Phenix nest, when she her wain Of age repairs, and sows her self again▪ Or when that balmy load she doth transfer Her cradle, and her parents sepulcher, To Heliopolis, Apollo's Town, And on his flamy Altar layes it down. A place that breath'd perfumes, Her words embalmed in so sweet a breath, That made them triumph both on time and death. Whose fragrant sweets. Since the Cameleon knew And tasted of, he to this humour grew, Left other elements held this so rare, That since he never feeds on ought but air. Oh how the flowers prest with their treading on them, Strove to cast up their heads to look upon them, And jealously the buds that so had seen them Sent out their sweetest smells to come between them, As fearing the perfume lodg'd in their powers, If known, would make men quite neglect the flowers, The nard breaths never so, nor so the rose, when the namour'd spring by kissing blows Soft blushes on her cheeks, nor th' early east Vying with Paradise 'th Phenix nest As it, the nard expires. Perfuming Phenix like his funerall fies. The winds of Paradise send such a gale, More pretious breath than which moves The whispering leaves in the Panchaian groves.
Arabian wind, whose breathing gently blows le to th' violet, blushes to the rose, ever yield an odour rich as this, hen the Phenix from the flowry east s the sweet treasure of her perfum'd nest, et as the proudest treasures of the east. et as the Indian Cane. As flaming gums, agrant as the morning rose, t as Panchaian gums or Frankincense, myrrhe, nor Cassia, nor the choice perfumes untouch'd nard, or Aromatick fumes hot Arabia doth enrich the air more delicious sweetnesse, ever smelt the breath of morinng flowers, sweetned with the dew of twilight showers. pounded amber, or the flowring thyme purple violets in their proudest prime welling clusters from the cypresse tree. sweet &c. As drops of balm. st of odours, spice and gums. fumes, that all th' Arabian gums excells, spices that do build the Phenix pyre, en she renews her youth in funerall fires, Whose sweetnesse doth as far exceed bian sents, as they the fowlest weeds, et as the Altars smoke, or as the new lded bud swell'd by the early dew. Whose native smell Indian odours doth excell, ll the pleasures were distill'd, every flower in every field. all that Hybla's hives do yield, re into one broad mazer fill'd, ereto added all the gums, spice that from Panchaia comes, odours that Hydaspes lends, Phenix proves before she ends, all the air that flora drew, spirit that Zephyrus ever blew, ere put therein, and all the dew, t ever rosy morning knew, all diffus'd could not compare,
With &c. As gums distill'd from weeping trees, Whose spicie smoke, Perfumes the neighbour air, till it doth choke The greedy sense, sweet as the drops of balm, As when soft west winds struck the garden rose, A showr of sweeter air salutes the nose, When with a sparing kisse and gentle power, He unlocks the virgin bosome of the flower. Whose odour fills the ambient air, Like spice of smokes rais'd from sweet gums With aromatick powders fraught, By merchants from Sabea▪ brought, That yield A savour like unto the field, When the bedabbled Morn Washeth the ears of corn, Fetch all the spices that Arabia yields, Distill the choicest flowers of the fields, And when in one their best perfections meet, Bring them to this, that so they may seem sweet. Sweet sounding The soft spring Chides not the pebbles that disturb her course With sweeter murmure, harmonious chime She forced, when she touch'd her lyre. The waves to leap above their cliffes, dull earth, Dance round about the centre, and creates new birth In every element, and outcharms the fears, Oh I could turn Cameleon, and live on this sweet air. A tongue made up of harmony, The hearers soul out at his ears inticing, Charming the soul even to an extasie, Striking a wonder in their ears, It wrought an envy in the sphears, Unexpressive notes▪ Whilst every strain Calls the soul into the ears▪ Taking all ears captive▪ Which with a greedy listening fain Would turn into the sound it hears, Contending nightingales struck mute, Drop down and dy upon the lute, Such time and measures Mercury did keep, Then when he plya'd all Argus eyes asleep.
The ravisht aire such pleasure loth to loose, With thousand ecchoes still prolongs each heavenly close. Such breaths the dying swans give, as they ride Upon Cayster, or Pergusa's glide. Such musick Orpheus made in hell, When he wooed Pluto for Euridice, And Ssyphus sae listning on his stone. Harmonious as the breath Of dying swans, prophetick in their death, Should but swans hear this well divided breath, They listen would, and sweetly welcome death, The ravisht nightingales striving too high To reach it would in emulation die. Whilst the amazed ear, ands ravisht such harmonious breath to hear. So sung the Thracian poe, when his songs asts, trees and stones attracts in following throngs, Her voyce the woods and rocks to passion moves, Tames salvage beasts, the troubled rivers smoothes, Detains their hasty course, and when she sings, The birds neglect the labours of their wings. Even so the dying swan with low rais'd breath, Sings her own exequie before her death. So Canens did bewaile Her late inchanted Picus. The dying swan adorn'd with silver wings, So in the sedges of Meander sings. So sung the Syrens, when Ulisses fast as bound with knoty halters to the mast. Gave accents in the sweetest strain, That ever opened an enamoured vein, Whose sadder tones enforc' the rocks to weep, Enricht all neighbour ears. Wooing the rivers from the springs to hear him. Such Musik as 'tis said, Before was never made, But whn of old the sons of morning sung, While the Creator great, His Constellations set. And the well balanc' world on hinges hung, And cast the dark foundations depe, And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keepe.
Able to make the rocks to dance, And surly beasts that through the deserts prance, Hgh from their gloomy dens. A song whose cadence doth enthral. All sence it reacheth. In strains so rare, Tat all the litting pinionists of the aire, Atentive sate, and in their kinds did long To hear some notes from his well timed song▪ Had wise Ulsses who regardlesse flung Along, the Ocean when the Syrens sung, Bt heard her song, he would to her faire eyes, Offer'd his vessel as a sacrifice. Or had the Syrens on the neighbour shore, Heard in what raping notes she did deplore Her buried glory, they had left their shelves, And to come near her, would have drown'd themselves. And none that heard him wisht his song an ending. Such musick did Arion make, When as he rid upon the Dolphins back. The prating Eccho's long For repetition of so sweet a song, All listening stood, At those sweet aires which did entrance the flood. And had the Thracian plaid but halfe so well, His wife had nee returned back to hell, Sounds, which by their delicious melody Might ull, not Argus, but even Mercury, Chocest accents be Harsh ecchoes of that heavenly harmony. Should such an holy song Enwrap our fancy long; Time would run back, and fetch the age of gold. Nature that heard such sound, Beneath the hollow round Of Cynthia's eat, the airy region thrilling, Now was all most won, To think her part was done. And that her raigne had here its last fulfilling; She knew such harmony alone, Could hold all heaven and earth in happier union. T' attentive rock, The rigour doth of its creation mock,
And gently melts away; Argu to hear The musick, turnes each eye into an ear. Sounds which the Pnther a, And sets the wildnesse of his nature law: A voice able to entrance the Panther, and command Incensed winds. Like sounds that breath upon a banke of violets. The shades admiring stand, And sacred silence to themselves command, Whilst the heap'd multirude with greedy are, Throng. As if musick from the sphears Did with their golden raptures swell our ears. Can charme the sphears, and rocks the heavens aslepe▪ Every sence makes hast to be all ears, And give attention to those pleasing aires, To which the Gods may listen as to praiers Of pous votaries, the which to hear, mults would be attentive and would swear, To make no noise. willingly would bear deaths harshest doome, To have her sing an anthem on my ombe. A song, Which can inspire the dull, and chear the sad, And to the dead can lively motion adde, Charming the chrystal floods. Had eccho with so sweet a grace, Narcissus loud complaints rurn'd, Not for reflexion of his face, But of his voice, the boy had mourn'd. A musick so divine did pierce his ear, As never yet the ravisht sence did hear. Like the sea nimphes in veigling harmony, May sing a lullaby unto the sphears. Me thinks my ravisht ear, pt with the secret musick that I hear, Aends the warbles of an angels tongue, sounding forth a sense-bereaving song. Where the ear bathes in pleasing harmony. With such excesse, Of grace and musick to the ear, As what it sung, it planted there, stroking the aire,
Which stills the winds and makes the wild Incensed bore and Panther mild. Which floods have stopt their course to hear, To which the spotted Lynx have lent an ear▪ As stikes a wonder in all ears, And works an envy in the sphears, Making the soul climbe up into the ear. Whose melody have made the sphears to lay Their heavenly lutes aside only to listen To their more charming notes. See how to hear thy sweet harmonious sounds About thy craddle here are thronging round, Woods, but with ears, floods, but their fury stopping; Tygers, but tame, mountains, but alwaies hopping. Sphar-borne, harmonious sisters voice and verse, Wed their divine sounds, and mixt power imploy, Dead things with imbreath'd sence able to pierce, Such harmonie make the seraphick quires, With their immoral harps of golden wies. The melting voice through mazes running, Untwisteth all the chains that tie The hidden soul of harmony, That Orpheus soul my heave his head, From golden slumber on a bed Of heapt Elysian flowers, and hear Such strains, as would have won the ear Of Pluto to have quite set free, His halfe regaind Euridice. See how the heavens rapt with so sweet a tongue, To list to thine, leave their own dance and song. To hear her warble, Would move the rocks, and ravish marble. Like softest musick to attending ears, Whose least breath brings from the sphears their musick, charging each ear with insensiblenesse that did not lend t selfe unto them. Making the soul plant it self in the eate. Magick sound, Which destroyes without a wound. If Orphus voice had force to breath such musicks love Through pores of senselesse trees, as it could make them move If stones good masue danc'd, the Theban walls to build,
To cadence of the tunes, which Amphions lyre did yeild▪ More cause for a like effect, at least wise bingeth, O stones, O trees, learn hearing Stella singeth. Soul invading voice, The very essence of their tunes when angells do rejoyce, Sweet as those dulcid sounds in break of day, That creepe into the dreaming bridegroomes ears, And summon him to marriage. Sweet in tast. The purest honey sweet That the Muses birds do bring. To mount Hybla every spring, No thing near so pleasant is. As sweet and good As the most costly and delicious food, Which if but tasted doth at once impart, Both life and gladnesse to the cheared heart. Like the sweet gummes that from electar trees Distill, or honey of the labouring bees, Like morning dew, that in a pleasant shower, Drop pearls into the bosome of a flower. To which compared honey is as gall, Sweet as the Indian cane, as Hybla's trees, Or roses blmy breath, which oft delight. The palates of the active bees. Some star fled from the sphear, is melted there. Tht mock Madera's sugar, and the Apricock. Passing in pleasant tast the drinke, That now in Candia deck Cerinthus brink. Nepenthe. Ambrosia. Nectar. Dops of balme. Mummy. Elixir. Swift. As swiftly whitling as the whisking wind. As swift as shafts fly from a parthian bow. Swift as the sweeping stream, the winged arrow. Swift as the winged thought. Wh nimble speed, scorning to touch the ground. Switer than an Hungarian ague, or english sweat. The swifter courser did out swim the wind, As lightning which one scarce dare say he saw: With as much speed as Daphne fled, or Phoebus did pursue,
Swifter than forced aie. As the drumming pulse. Swift as the breathed stagge. So swift that in mine eye, Lightning seem'd flow, and might be taught to fly. So Pluto dove when in his gloomy coach He hurried Proserpine. So flie the arrowes from the twanging strings, With no lesse speed, than if supply'd by wings. He vanisht from our eyes, As swiftly as a well driven javel in flies, Or as a singing pellet from the sling. As hawa the feaful dove, or huntor swift, Pursues the hare through Aemons snowie drift. Swift as the rolling fire. As the quick moion of dislodged souls. Swift as an arrow from a Cretan string. As swift as Scythian shafs. Both from the barriers start, Whose nimble steps scarce touch earths upper part. Their feet unwet the sea might well have borne, Or unsuppressed stalkes of standing corne. Hippomanes and Atalanta ran with such a quicknesse, His noiselesse wings by night, fly Morpeus strains, And with the swifnesse of a thought attains, &c. Fear wing's her feet, and love enfor' his pace. Swift as the chaed cloud, or flying wind. As swift as grayhounds laid in with the hare. With pace as speedy as the wind. Their pace was flee, And thick they gather'd up their nimble feet. Their sails so wrought, They cut a feather, and command a thought. Swift as Camilla, who with nimble feet, The tops of the unpressed corne could greete; And on the swelling waves so go that they Sunk no, when she on them her weight did lay. Quick as the eastern wind, Sweeps through a meadow, or the nimble hind, Or Satyre on the lawnes, or skipping roe, Or well wing'd shaft sent from a Parthian bow, Like gallant▪stags, that as they scorn'd the ground, Run from the shill cries of the full-mouth'd hound,
Nor swifter comes the messenger of heaven, Nor winged vessel with a full saile driven, Nor Myrha's course, nor Daphne's speedy flight, Shunning the dalliance of the God of light, &c. Swift as the foales conceived by the winds. Swift as the fleeting aire, Fleet as the swift-wing'd moments, houres, minutes. As if she had leapt into the chariot of the wind. Swift as the flight of lightning through the aire. Swifter than whelpe-rob'd tygers, or the flight Of lightning ore Apulia, where the fild, Unplough'd, no corne, but slggish grasse doth yeild, Swifter than lightning, or the southern wind Through Lybia's yeilding aie. Swift as the Autolole's whose winged speed, In running far outstips the swiftest steed; Equal the winds themselves, and as they passe, Scarce bend the standing corne, or slnder grasse. Outstrip the wind, And leave the breathed hart behind. More swift than motions self. To this compared, slow Fly stones from slings, and not so swift as she, From Parthian bowes, the winged arrowes flee. Swifter than winds, whose tardy plumes, Are reeking waters, and dull earthly fmes. As Biscan darts, or shafts from Russian bow, Swallowing the way. As the arrow from the Tartars bow. Like arrowes that outrun the hunting eye. That on a winged whirle wind ride. As the swift son of Euriale, Who in his course was said to be so fleete, To run ore rivers, and nere drench his feet. Or on the land through well grown meadowes passe, Yet with his weight not once to bend the grasse. Swim. Pace with the native stream the fish do keepe. To move the bodies oares. Himself the oares, The pilot, and the boat. To best the surge, and row himselfe With his own armes. Himself the ship and wares. Bfft the stream with lusty sinewes.
Swine. Tusked swine, That foe unto the corn and vine. The bristle-bearing beast. The beast that first taught mortalls how To rip the earth with shared plough, That with such pleasure can desire To wallow in the durt and mire. The nasty cattle which the Jew With so much hatred did pursue, The beast which lovely Venus hates, Remembring her Adonis fate, And Bacchus from them doth decline, As the destroyers of his vine. Sword. A Millain hilt. Damasco blade. Toledo. As good a sword, as ever rid on Gentlemans thigh. Imprisoned weapon. Morglay. Excalibur. Durindana: Swound. Then grief contracts the soule, a sodain night Invades the sence, and reaves the eyes of light, The nerve forsaken joynts all faile, cold ice Freezeth the heart, with hope of death she lies Deceiv'd. Souls eclypse. Extasie. Counterfeit of death. Syrens. Those impes that with their charms, Woo'd wise Ulysses to his harmes. The rude sea growes civill at their song, And ravisht stars shoot madly from their sphears To hear their musick. Great Theis train, That on the shores do plain, And trammell up their sea-green haire. Acheloides. Those deathlesse powers, Were with the Goddesse when she gather'd flowers, Whom when through all the earth they sought in vai They wish for wings to fly upon the main. That pathlesse seas might testifie their care, The easie Gods consented to their praier. Strait golden feathers on their backs appear, But least that musick fram'd t' nchant the ear, And so great gifts of speech, should be prophand, Their virgin lookes, and humane voyce remaind.
Ne'r man in sable bark sail'd by, That gave not ear to their sweet melody, ut the sly Greek, They to the Temple went among the rest, There where Aenarian waves that Isle invest, Their faces with an oilie fucus spread, Their lips so rosie, not with their own red, Their necks and breasts shone with adulterate white, re to the wast, the better to invite, VVith painted eyes and tresses of false hair, VVhich jointly bear off lust, the badge and snare, VVhom when Minerva from her shrine had spied, She hid her eyes, and turn'd her head aside, If I a goddesse, nor in vertue fail, ight of force or modesty prevail, They shall not said she herein glory long, ly grief shall arm me to revenge this wrong, New scarce departed from her Tmple doore, VVhen scarce their feet had prest the beachy shore. Their legs united in a scaly hide, And bones in finnes thrust out on either side: Nor yet their former mind unchanged keep, But hold themselves for monsters of the deep, Who now upon the dancing billows move, shes below the wast, and maids above. Harmonious daughters of Calliope Parthenope, Ligea, Leucasia, T. Talkative. TYng his ear to no tongue but his own, An ocean of words. That lions tail, tongue ever in motion. That tyrant in discourse. Drum of the company. That spend thrift of his tongue. Unthrifty babler. A pattentee of speech. Ingrosser of discourse. Two grains of wheat in two bushels of chaffe, Such are his words. Thinking silence commendable in nothing but a dead neats
tongue, whose tongue hath a good turn when he sleeps. Too m of the mother in him. Long winded monster, Crispinus, Hydra discourse. Land remora, wordie prodigall. Speaking frying pan. One that hath got a patent for prating, and it were no lesse t to take his purse, to speak a word in his company. A flood, a  Vollies, hail shot of words, His tongue goes continually his erra but never speeds, enough to make a mans memorie ake, with c¦ing such dirty stuffe into it. Able to speak far more with ease, t any man can endure with patience. One that drops out at his mouth whatsoever is poured in at ears. That sows his words by sacks, whilst others do it by handfulls▪ rolling tongue. They which converse with him run the same fortune which they which live by the fall of Nile, there is no overflowing like that his words, a man cannot safely give him audience, an head ach three days after is the least hurt he can take, that but hears him ¦ter dinner. Upon any occasion he will find a mouth, find a speech w will. His talk at table like Beniamins messe, five times to his pat. Tantalus. Hungry, whilst ripened fruit hangs by his lip, Thirsty whilst water by his chin doth slip. Pelops great father. Allowed to feast with gods. Admitted to the secrets of the gods. Unhappy father of proud Niobe. That made a bloody feast Of his own son, and call'd the gods his guests, From whom the long desired waters slp, And catch'd at fruit, steals from his touched lips, He that doth daily dread, The hanging stone, that hovers o'r his head. Thrown headlong into hell. Cause he the secrets of the gods did tell. Tantalise. As when beyond our greedy reach we see, Inviting fruit on too sublime a tree, As when the greedy dog sees that repast, Which awed by the whip, he dares not tast.
A Tavern. degree, or a pair of stairs above an alehouse, There men are drunk with more credit and apologie. A broacher of more news, than hogsheds, suckt up here by some gie brain, and then squezed into a Comedy. The common sumption of after noons, and the murderer or maker away of a nie day. The busie mans recreation, and the idle mans bu∣nesse. Teach. esson, Tutor, inform, instruct. Tears. The best expressours of true sorrows, the urine of the eys, ad daughters of the eyes. The pearly floods, The pearl, and chrystall showers, the wine of love. The balmy sweat of the eyes. The watry language of the tys. Dumb Eelegy, the numerous issue of the eyes, The liquid amber. The lovers pleading eyes. The watry oratours, dumb perswasion, Rhetorick, eloquence ll tide of sorrow. The sadder straining of the melting eyes. Wet badge of weak mortality. The Plaintive floods, fruits of the funerall, The brinie showers, sad tribute of the eyes. Sorrows liverie, the dumb Ambassadours of grief. Streams of liquid pearl. Soft dew distilled. from the two chrystall limbecks of her eyes. Those moving agents. Due tribute of the dead, watering those plants are sown in corruption. The innundation, deluge of the eyes. The issue of the pregnant teeming eyes, The flood of pearly moisture. The tributary drops of woe. The pearly treasure of the eyes. The eye-offending brine, sorrowfull water, The fruitfull river in the eye. The watry trappings, and the suits of woe. The flushing of the galled eyes. The pous beads. False tears. Such Tereus shed, when he Pandion sues In Progne's name for Philomel.
So weeps the monster of the seven mouth'd Nile. Instructed tears. Lovers Tears. v. Love. Tedious. So many minutes as in hours there be, So many hours each minute seem'd to me. Teeth. Those ivory pales, which enclose a tongue made up of▪ harmon Those ranks of orient pearls. The pearlie pales, That hedge of ivory. The ivory bounders of the tongue. The pearly row. The ivory Precincts. The double pearly guard of speech. The pearl-pott cullis, that adorns The two leav'd ruby gate. The second sweetly fenced ward. An heavenly dewed tongue to guard Natures shedding knives. Temperate. v. Abstemious Content with natures courtesie. His feast but hungers banishment, That ne'r refus'd. The diet Curii and Camillus us'd, Whose unbought cates please their unlearned throats, That lives at natures cheap expence. That feeds at natures charge. Tempest. The furious winds with one another scold. Lightning is all our light, and it rain'd more, Than if the sun had drunk the sea before, Darknesse lights elder brother, his birthright. Chain'd o'r this world, and to heaven chas'd this light▪ The seas are ruffled into billows. Eurus stiffely blew, And high wrought seas with chafing foamie grew, The tossing seas appear to touch the skie, And wrap their curls in clouds. Ambitious seas to gloomie heaven ascend. Sails suck the falling rain. Showrs joyn with floods. The assailing waves the vessel rock, On every rising wave, Death sits in triumph and presents a grave▪ The giddy seas do whirl, and pitchie clouds.
Obscure the skie, The wild Ocean knows no shore. e roaring surges rake the ratled shore. s thrust their waves upon the groaning shore stle their backs and spit their angry foam. The tempest raves. oops from the clouds, and cuffes the purple waves, e destinies sat dancing on the waves, see the wrastling winds with mutuall braves, sume each other. The waves do knit their brow, he ruffled waves of the enraged sea, Then every puffe of wind blows up a grave, thin the bosome of the angry wave, Neptune then gathered clouds up from the Land, ighted the seas up, snatcht ino his hand Is massie trident, and aloft did tosse Of all the winds all storms he could ingrosse, ll earth took into sea with clouds, grim night, ell tumbling headlong from the cope of light, The East and south wind justled in the air, oll'd waves before them. With clouds did Jove heavens heightned fore head bind. Then tyranniz'd the wrath of all the winds, The floating ship was cuff'd from wave to wave. Made the winds tennis ball, uch was the tempest when Ulysses lost All his companions. The waves and winds in mutinie. O stempered waters, Jove drives his flock of clouds, The stormy tyranny of winds, The Ship is made the scorn of sea and winds. Winds quick, winds up the waves, the billows rise. Dark clouds oll up, and take day from our eyes. With our laborious oas we ply, Slice up the foam, and sweep blew waves on high, The bow backt waves tosse us up to the skie. A storm whose blacknesse frights the sea, Horrour in triumph rides upon the waves, And all the furies from their gloomy caves, Hovered upon our ship, Where howling trenches of self-drowning waves, And stormy gusts throw up untimely graves, Where billows with white foam shew angry minds, For not outroaring all the high rais'd winds,
The Dolphins that presage a coming storme, Swiming on the waves, to teach us, none should dare, Excepting fishes then to venture there. When the distracted Ocean Swells to sedition, and obeyes no law. The stormes speak loud, And the astonisht day doth turne to night. The seas are rais'd so high, That waves do hang like tears in the suns eye, That we, as in vast cataracts they fall, Think that he weeps at natures funeral. Such was the tempest in wich Caeser sayl'd, In a small barke from Greece to Italy. Proud billowes rise, and war against the skies. The waves in crooked furrowes flow, As if that Aeolus and Neptune strove For the seas empery. The threatning Ocean spends his swelling spight, The tenth wave rears the ship. The Porpoise dance upon the swelling wave, Whilst every billow is her sisters grave, The angry tumults of the sea and skies. Aeolus lets loose his uncontrolled breath, Whose language threatens nothing under death▪ The rudder failes, the ships at random driven, The eye no object ownes, but sea and heaven. The heavens begin to roare, As they would split the massie globe in sunder, From those that live above, to those live under. The winds above, rhe water underneath, Joyn in rebellion, and conspire death; Each one becomes an Oratour for life. Their hands are busie, while their hearts despaire. The waves With unresisted tyranny outbraves, And threats to grapple with the darkened skies, Whilst like to mooving mountains they arise, From their distempered Ocean and assaile Heavens batlements. High tides do flow, Whose brackish waves do lash the broken shore▪ Seas smooth back roll'd before with gentle breath, In brissels set, now spits her foamy wrath.
A pitchy storme, wrapt up in swelling clouds, ster, clad in a cloak of clouds, and lin'd, h thunder mufiled up the heavens. able aire so muffles up the skie, at the sad sailers can no light descry, if some beam break through their pitchy night, s but dread flashing of the lightning's light, d with their top-saile tilt up at the stars. The sea doth rage and rore, menacing to swallow up the shore. The troubled waves in mighty mountains rise, Threatning to spit their brine drops in their eyes, The sea her billowes musters proudly up, nd shoots them at the sun, if all elements, and all their power, Were turn'd into one vow'd destruction. The ship with main mast bores the moone, The troubled billowes chasing with the shores. The scolding winds ive up the knotty oakes. Th'ambitious Ocean swells, rageth and foams To be exalted with the threatning clouds. The chiding billow seems to pelt the clouds. The wind shakt surge, with high and monstrous main, Seems to cast water on the burning bear, And quench the guard of th'ever fixed pole. never did like molestation view On the incensed flood. Winds blow, as if they meant to waken death. The labouring bark climbes up vast hills of se as Olympus high, and ducks again as low, As hell's from heaven. A water combate on the sea, betweeen Two toaring, angry, boyling billowes, how They march and meete, and dash their curled brows, Swelling like graves, as if they did intend Tentombe each other, ere the quarrel end. Ulysses ships found not the seas more rough, Nor the unhappy navy that from Troy, Once with Aeneas sayl'd. The sea is not more troubled than their breast. All the tempestuous stars
Their Constellations join and on them pour Their most malignant influence. Sterope, Artophylax, The kids, Hyades, Orion. Africus, Notus, Euroclydon. Tempestuous winds. V. Dunnes storm. Sands Ovid. Metam. Lib. 11. p. 379. Virgil. 1. book a¦nexed. p. 535. The frighted sea-calves sculk away and hide Their quivering heads within the swelling tide. The crooked Dolphins bristle up their backs, Amaz'd to hear such loud voic'd thunder cracks, And all those massie whales that brush the seas, Dive down for fear to find the Antipodes, The juggling sea god trusting to no shape, Nor any transformation for escape, Saddles his finny courser and doth fly, Followed by all his scaly infantry. Doris and her gray daughters shreeking tear From oft their heads their sea-green locks for fear, And Mellicertus speedier doth fly, Then when he fled his fathers cruelty, (His snorting sea horse Triton doth bestride, Thrusting his shell-spurs in his brawny side, &c. Temporizers That shake hands with th' unworthy times. Running with the current of the Sate. A participle of the Present tense. That danceth to the tune of fortune, and studieth For nothing more than to keep time. Terrour. v. Fear. Such terrour, as when Jove his tresses shake, And makes the earth and fixed stars though fixed shakes. Such terrour, as when Jove did drown the world, Or Phaethon it burn. Making every one to stand upon his guard, And have a continuall larum bell in his ear. Thanks. v. Forms of Thanking. To Thaw. v. Melt. To unknit, unfetter, unlock the ice. The Pythian Knight Doth strip the mountains of their snowie lawns, The crusted snow dissolves, and all those veins Which frost had fettered up in Chrystall chains, Are now dissolv'd.
Theseus. Aegeus glorious seed. Great Narathon resounds his praise For slaughter of the Cretan bull. Vulcans seede By him glad Epidaure beheld to bleed. Periphetes, Savage Procrustes death Cephisia view'd, Elusis Cercyons. Scinis ill endued, With strength so much abus'd, who beeches bent, And tortur'd bodies twixt their branches rent, He slew. If we his years should number with his acts, His years would prove a cypher to his facts. Ariadne's faithlesse spouse. Tat slew the monster of the Labyrinth, And the Arthenians from their tribute freed. Helens first ravisher. Theeves. Who dayly marke Those houses, which they plunder in the darke. Thetis. v. Sea. Waves. Doris fair daughter. Nereus fair issue. The Queen of seas. The Goddesse with the silver feet. Fair Queen of waves. Achilles beauteous mother. The faire Queen of the liquid plains. The powerful Lady of the sea. Queen regent of the waves. Out of whose spatious cisterne daily flow Refreshing streams, which as they run do fill, Earths duggs, the hillocks, so preserving still. The infant grasse. Faire pearle and glory of the sea. Thighes. The alabaster rocks. Supporters of the beauteous frame. Soft ivory pillars. Well proportioned columnes. The sister pillars of soft ivory. Thinne. Thin as burnt aire. Thin as the starved chaps. Thin as the unsubstantial ghosts. Stretcht to an airy thinnesse. Thirst. v. Draught. My tongue wants moysture, and my jawes are dry. Scarce is there way for speech. Water to me were Nectar. Such was Latona's when the Lycian clownes
Denied her water. No greater is the thirst of Tantalus. Thought. The still borne issue of the mind. Silent discourse, the quiet creatures of the soul. Tenants of the heart. Free inhabitants of the breast. That know no prison. Free borne issue of the mind. That are not subject to an human law, Nor but of God, and conscience stand in aw. The souls still language. The minds parliament. Thunder v. Lightning. Joves hitting shafts. Inevitable flame. Joves trident. Cyclopian darts, shafts. The vengefull flame. He thunders, and with hands that cannot erre, Hurles lightning. The three forkt shaft. The breaking cloud rackt by the winds, Hot from the cyclops anvile. Aerial tumults. The throwes and shrieking of the childbed cloud. Whilst her hot issue from her cloven wombe. Tears out a forced passage. Loud Artilery of heaven. Loud noises that torment the aire. The voice Of angry heaven, intrancing with its noise, That rend th'amazed firmament, and makes Th'affrighted rafters of the skie to shake. The balling issue of the sulphury cloud, That tears in peeces the wide cheeks of aire. Joves fire-breathing horse. Wherewith dull earth, and wandering rivers quake, Yea Stygian fens, and horrid dwellings shake, Of horrid Taenarus, and Atlas bounds. Heavens cholerick, angry, chiding language. Heavens arrowes shot from the divided cloud. The coughing, hoarse barking of the skies. Heavens chin-cough. Clouds roaring conflicts from their breaches throw Darts of inevitable flames. To Tie. To knot, manacle, fetter, gyve, chain, infetter, lock. Time. The eternal clock. Swift old dotard, Which glides away with undiscovered hast, And mocks our hopes. The nimble aged syre.
Swift speedy time feathered with flying houres, Whose constant course doth every thing devoure. That doth unglosse the flourish set on youth, And delves the paralels in beauties brow. Whose slippery wheele doth play In humane causes with inconstant sway, Motions swiftest measure. The motion of the ever whirling wheele. Devouring cormorant. That common arbitratour. The general invader. That ever flying minute, The moth of nature, and of at. Natures book▪worme. The shop and mint of change. The universal Justice, that tries all things. Untangler of all knots. Who greedy to devoure, His own and all that he brings forth. Is eating every piece of houre, Some object of the rarest worth. Truths aged father. The most abhorred Stratagems of night, Lurking in cavernes from the glorious light, By him perforce are from their dungeons hurld, And shew'd as monsters to the wondering world▪ Whose absence all the treasury of earth Cannot buy out. Irevocable time. Not all The wealth or treasures of the earth recall One of his swift-wing'd minutes back. The bald unbribed witnesse. Timanthes. The famous painter that allow'd no place For private sorow in a princes face, Yet that his piece might not exceed belief, He cast a veile upon supposed grief. Tombe. v. Grave. The solitary vault. The marble monument. The guilded marble, or the brazen leaves. A stone to bear Witnesse, that once we were. The blind dark vault. The chest Which harbours the pale ashes, sad dust, The vault were the sad ashes lie.
The coole vault. The dark silent roome. The monumental vault. The melancholy chamber of the earth. The marble where we are. Slaves to the tyrant wormes. Cold burthen of our ashes. The gloomy cave. That glorious trouble ore the grave. The gorgeous pallace of the dead. Sad entertainment of the grave. The dead's embroydered clothes. The sacred vault where ashes proudly dwell, And dead, as living do their pomp expresse, In sumptuous tombes, like gorgeous pallaces, That sever the good fellowship of dust, And spoile their meeting. Unenvied mansions of the dead. The gloomy house of death. Deaths silent mansion. That often perjur'd stone bearing a lying postscript. Where none can bribe impartial wormes to spare, Princes corrupt in marble. Tongue. The hearts Herald. The thoughts Embassadour. The minds interpreter. The legate of the soul. The best, worst dish▪ Great litle member. That shapes the aire to words. Mother of speech. Toppe. Summit, crownet. Torch. Flaming pines, sputtering flames, oyly pines, Pitchy tapers. Torment. Strapado, rack, martyr, excruciate, grate, eate. Torne. Mangled, minc'd▪ scatter'd, shatter'd, shiver'd, anatomiz'd Tower. Turret, arcenal, cittadel. Tragedian. Whose angry muse doth in her buskins rage, And her long tragick robe doth brush the stage, Whose numbers thunder, and whose quills Fresh drops of death at every word distill. The  of Melpomene.
Traveller. The curious exile. Expert in all but home Cosmography. That hath seen much, but can discourse of more, And with a pretty bold authority Challenge belief, even when he tells a lie Trees. v. Shade▪ The shady screens: The leavy covertures. The birds leavy cage, With bushy crowns, and leavy hats. Whose curled tops deny the heavens great eye To see the stock they were maintained by. The standarts of the woods. Muff'd with hoary mosse. Under whose shade the Nightingale would bring Her chirping young, and teach them how to sing; The woods most sad musitians thither hie, As if't had been the Muses Castalie, And warbled forth such elegiack strains As struck the winds dumbe. That stretcht their branching armes. That give a welcome shelter to the beasts, When scorching summer them with heat infests. Tremble. v. Quake. Fear. She trembles like a lambe snatcht from the fangs Of some fell wolfe, that dreads her former pangs, Or as a dove, who on her feathers bears Her bloods fresh streams, and late felt talons fears. So trembled Philomele in Tereus armes, When she perceiv'd her now approaching harmes, Like shaking corne, which waveth with the wind. And like a misshap'd letter I do stand, Which hath been written with a trembling hand, As the sea trembles, when light winds do blow, O waving aspes. Triton. Whose shrill shell-trumpet seas and shores do hear, His snorting sea-horse doth bestride, Thrusting his shell spurs in his brawny side. The scaly herald of the sea. Whose shells loud blast Blew floods affright, his figure to his wast Presents a man, the rest a fish, before
His monstrous breast, the foaming furges roare. Neptunes blew brother. Triumph. The laurel crownes their browes, they Io sing, And to the captiol their trophies bring. In ivory chariot rides The glorious wardrobe of the victors show. High pallaces are now with garlands dight, And smoking incense, turnes the day to night, Now the white victimes by the axe are slain, And with their purple blood the pavements stain; The captive kings more to encrease the show, Before the plumed horse do chained goe. The subjcts by loud shouts their love do shew, Whilst all the way with sweetest flowers they strew, The Vctors Temple crown'd with verdant baies, The souldiers singing Io to his praise, While in his ivory chariot drawn he goes Into the temple. v. May's continuation of Lucan. lib. 5. Troy. Piams unhappy town. The ancient city of Laomedon. Ten years assaulted by the angry Greeks. Laomedons rich city. The God-built city. Whose walls were built by the sweet harmony Of Phaebus harp. Hectors native towne. Unhappy Pergamus. Distressed Ilium. True. Unquestioned as an oracle. Undoubted verity. True as the voice of Jove. The Pythia from the tripos never gave A truer answer. When this is false, then truth it self may ly. Trumpet. The martial trumpet gives the bloody sound. That gived the cruel noise. The tragical Alarme. A trumpetter is a man whose profession is not so worthy, as to occasion insolence, and yet no man so puft up. His face is as brazen as his tumpet. He is somewhat in the nature of a hogshead, shrillest when he is empty. No man proves life more to be a blast, or himself a bub∣ble,
and he is like a counterfeit bankrupt, thrives best when he is blown up. Truth. Times eldest daughter. Times wonted off-spring. Upon her head she wears a crown of stars, Through which her orient haire waves to her wast, By which believing mortals hold her fast. And in those golden cords are carried even, Till with her breath she blowes them up to heaven. She wears a robe enchast with eagles eyes, To signifie her sight in mysteries. Upon each shoulder sits a milk white dove, And at her feet do witty serpents move. Her spacious armes do reach from east to west, And you may see her heart shine through her breast. Her right hand holds a sun with burning raies, Her left a curious bunch of golden keyes. With which heavens gates she opens and displaies. A chrystal mirrour hangeth at her breast, By whch mens consciences are searcht and drest. In her coach wheele Hypocrisie lies rackt, And squinteyed slander with vain glory backt, Her bright eyes burn to dust, in which shines fate, An Angel Ushers her triumphant gate. Whilst with her fingers, fans of stars she twists, And with them beats back errour clad in mists. Eternal unity behind her shines, That fire, and water, earth and aire combines, Her voice is like a trumpet, loud and shrill, Which bids all sounds in heaven and earth be still. Turnings. Menders, writhings, wheelings, windings, esses, maes, whirings, whiskings. Twilight. v. Evening. Now to the day succeeds that doubtful light, Which neither can be called day, nor night. The wavering light. The doubtfull close of day. Nor had night spread Her sable mantle, yet, though day was fld, That part of day in which we might Not speak a falsehood, though we call'd it night.
Tyrant, Whose law is will, By which they governe, spoile and kill. That knowes no bounds, but makes his powers his shores Themselves esteeme, Made for themselves, and all the world for them. Whilst heavens great law, given for their guide appears Just and unjust, but as it waits on theirs. Scruing up the pins of power too high. Not cutting but ravelling out mens lives. He seldome sleeps soundly, having blood for his bolster. His fancy presents him with strange masques, Wherein only feinds and furies are actors. The fright awakes him, and he is no sooner glad that it was a dream, but fears it is propheticall. Having lived in other mens blood, he commonly dies in his owne. As if he had a quarrel at all mankind, killing all he comes near. Who what they cannot gain By fairer language Tarquin like constrain. That can what soere he wills, wills what he can, To whom it is enough to be guilty, to have power to be guilty. Wanton cruelty, knowing no Horizon. Punishing not so much for hate, or anger, as because he felt not the smart of punishment. Pleasing themselves in making others wrack, the effect of their power. Whose liking was his justice. Sporting themselves in pains, and making others praiers the argument of their victories. Disdaining to obey any thing but his passion, which he calls his mind. Observing no formality but what passi∣on suggests. To whom the eloquence of hatred, hath given revenge the face of delight. Able to teach Tiberius craft, and Nero cruelty. His will is his God, and power his law. A man that can be as ill as he lists, And loves to be as ill as he can, and as much as any ad∣vancement can be got by it. The red eyes of strain'd authority.
That with their humour onely can comply. He keeps a constant kennell of blood hounds, To accuse whom he pleaseth, which will depose more than men an suppose. He leaves nothing to his poor subjects they can call their own but their miseries. Dancing pleasantly at the dolefull Dirty of dying groans Like Devils in flesh, antidate hell in inventing torments. Epicurising on poor mens pains▪ Killing men for their wealth s the west indians kine for their tallow. V. cruel. V. Vale. Valley. WHere the mild whispers use. Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks, On whole fresh looks the swart star sparely looks. Embroidered o'r with quaint ennamell'd eyes, That on the green turf suck the honied showers, And purple all the ground with vernall flowers. ac'd with silver rills, Encompass'd round with gently rising hills. V. Pleasant Place. Valiant. Valour. Puissance, powesse, fortitude, chivalty. The souldiers vertue, the soul of war. A man made all of fire. Attemptive spirits. ndaunted, high, erected spirits, The dead quake in their grave to think of them. One that dare prop the sun if it should fall, Dares grasp the bolt from thunder, And through a Canon leap into a town. One that dare die next his heart in cold blood, That leads the fight, and lets no danger passe Without improvement. The flnts he treads upon.
Sparkle with lustre from his arms, As if in love with danger, That life can sobetly despise. Undaunted spirits that encounter those, Sad dangers, we to fancy scarce propose, That deride Pale death, and meet with triumph in a tomb, Who to pale fear, Whispering danger never lent an ear. That sells his life dear to his foes, Whom dangers do encourage and invite A spirit scorning justest fears. As if incapable of fears, Who, when a foot, is mounted upon an high spirit, Flying nothing more than the mention of flying, The sweetnesse of life cannot so flatter the palate of the soul, as make him swallow the bitternesse of an eternall disgrace. As the Indian for his gem doth sound the stood, He dives for honour in a sea of blood, Glazing his valour in a crimson flood, A spirit that hath outgrown his years, Trampling depressing fears, Under his valiant feet, sets bravely on The Front of danger, 'Twixt whom an fear there's an antipathy. A spirit that durst war against the fates. That dare set his naked breast Against the thunder. Giving a Majesty to adversity. Making time hast it self to be witnesse of their honours▪ and o place witnesse to another of the truth of their doings. Men of such prowesse, as not to know fear in themselves, a yet to teach it others that had to deal with them. A courage apt to climb over any danger. Observing few complements in matters of arms, but such as pro anger did indite to him. Giving as many wounds as blows, as many deaths as wound That can face the murdering Canon, When it blows ranks into the air like chaffe, A courage that knows not how to fear. As full of spirit as the Moneth of May. A spirit of greater confidence, Than can admittance give to thoughts of fear. Will fight untill his thighs with dares
Be almost like a sharp quill'd porcupine, Every gash he receives is a grave for him that made it, That being angry doth forget He ever heard the nime of death. An unaffrighted mind. Didaining fortune with his brandisht steell, Which smoakt with bloody execution, Like Valours minion carved out his passage. Bellona's Bridegroom, ushrinking spirit, So daring that he would Go on upon the gods, kisse lightning, wrest The engine from the Cyclops and give fire At face of a full cloud. Looks like Apollo, rais'd to the worlds view, The minute after he the Python slew. An heart that scorneth danger, With a brain Beating for honour▪ Like Eagles, his undazzeled eyes Affront the beams, that from the steel arise. That looks on his enemies with a kind of noble heavinesse, no insul∣tation. A spirit that to sullen fear, Whispering death ne'r lent a gentle ear, Like to the Roman Scevola dothstand, Bathing in flames his Salamander hand, And with a sober scorn doth laugh to see The worst incensed fates can do. Amazing death, to see with dying pride, In her pale chariot him in triumph ride, That wear their lives at their swotds point, Whose courage out-brave all fear, If he do not live to enjoy the honour he purchaseth with his blood he leaves the world his Executor, and to it bequeaths the rich in∣heritance of his memory. Ready to disburse his life upon a good occasion. Adventuring upon such designs, as have no more probability, Than is enough to keep them from being impossible. That ne'r saw fear, but in the face of the enemy, Hands of steel, and hearts of diamond. His valour like the Fairy Arthurs shield, Which but disclos'd awak'd the weaker eyes Of proudest foes, and won the doubtfull field,
A God-like courage, which no soft delight Can weaken, nor the face of death affright. A courage us'd to victory as an inheritance, Having the Thracian God tied to their swords, More than his body was to Vulcans chain. A wise well tempered valour. Those gyants, death and danger, Are but his ministers, and serve a master, More to be feard than they, and the blind Goddesse Is led amongst the captives in his triumphs. Veins. Twining Manders of the blood. The bloods meandting sterne The purple channels of the blood. The pipes of blood. The laces of the skin. The purple conduit pipes. The crimson brooks. Fair rivulets which for the food Of living bodies bear the crimson flood To every part, within the liver meet, And there with kisses numberlesse do greet Themselves, and as they through each other glide, Make many knots, as if they took a pride In their strange foldings, and themselves did please, In their admired Apostomoses. The airy paths Where ruby fairies dance their liquid rounds. The chrystal cases of the blood. The azure chaines. Purple Labyrinth. Those saphyr colour'd brooks, Which conduit like with curious crooks, Sweet Islands make in that fair land. The natural gates, and allies of the body. The bodies purple lanes. A zure rivulets. Venus. The queen of beauty. Cyprian Queen. Paphian Goddesse. Loves fair Empresse. The power that rules in love▪ The Cyprian Deity. The Queen of all that's faire. Shee that governs chamber sport. Mother of love. Loves golden arbitresse. Cupids beauteous mother. Vulcans lovely wife. Mars gamesome mistresse. The sea born Queene. The fair wife of the sooty blacksmith God. Loves sportive mother. Loves lascivious dame.
The rosy Queen of love. Fair Erycina. Great Queen of Paphos, and Cythaera's shrine. The blushing Queen of love's Drawn in a chariot by a team of doves, ut whips her doves, and smiling rides away. e froth-borne goddesse. Laughter loving dame. Tho Cidos, and bright Cyclads holds. Tho Paphos with pair'd swans doth view. That from the Ocean drawes her pedigree. Neptunes Neece, ormed out of Ambergreece. Who in her snowie armes The God of rage confines, Her whispers are the charmes, Which only can divert his fierce designes. The pleasant Queen to Paphos thence retires, Where stood her temple; there an hundred fires, Whose fragrant flame Sabaean gums devoures, Blze on as many altars crown'd with flowers. Aged Anchysa's sprightly wife. Adonis goddesse. Aeneas beauteous mother. Idalian Queen. Samian goddesse. Acidalian mother. Bright Cythrea. Verse. v. Poetry. Weighty numbers. Victorious rime. Revenge their masters death, and conquer time. Soul-raping numbers. Soul entrancing laies. Harmonious language. Victory. v. Valiant. Triumph. Victory doth play upon their dancing banners. Upon their swords Sts laurell'd victory, and smooth successe Is strew'd before their feet. Returnes laden with spoyles and honour. Bright conquest doth her silver wings display, Perch't on their standards. Victory their inheritance. Doubtful victory. The wars successe in doutful ballance hunge. Slow vctory in choice yet what to do. With doubtfull wings 'twixt either army flew. Conquest with doubtfull , Hover'd upon their lances. The ballances of fate did equal stand
For either Army. They fight on equall terms, Fortune deliberates, As not resolved yet what she should do, On equall hopes they both engaged were, And fury joyn'd with fury equal held, The ballance straight, whilst doubting victory Seem'd not a while resolved whose to be, Like to the mornings fight, When dying clouds contend with growing light. Vine. The limber tree that yields the sprightly drink. Bacchus uxorious tree. Grape charged tree. That bears the juicie clusters. Life chearing tree. —Which cut, abounds With budding gems, and prospers in her wounds. Violent. Like lightning crushing through the justled clouds, As when a tempest raves, Stoops from the clouds and cuffs the swelling waves, Then like a Lybian lion round beset, Arm'd with an high despair, and rage as great, Carelesse of wounds and weapons, forth he goes, And sells a loathed life, dear to his foes. As heavens sulphureous flash Against proud mountains, surly brows doth dash, As hasty powder fir'd Doth hurry from the fatall Canons womb. Like that fierce bird, which from the yielding skies, At Joves command with fierie lightning flies, Of all the winged crew ordain'd the head, For faithfull service in his Ganimede, Whom youth had native vigour forth have drawn, Labours to try, which were before unknown, And those soft winds that fan the lively spring, Have taught with fear his new flights managing, When he rais'd with a generous courage flies Into the field, his strength to exercise. Or like fell dragons, that like force do vie, Is train'd by hope of food, or victory. Or like a lion new wean'd from the teat O's yellow damme, who goats intent to meat, Spying in verdant fields resolveth straight,
O him his youthfull jaws to saiate, e them &c. when south-winds on surly billows ride, hilst showry Pleiades the clouds divide, as two shaped Ausidus amain, s bellowing forth along th' Apulian plain, hen he with rage and swelling floods abounds. eatning a Deluge to the tlled grounds. V. Lightning. Thunder. Wind. Tempest. Violet. v. Primrose. The violets which first appear, By their fine purple mantles known, d as the virgins of the year, Thinking the Spring to be their own. The purple offsprinsi of the prime. The resolved fair Virgin. Which contracted to her own bright eyes, eeds her lights flame with self substantiall fewell, aking a famine where abundance lies, Whose uneard womb dains the tillage of good husbandry. nthrifty lovelynesse. Beauteous niggardnesse. Profitlesse usurer, that trafficks with her self alone. The seal that stamps no print, Natures Apostate. June in her eyes, in her heart January, The cruell fair one. Venus Anchorite. That will leave the world no copy of her graces. Fair cruelty clasp'd in her own embraces, Who dead, The worms must rifle for her maidenhead, Like Daphne she as lovely and as coy. Ʋlysses. The Grecian wanderer. Old Laertes son, He that so many men and Cities saw. Wise Laertides. Penelopes grave husband. jax coorrivall for Ulysses arms. The politician of the Greeks. That wisely stopt his ear, And would not the inchanting Syrens hear, Whose mates by Magick wine, Circe transformed to the shapes of swine. The well-tongued Lord of Ithaca.
Ʋnchangeable. v. Firm. Inviolable as the stygian lake, Eternall as the book of fate, That never knoweth change or date, Like the unremoved rock. Like to the Laws of Medes and Persians. That knew no alteration. Beyond the reach of change. Ʋnhappy. In whom All stars conspire to make affliction perfect, Far more than is The common heap of humane miseries His mother bore him to. Fortunes utmost spight Pursues our actions. The blind goddesse her tennis-ball. Born under unpropitious stars, malignant influence. Unthrifty planets ruled at his birth, A sullen star was at his lucklesse birth, The Lord Ascendant of the house. Libra in his full aspect, And cursed Scorpius with beams direct, And Capricorn that rules the gloomy west, His Horoscope with cruell rage infest, Whose thread of life is spun Of black and dismall wooll. v. Miserable. Ʋnlearned. v. Ignorant. Fool. Vnluckie v. Ominous. Dismall, fatall, inauspicious, Like to the omen of ill boding owls, This nor Juno blest, Nor Hymen, nor the graces grac'd that feast, The snake-hair'd furies held the sputting light, From funeralls snatcht, and made the bed that night, Th' ill-boding owl upon the roof was set. Tereus and Progne with such Omens wed, But neither Hymeneus usuall words, Nor chearfull looks, nor happy signs affords, The torch his hand sustain'd still sputtering rais'd A sullen smoak, nor yet though shaken blaz'd. The event worse than the Omen, Such Omens wated on. Orpheus his marriage with Euridice. The funerall owl thrice rent.
The aire with ominous screeches, Such Omens waited on Lascivious Myrrha to her fathers bed. Ʋnspeakable. Though Phaebus should an hundred tongues bestow, A wit that should with full invention flow, All Helicon infus'd into my brest, Yet could not this, for all this be exprest. Had I as many tongues as Argus eyes, As Xexes arrows that did cloud the skies. As many mouths as Sybills had of years, Or fruitful Gargarus hath ripened ears, &c. We may as well, Descibe the joyes of heaven, and pains of hell. So vast, That all the act, and power of speech is wast. Voluptuous. v. Glutton. Master of unexampled luxury. Sardanapalus drown'd in soft excesse. That follow passion and voluptuous sence▪ That revel out their lavish dayes. Like one of wise Ulysses foolish mates, Sons of earth, enthrall'd to sence. Dark, narrow souls which drown'd in foggy flesh, Do never dream of higher happinesse. Plung'd in soft delights. Stues his heart in mirth, Crushing the child of sorrow in the birth. Whose flat delights on earth do creep and grow. A soul lost in the flesh. Lethargick slumbering soules. Lanke soules that in no other thing delight, But what may please the Brutish appetite. Melting away in pleasures wanton lap. Licentious Libertines, That practise in the present those delights, Hereafter promised by the Alcoran. Hard hearted evil men, Who vertue think a school name, and no God But abject pleasure. Oyling the wings of time with unctious pleasures. Melting down their youth In different beds of lust, and never learn
The icie precepts of respect, but follow The sugred game before them. That treads the primrose path of dalliance. Their bathes the juyce of July-flowers. Spirit of roses and of violets. The milk of Unicorne, and Panthers breath Gathered in bags, and mixt with Cretan wines, Their drink prepared gold and amber. Wedded to sports they were, The Kallender for to divide his year, Making with time, his gamesome pastimes try Whether could show gretter variety. That revel out the nights In dalliance, and the day in loose delights. Ʋsurer v. Covetous. That undoes those he hath most interest in. You are least beholding to him, when you are most obli∣ged, and he is lesse your friend, for the multitude of his courtesies. Sits brooding ore his bags, And measures time, by counting of his gold. Vulcan. The famous fiery Artisan. The president of fire. The crook▪leg'd God. Venus lame husband. The cripple God. The sooty blacksmith God. Lemnian God that in his fiery shop, Hammers out thunderbolts on Aetna's top. The God whose face is smudg'd with smoke and fire. The God with collied cheeks and sooty beard. The poultfoot God. Aetna's limping smith. The white arm'd Goddesse, sooty son. Slow pac't God. Vulgar. The many headed beast. The unconceiving crue. The shallow headed, weak brain'd, multitude. Lay-understandings. Lowest dreggs of men. Uncertain tide of people. Unlearned throng. Illiterate croud. The giddy headed swarme. Humorous tumults. Frantick company. Which like so many empty pitchers may By the lugg'd ears be carried any way.
W. Wander. Rove, roame, range, randome, vagary, gadde, flitt. which run a planetary motion. By wandering stars and not by compasse sayle. Ulysses did not wander more from thaca. That have no certain station. War. The sulphurous breath of war. All destroying fury. Where drums and trumpets and loud canons talke, In an affrighting language. Neglected plowes want labouring hands, Janus gate stands ope. Death hah his plenteous harvest. The souldiers throng'd could scarcely wield at all Their killing hands, the slain could hardly fall. Supported so, the number did oppresse The dying people, and dead carcasses Encreast the slaughter falling heavily. On living bodies. Where stand the groves of spears. Three sisters spedy hands cannot suffice, For breaking threads, hath tyr'd the destmies. When now the horse came prancing nigh, The ground did shake, and clouds of dust did fly, As great as Thracian whirlewin is blow about, Ore the skies cover'd face, and darknesse wrought. Shrill cornets then began the aire to wound, Th' alarums beat, and all the trumpets sound, The noise and shout of souldlers pierce the sle. Poor souldiers stand with fear of death dead struck. All hands are bath'd in blood. And with a purple stream the thirsty soyle Oreflow'd, where all besmear'd in blood there lies, A throng of carkasses, wose livelesse eyes Are clos'd with dust, and death. In a well ordered body stood Erected pikes, like a young leavelesse wood.
Where drums and trumpets give such fearful sounds, As they would shake the clouds unto the ground. Each body seem'd but as a sheath For his next neighbours sword. Where an ounce of honour, costs a pound of blood. Where dead and wounded, pave the bloody field, Strew'd with the slaughter'd carkasses. Where brandisht ensignes seem to brave the day. Where in one shrick another shriek is drown'd, And blood for blood incessantly doth call, From the wide mouth of many a gaping wound, Where drums and trumpets do awake the day, Muffled in mists. Where the blunted sword, Doth rather break than wound, Cloying the greedy jawes of death. The conquer'd field sown round with carkasses. There they fell, And made their clashing armour ring their knell. The crimson pathes of war pav'd all with corps, The bloody harvest where whole threaves of men, The reaping sword sythes down. Where men are drown'd in showers of darts Shafty, armed clouds. Steele-glistering spears the very fields affright, And all the camp seems fir'd with armour bright. Where towers, Prostrate themselves before the iron showers. Where is spent Many a cold December, with no tent, But such as earth and heaven makes. The rugged paths which those men tread, Which with a barbarous pride reckon the dead, And thence their glories number. Where runs the scarlet flood, Dogged war bristles his angry crest, And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace, Thousands like sacrifices in their trim, Unto the fire-eyed maid of smoaky war, All hot and bleeding do they offer up. And mailed Mars doth on his altar sit, Up to the ears in blood. The naked infants spitted on the pikes.
The wounded steeds Fret fetlock deepe in gore, and with wild rage, Yerk out their armed heeles at their dead masters, Killing them twice, and tread a quagmire made Of mangled brains. No blow is dealt, that leaves not death behind it: Where friends depart, and never bid farewell. Where dying mouths do gaspe forth purple breath. Blades imbrued In rivers sprung from hearts. Now horse to horse, and man is joyn'd to man, So strictly, that the souldiers scarcely can Their adversaries from their fellowes know. The grassie pavements stood, All moated over with a crimson flood: War that blood sucking cormorant, From batter'd caskes with every envious blow, The scatter'd plumes fly loosely here and there, Which in the aire doth seeme as drifts of snow, Which every light breath on his wings doth bear. The child of malice, and revengeful hate, That impious good, and good impiety. Warme their cold swords in blood of enemies. So thick their blowes, No wound one sword unto the other owes. War, whose angry feet shake towns and towers asunder. An iron cloud, heavens angry face doth hide. There stood A mount of bodies in a moat of blood. The dikes ore fill'd with slaughter, while the blood Of men and horses make one purple flood, As if in nature they had been the same, And from the wounds of slaughter'd Centaures came. Each one plies deaths fatal taske, the swords sad work. Pikes, bills and darts, seem'd as they stir'd or stood. A mooving forrest, or a standing wood. Drowning their swords in blood. Striking so thick, as if that every blow would fain have been foremost. Making the earth to groan under their furious burthens▪ The horses angry in their masters anger, with love and obedience, brought forth the effects of hate and resistance
and with winds of servitude, did, as if they affected glor, The earth wont to bury the dead, is now it selfe buried with dea∣bodies. In one place lay disinherited heads, dispossest of their natural seig∣niories, there lay armes, whose fingers yet mooved, as if they would feele for him that made them feele, and legs, which contrary to common reason, were made heavier by being discharg'd of their burthens. Many first overthrown had the comfort to see their murtherers over run them to Charons ferry. Where terrour was dect so bravely, that the eye, With delight had scarce leisure to be afraid. Where each sword makes spatious roome before it, Like a wanton rich man, that throwes down his neighbours house, to make himself the better prospect. The horses with open nostrills breath war, ere they can see an e∣nemy, and now up with one legge, then with another, seeming to complain of nature that she had made them any thing earthy. Their swords like cannons, battering down the walls of their armour, making breaches almost in every place, for troops of wounds to enter. The bloody armour seemed to blush, it had defended its master no better. Making many windowes in their armour for death to come in at. Bleeding in such measure, as if they meant to lend Charon a flood, to ferry ore their departing souls. The cannons spit their iron salutation▪ With bullets wrapt in fire, They make a shaking feavour in the walls. The sleeping stones By the compulsion of the ordinance Are raised from their fixed beds of lime. Now death lines his dead chaps with steele, The swords of souldiets are his fangs. The summer dust is laid with showres of blood. Tearing the clowdy cheeks of heaven, With roaring bellowes from the iron mouth Of loud voic't cannons. V. Dubartas The vocation. Ovid Mat. lib. 12, Centaures Lapithae. Virgil. 4. last books Aeneids. Lucan by May translated.
Civil war. To distain In their own bowels their victorious swords, Where kindred hosts incounter. Known ensignes, ensignes do defie, Piles against piles, eagles against eagles flie, Like those on the Aemathian plains. Like the Serpentine brood by Cadmus sprung. Like ensignes all, against like ensignes band, Bowes against bowes, the crown against the crown, Whilst all pretending right, all right throw downe. Convulsions of the state. Untuned drums. That viperous worme, That gnawes the bowels of the common wealth. The trumpet gives uncertain sounds, Where both most loose, though but one party win▪ Wast of the body. A wast as strait and clean As Cupids shaft, and Hermes rod, And powerfull too, as either God. Strait as Circe's wand. Water. The christal regions. Issue of the springs. The liquid christal. Flowing deity. Chrystal Nymph, liquid glasse, melting chrystal. Shaking chrystal, impartial mirrour, undeceiving glasse. Watch Wake. v. Sleepe. As the keen dogs keep sheep in coats, O folds of hurdles bound, And grin at every breath of aire, Envious of every sound. Sleep wanteth weight, to close a winke. Light doth divorce The low and upper lids. His eyes resume their charge. On leaden wings sleep from him flew. My weakened snces had unlockt mine eyes. Wave. Billowes, surges, flowes, the rolling hills. Frothy mounts. Liquid mountains. The foamy wrinkles of the main. Wtry heaps. Neptunes watry brissells. Rolling trenches, moving moutains.
The swelling clusters of enraged seas. Thetis glassie mountains. Those sparkling furrowes of the swelling tide. Weave. Arachne's fatal, yet deserved doome, Nere gave such glory to Minerva's loome, As did her weaving this, that did but show Her art was great, this shew'd her Goddesse too. Such as Arachne on her loome, Wove before she had her doome. Weep. v. Tears. I will weepe a flood▪ Deep as Deucalions, and again the Chaos Shall muffle up the lamentable world, In sable cloaks of grief and black confusion. Then with the pressure of her eyes she freed One tear from prison. The trickling tears ore flow the blubberd cheeke. The flowing eyes send out their numerous tears. To poure out the soul at the eyes. So wept Deucalion, when he saw the state, And face of nature deadly desolate. With tears which might have made another flood, Bathing her cheeks in tears. To shead From drowned eyes vain offerings to the dead. So wept th' Heliades, When they bewail'd their brother, so their trees, Yet amber weepe. Such was Ocyrrohoe's tears, and such her care, When she perceiv'd her self become a mare. So wept old Inachus, then, when he found, His unfound Io. So wept the skilful Centaure, when the faire Ocyrrhoe his daughter turn'd a mare. Warme tears did from her charged eye-springs drain. So wept Andromeda, as to the rock She chained lay. So Cyane when thaw'd into a lake, She mourn'd the ravishment of Proserpine. The drops of rears at every accent fall. Griefe dissolved eyes. Eyes drown'd in tears.
Sorrow impatient to be slowly uttered, her often stopping speeches, poured it self in tears, Eyes big with tears. Like a proud river peering o'r his bounds, o water the plants, the roses and lilies in the cheeks. My cheeks are guttered with my fretting tears. o launder cheeks and handkerchiefs in tears. So wept Pandyon when to Tereus he Gave Philomel. Scarce could he bid farewell, obs so engage his troubled speech. Such tears wept myrrha now become a treee, Abortive tears flow from their spring. So wept old Hecuba, then when she wash'd The wounds of her beloved Polyxena, And saw dead Polydore float on the Main, To mellt his grief in tears, Washing her eyes, with their own native tears, Fresh streams of loves salt flood, illowed on her soft cheeks. To drown the eyes in tears. Steep the eyes in tears, Make Limbecks of the eyes. The melting thawing eye. The deluge of her melting tears disgrace, And drown'd the world of beauty in her face, Hard was it to descry Whether the drops were clearer or her eye. Tears fearing conquest to the eyes might fall, An innundation brought, and drowned all, There remain'd a feature Made sorrow sweet plac'd in so sweet a creature, Showring eyes. Run floods of sorrows. Distill the soul in tears. Channell their cheeks with tears. To drop the brain in tears. His eyes look through his tears, A flowing tide of tears gush from his eyes, Tears wrapp'd in sighs. With eyes that threatned they would drown his face. Eyes great in labour with their tears. With rainy eyes. Write sorrow on the bosome of the earth, And with the southern clouds contend in tears. Lik one was born in April.
The falling tears fret channels in her cheeks, The eyes Drop faster tears than the Arabian trees. Their medicinall gum. Down from his eyes a shower of tears did flow, Like water running from the melted snow. So Ariadne left by Theseus wept, Whom she seeks, Whilst showers of tears made furrows in her cheeks. Mine eyes do flow Like Nilus when it scorns the opposed shore. Tears the best Expressors of true sorrow speak the rest. Dopping his tears upon one place, As if he meant to fret himself a grave. To spend the pearly treasures of the eyes, His eyes out flow the ocean. To weep for joy. v. Lovers Tears. Have you beheld an April shower Send down her hasty bubbles, and then stops Then storms afresh? through whose transparent drops, The unobscured lamp of heaven conveys, The brighter glory of his sparkling rayes, Even so upon her blushing cheeks resided A mixt aspect 'twixt smiles and tears divided. Welcome. v. Glad▪ More welcome than was light, To the disordered chaos. Welcome as are the ends unto my wishes. Nay far more welcome than the happy soil, To sea scourg'd Merchants after all their toil. Kings meet Queens. So Cleopatra met Mark Antony. So soft streams meet, so springs with gladder smiles Meet after long divorcement made by Isles, When love the child of likenesse urgeth on Their chrystall waters to an union. Welcome as quiet rest To one by pain and want of sleep opprest. Health to the sick, drink to the thirsty soul. Is not more welcome. As is the journies end To weary travellers.
Ulysses after all his toil at sea, as not more welcome to Penelope. The scorned beggar could not entertain With greater joy, should he a Kingdome gain, His unexpected fortunes. West. Proud pillars of Alcmena's son, Th' Hesperian Vale. Sols wavie bowers. low Hesperian vales those pastures are, Where Phebus horses on Ambrosia fare, Here Titans panting steeds his chariot steep, And bath their firie fetlocks in the deep. Tartesian main. Sols descent. Hercules pillars, Great Alcides spires, Where Joves great son his pillars rear. ols watry bed. The western streams, Where weary Phebus drops his fading beams Gades. Titans western valley. Iberian deep. Tartesian shore. Where furthest Ganges girdles India. Whale. Those moving rocks. The floating mountains of the sea. The living Islands of the sea. Swimming Delos. The swarthy tyrant of the Ocean, Such was that Monster Perseus once did slay, Rescuing from him the fair Andromeda. Such was the monster angry Neptune sent To Troy, as a revengefull punishment, Which great Alcides slew, That swim in a sea of waters, and have a sea of oyl swimming in them. As a gallie with forefixed pow, Row'd by the sweat of slaves the sea doth plow, Even so the monster furroweth with his brest The foaming flood. Whisper. The language melted in the ear. White. As Venus Doves, as mountain snow, White as the driven and untroden snow, Before the moist and thawing Auster blows, White as the Bull in which
Jove did Europa court. As drifts of winter snow. As spotlesse ivory. As Albanian snow, Or milk white swans that breast the streams of Poe, Not Pelops shoulder whiter. Flora ravish'd with the sight, In emulation made all lilies white, All other whites but shadowings to this. VVhiter than morning milk. White as the flower, That Juno's milk did spring the silver lily, Whiter than Laeda's swan, or bleached snow, Whiter than was the fair swans downy feather, VVhen Jove and Laeda lay in bed together, Like new faln snow upon untroden mountain, As white as is the nectar▪stained way The restlesse sun by travelling doth wear, Passing his course to finish up the year. VVhiter far, Than Towers of polish'd ivory are. So white it is. Snow is an Aehiope, if compar'd to this, Not the fairest Laeda's swan, Nor the sleekest marble can, Be so smooth and white for show, As her lilies, as her snow, More white than snow VVhich on cold winters face doth grow. More white than Neptunes foamie face, VVhen struggling rocks he would embrace, There Laeda's swans her feathers mews, White as the spotlesse Ermine. As unsum'd snow, As that congealed snow. The cast wind hangs on Taurus brow, VVhite as the Aethiops tooth, as the fann'd snow▪ That's bolted by the Northern winds twice o'r, In whose comparison all whites are ink, To write their own reproach. As new faln snow. Or silver swans that trace the banks of Poe, VVhiter than Scythian snow, VVhich Jove doth as his pattern view, VVhen he would give his silver flakes their true
And proper tincture, which the lilies make Their sampler, when their native white they take. VVhore. A parcell of the damned family. n Advowson that hath many incumbents. Give her thine, and she hath a maiden head, VVhose eyes speak charms Embracing makes loose circles with her arms, VVhose looser glowing rayes, VVould thaw the frozen Russian to lust, And parch the Negro's hotter blood to dust. oyson'd Marmalad box. Burning temptation. tock vermine. Tear sheets. No way good, but that openly bad, The quiver ope for every shaft. ustina, Thais, Helena, Lais, Clytemnestra, Tullia. ppia, Catulla, Iberina, Messaline, Inachia. lesina, Lydia, Chloe, Lesbia, Naeera, Phryne. hrysis, Glycerium, Pasibula, Pamphila, Bacchis. ilotis, Philenium, Sylenum, Gymnasium, Delphium. lematium, Erotium, Philocomasium, Acrotelleutium. asicompsa, Phenicium, Adelphasium, Anterastilis. Phro∣esium. Her self is both Merchant and Merchandise, selling her self for ofit, and hath pleasure into the bargain. Her love is a blank wherein she writeth the next man that tendereth is affection. Like the common road, ready for the next Passenger. Her eyes like burning glasses inflame their objects. She writes chracters of wantonnesse with her feet as she walks. VVanton temptations ly in the language of her gesture and be∣aviour. She ties her self in marriage to one, that she may more freely stray t to many. She useth her husband as an hood, casts him off in the summer prosperity, and puts him on for a cover in adversity. ost shamelesse, when her deeds are most shamefull. VVicked. v. Forms of dispraising. at hath practised villany from his Cradle.
And from the dugge suck't mischief more than milk. The gallows was all the inheritance he was born to. The ba scum and spawn of fiends, doing such things as might the De shame. Which if in hell no other pains there were, Makes me fear hell, because he must be there, Who with sinnes of all kinds as familiar be As Confessors, and for whose sinfull sake, School new Tenements in hell must make, Going beyond all examples of others, as if they scorned to be holden to them for their damnation. Monopoly of vice, Hieroglyphick of all ill. That have contracted in a soul the body of all mischief, one tha hath in him all the ingredients of wickednesse., Such an one, as h enemy need not to wish him worse than to be himself. Such another would sink all mankind. Replenisht villain, Who is no lesse Than the perfection of all wickednesse. Wildernesse. Desarts where none make stay, But savage beasts, or men as wild as they. winds v. Aeolus. Gusts, blasts, puffes, Aeolian scouts, Aeolian slaves. Heaven-fanning exhalation. Heavens fanne. The whisking brooms of air. The thundring Skies with their incounters rock, Which with their dusky mantle sweep the air. And earth and seas, The brushing beesomes of the air, Which loose submit to no command, Perplex the clouds, with stern encounters roar, And strike forth lames, That whirl about in their uncertain sphear, And ride their unknown circuit every where. The Astraean sons in swift incursions joyn, Tossing the troubled air and Neptunes brine, That rake the breaking clouds. The hollow flood of air, in Zephyrs cheeks, The tatling bellows. Tatling gossips of the air. Loud noises that torment the air. Chill breaths Fly from their rockie den and blow, As if they meant to crack their swelling cheeks.
Whose tardie plumes ereeking waters, and dull earthy fumes, at from the troubled womb of earth, here they receive their undiscovered breath, eak out in wild disorders, till they make Has beneath his shaking load to quake, e quarrelling winds that deafen unto death, e living and the dead, vvaken to breath. VVine. Which will disengage humane thoughts. e juice of the bewitching grape, e lusty blood drawn from the youthfull vine, e sprightly liquour of the spreading vine, Those floods of light, Which with their sparkling streams, Darting diviner graces Casts glory round our faces, And dulls the tapers with Majestick beams peez'd from the lustfull cluster of the vine, Delicious grapes, surprising juice. Frolick cups. Whose dancing sprightly bubbles, Defie degenerous fears and the dull troubles Of poor afflicted hearts. The inflaming blood Of generous grapes. Wings. Feathered sails, plumed oars, feathered oars. VVinter. VVhen Isicles hang by the wall, And Dick the shepherd blows his nails, And Tom bears logs unto the hall, And milk comes frozen home in pales, Then blood is nipp'd and wayes be foul. And nightly sings the staring owl, When all aloud the winds do blow, And coughing drowns the Parsons saw, nd birds sit brooding in the snow, And Marians nose looks red and raw. When rosted crabs hiffe in the bowl, And nightly sings the whoopping owl, When we can see nothing but a pale Sunne, and a thread bare ath.
When roping Isicles hang on the ears, When Capricorns cold Tropick lengthens night And old men tell their tales, as by the fire They tost themselves. The Sun to us a niggard of his rayes, Revelleth it with our Antipodes. The years cold and decrepid time, When Flora's self doth a freez jerkin wear, The springs by frost Having taken cold, And their sweet murmures lost. The Evening of the year. Old age of the year. Winter storms do crisp the hills, The abstract of the iron age. Boreas congeals the snow, and bears the earth with hail, When in the air winds meet with such a shock, That thundering Skies with their incounters rock, Then comes old winter void of all delight, With trembling steps, his head or bald, or white, The leavie branches, then put off their green. The snowie dotage of the year, When downie snow did make the fields look old. Jove his cold Javelin throws Upon the earth, and whites it all with snows, When floods embrace the snows fair tender flakes, As their own brood. When hardly feed the flocks, And Isickles hang dangling on the rocks, When Hiems binds the floods in silver chains, And hoary frost hath candied all the plains, VVhen every barn rings with the threshing flails, And shepherds boyes for cold do blow their nails, Which with many a storm. Beat the proud Pines that Ida's tops adorn, And makes the sap leave succourlesse the shoot, Shrinking to comfort the decaying root, Divorced leaves then carpet all the ground, Winter doth the earth array In suits of silver gray, when night and day Are in dissention, night locks up the ground, VVhich by the help of day is oft unbound, The winter comes and makes each flower Shrink from the pillow where it grows. And the intruding cold hath power
To scorn the perfumes of the rose, When seas are fettered in cold chains of ice. Wrincles the beauty of the fields, When we have pigmie dayes, Hiems locks up the rivers with her icy key, Phebus lamp to our horizon low The shortest dayes, and coldest doth bestow, From Capricorn cold winter glaz'd the floods, And pur'd with frosts the fields and naked woods, Every thing hath now His courser nature on winters rough brow, And Boreas blast with envious hast, rends every tree, Dsleves each twigge and bough, When trees put off their leavie hats In reverence to old Winters silver hair, When every hoary headed twigge Wears his snowie periwigge, When every bough Wears on his head a cap of snow. When watry Pisces cools fair Phebus side, The frost Candies the grasse, and casts an icie cream Upon the silver lake and Chrystall stream, Heavens archer arrows every where bestows, Headed with ice, feather'd with sleet and snow, Winter hath scal'd the crannies up with frost, And crusted all the grounds. V. Cold, Frost, Ice, Snow. Wise. v. Learned. Crowned with wisdomes rayes. A mind From earth and foggie ignorance refin'd, A knowing soul. Who high in knowledge sir, From earth and foggie ignorance refin'd, Wisdome is center'd in his breast from whence She draws the lines of her circumference. Witch. Sycorax, Canidia, Circe, Medea, Perimede Smmetha, Meroe, Dypsas, Sagana, Vei,, Folia, Maegaea, Which cursed dew from the unwholsome fenne, Brush off with ravens feathers. Pythonissa, Erict. Company for toads, Beetles and Bats.
That can controll the moone, cause flowes and ebbs, Whose exercise Is secret murther, sullen tragedies; Her drink the blood of babes, her dainty feast, Mens marrow, brains, guts, livers late deceast. The mumbling Beldame muttering her charmes. On the corner of the moone, Hangs a vaporous drop profound, Ile catch it ere it come to ground, Which distill'd by Magick slights, Shall raise artificial sprights▪ Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd, Twice and once the hedge pigge whin'd, Harpier cries, 'tis time, 'tis time. Round about the cauldron goe, In the poisoned intralls throw. Toad that under the cold stone, Daies and nights hast thirty one. Sweltered venome sleeping got, Boyle thou first ith' charmed pot. Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boyle and bake. Eye of neutes, and toe of frogs, Wool of bats, and tongue of dogs. Adders forke, and blind wormes sting. Lizards leg, and howlets wing, For a charme of powerful trouble, Like a hell broth boyle and bubble. Scale of dragon, tooth of wolfe, Witches mummy, maw, and gulfe. Of the ravin'd salt sea sharke, Root of hemlock digg'd ith' dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew. Gall of goats, and slips of yeugh, Sliver'd in the moons eclypse, Nose of Turke, and Tartars lips. Finger of birth-strangled babe, Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make this gruel thick and slab. Adde therein a Tygers chauldron, For the ingdients of our cauldron.
Coole it with a baboones blood, Then our charme is firme, and good. By whom large streams back to their fountains flow. The stars drop blood, While the still moon with sanguine visage stood. By moone-light hearbs with brazen sickle crops, And poysonous weeds that bleed in sable drops. Whose unkembed head, Are with short vipers filleted, Commands from graves wild sigtrees torne, And Cypresse, which doth beers adorne. Eggs steep'd in bloud of toads, to bring, With feathers of the Scritch owles wing. Hearbs of Iolcos baneful field, And poysons Thessaly doth yeild. Bones snatcht from jawes of hungry bitch, To burne with flames of stinking pitch. On which the witch doth water fling, Fetcht from Avernus loathsome spring. Ingredients of witchcraft. Peeces of dead carkases snatcht from ravenous beasts. VVolves haire. Mad dogges foame. Adders care. Serpents slough. Spurging of a dead mans eyes. Mandrake roote▪ Flesh, bones, and sculls from charnel houses. Ropes, chains, raggs, bones, haire, sinews, Marrow of men-gibetted, blood and fat of slain infants. Eggs and black feathers of a screech owle. blood and back bone of a frogge. Aconite, hemlock, henbane, adders tongue, nigh-shade, Moon-wort, libbards bane, poppy, cypresse, wld fig∣trees growing on tombes, juyce of the lach tree, or A∣garicum. Basiliskes blood, vipers skin, the toad-eyes of the owle, bats wings, young colts forehead. Harpier, Padock, Martin, familiar spirits. Pluto, Hecate, Proserpina, Chaos, Diana, Eumenides, and all the infernal powers, the deiris invocated by witches. V. Dubartas. Trophies, Witch of Endor. Ovids Metam. lib. 7. Amorum 1. Eleg. 5. Horace. Epod. 5, Virgil Eclog▪ 8. Theocritus Pharmaceutria. Skakespears Macheth.
Ben. Johnsons mask out of the house of Fame. Lucan. Lib. 6▪ Witty. Whom the fates thought fit To make the master of a mine of wit, That rules the Monarchy of wit. His brain's a quiver of jests, VVomen. The frail tribe, softer sex. Fair afflictions. Beauteous troubles. Frail Corporation. Weaker vessels. Oversight of nature. Mistake of nature. Disgrace of reasonablenesse. Obstinate cowards, slave born tyrants. Shops of vanity, gilded weathercocks. In whom conscience is but peevishnesse, chastity, Way wardnesse. A bad wife is The Hectick feaver, not to be be cured, but by death, Like Falcons stooping to a gaudy lute. VVenders of nature when they wrong her not. The best of goods, or else the worst of evils. Glorious angels, or else cursed devils. None more desire honour, or worse keep it. That most desire what you most deny, And most contemne, what comes most easily. That carry a pedlars shop about them. Names of beauteous women. Cynthia, Caelia, Phebe, Phyllis, Amarillis, Lesbia, Chloris, Phloe, Sirena, Coynna, Clarinda, Castora, Amoret, Florimel, Claribel, Arabella, Lucida, Belphebe, Paeana, Aemylia, Serena, Blandina, Gloriana, Delia, Rosalinda, Laura, Lucinda, Rosaline, Portia, Cornelia, Angelica, Angelina, Stella, Mira, Miranda, Lucerta, Olivia, Violetta, Lycoris, Julia, Cytheris, Clarinda, Calista, Irene, Leucippe, Chariclea, Panthea, Saccharissa, Philumene. Valiant women. Laurina, Tulla, Tarpeia, Camilla, Hippolyta, Acca, Penthesilea, Bomart, Tomyris, Artemysia, Hipsicratea, Candace, Voadicea, Zenotia, Amalasunta, Valasca.
Ʋnchast women. v. VVhores. Faustina, Thais, Lais, Helena, Clytemnestra, Tullia, Hippia, Catulla, Messaline, Iberina. VVomen of all sorts, Heywoods book of VVomen. Wolf. VVhich infest the night VVith their wild howling at fair Cynthia's light, The Mountain dogs, that out at midnight stalks, And round the quiet sheepfolds closely walk. The bitter foe of bleating flock. Womb. The winding chambers of the womb, Our Mansion where kind nature shews her cunning, The secret Mansions where we are, VVhilst nature doth our limbs prepare, Natures secret cabinet. Mans first grave and tomb. Wonderfull. v. Admirable. Wood. v. Arbour. Shade. A wood untoucht of old was growing there Of thick-set trees, whose boughs spreading and fair, Meeting obscured the inclosed air, And made dark shades exiling Phebus rayes, VVhere no rude fawn, nor wanton Sylvan playes, No nymph disports but cruell deities. No bird dares light upon those hallowed boughs, No beasts made there their dens, no wind there blows, VVhere Dryades oft meet The Naiade, and with their nimble feet Soft dances lead, although their aierie shape, All but a quick poetick sight escape. There Faunus and Sylvanus keep their court, And thither all the horrid hosts resort. A wildernesse of trees. Wooll, The curled burthen of the ramme. The fleecy burthen of the sheep. Thriving burthens. World. The universe. The glorious ball. The twin globe. The universall bower.
The all-circumference. Vast volume. The vast amphitheater Mighty orbe. The vast rondure. A ball of wind. A glorious nothing. The biggest bubble. A ball of ice. A slippery bowle. The common hall of troubled natures factious court. All the World over. Where ever Nereus walkes his wavy round. From where the morning riseth, and the sun, To where the even, and night their courses run. As far as ere heaven-propping Atlas high, Bears on his back the beauteous starry skie. As far as Phaebus dart▪s his golden ray. Wheresoere the sun doth cast his flaming eye. From Alexanders to Alcides bounds. From Indian shores unto the setting sun, And from the farthest Hyperborean coasts, To those whose climes continual summer roasts. Where ere the invading sea assaults the land. As far, As is the Artick from th'antartick star. From silver Ganges to Sols watry bed. In all the world where Phebus ever showes His glorious face, when he his circuit goes. From East to West, untill in dusky night, Unto the lower world he lends his light, Within the compasse of the general frame, In all the countries, which from Gades extend To Ganges, where the morning beams ascend. Wormes. The crawling vermine. Dead corps bed-fellowes. The wrigling tenants of the grave. Crawling Canniballs. Wrigling insects. That feast upon the dead. The unfelt fleas within the winding sheet. Wound. v. Kill. The biting steel's pursued by streams of blood, That bth'd her pure white in a crimson flood. To warme the reeking steele in blood. To sheath the weapon in the flesh. To plow the flesh. To sluce the blood. As from a crack in a strait pipe of lead, Conveying water from some fountains head,
Hissing i'th aire the captive stream doth spin In Chrystal threads her silver humour thin. Unseam the skin. The gash lies gaping for revenge. Wrong. No patience can bear, no charity pardon. An injury beyond all satisfaction. Height of injustice. Break the lawes of justice. W. Xanthus. Troy's ancient river, which such streams did hold, As made the sheepe that drunk of them wear gold. Divine Scamanders flood. The stream, Which men Scamander, Gods did Xanthus call. The streams wherein young brides did wash their bright, And beauteous limbes before the marriage night. Xerxes. Darius wealthy son, That brought the numerous army into Greece. 1700000. or as others, 1000000 That with his armies, drank whole rivers dry. That with his ships bridg'd ore the Hellespont. That whipt the seas, and lasht the winds cause they His threatning commands durst disobey. Whose souldiers through the mountains cut their way. Persia's luxurious prince. Year. The year, Whose winged car by moneths, daies, hours is drawn. The circle of the moneths. The chapters of the booke of Time. The serpent rolling in, into her selfe. Space of Years. Thrice seven summers I had seen, Deckt in Flora's rich array, And as many winters keene, Wrapt in suites of silver gray.
Thrice through the Zodiack had Hyperion pranc't, And the fourth time his burning team advanc't. When Sol again had brought his team about, The sun hath three times parched crab and goat, Twelve times the sun Through his twelve signes had run. Now he to fifeteen added had a year. When summers five he thrice had multiplied. By this the sun, Conducting time had through, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. Autumnes run Now through twelve signes, the sun had brought his light. Now Titan thrice had finished his years. In watry Pisces. While slowly shding moneths make up the date Of thirty years. Now thrice foure heavens have roll'd about The circle of the year. Untill Sol thrice the globe hath circled round. The quickning sun Had twice six times about the Zodiack run▪ Twice had the glorious sun run through the signes, And with his kindly heat improv'd the mines. Thrice had Phaebus been, In horned Aries, taking up his Inne. Now when the year had turn'd his course about, And fully worne his weary houres out; And left his circling travel to his heir, That now sets on-set to th' ensuing year. Now seventimes Phoebus, had his welked wain, Upon the top of all the Tropick set, As many times descending down again, His fiery wheeles had with the fishes wet. Three winters cold, Have from the forrests shak't the summers pride: Three beauteous springs to yellow Autumne turn'd, Three Aprill perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd. Three summers now have past, Thrice hath the painted pride of flora grac't. Earths joyfull bosome, thrice hath winters rain, Bereav'd her of that verdant dresse again:
The posting sun Five times, through his celestial Innes must run: Cold Capricorne had pav'd earths surface, twice, With brittle places of chrystal crusted ice. Twice glazed rivers, and the sappy blood, Of trees hath twice re-periwig'd the woods. aturnes flow team hath trotted twice the round, The sun hath gone his yearly progresse twice. Ful thirty times hath Phaebus Car gone round Neptunes salt wash, and Tellus orbed ground; And thirty dozen moons with borrow'd shine, About the world have twelve times thirty been, The rising Pleiades have four Autumnes seene. Twice hath the golden sun, Through the cold psces his round journey run. re Phaebus thrice twelve times shall fill her hornes▪ When years first stil'd me twenty. V. Spring. Summer. Autumne. Winter. Young man. To whom nature did late begin, To uneffeminate his smoother chinne▪ Now in his looks both boy and man appear: An old boy, an infant man. The doubtful downe now budding on his chin. His chin began to bud with down of gold. His blooming youth twice told eight birth daies crown, And cloth his cheeke with scarce appearing downe. So young, Scarce any downe darkning their cheeks was sprung. The blossome of his youth so fully blowne, That strength of nature now thought good to seeke, Her entertainment in his downy cheeke. And with her manly beauty did begin, To uneffeminate his sleeker chin, Whose Phaenix down began but to appear, Like unshorne velvet. Whose bare outbrav'd the web it seem'd to bear. Fresh beauty triumphs on the brow. His height made him more than a boy, His looke would not allow him man. The mossie down still growing on his chin. Whose face as yet did not bewray his sexe,
With so much as a shew of haire. His face now beginning to have some tokens of a beard, was composed to a kind of manly beauty. Not old enough for a man, not young enough for a boy, a squash before 'tis a pescod. A stripling, not much in debt to years, Upon whose chin, are not so many haires, But a tapsters arithmatick may soon bring his particu∣lars therein to a total. The swift post of time hath now begun His second stage. Reason now drawes her curtains, her closed eyes Begins to open, and she calls to rise. Youths now disclosing bud peeps out, and showes Her April head, And from her grasse greene bed, Her virgin primrose early blowes, Whilst waking Philomel begins to sing Her warbling sonnets to the wanton spring. His stage is pleasant, and the way seems short, All strew'd with flowers, The dayes appear but howers, Being spent in time-beguiling sport, Her griefs do neither presse, nor doubts perplex, Here's neither fear to curbe, nor care to vex. His downy cheek growes proud, and now disdains The tutours hand, He glories to command The proud neckt steed with prouder reins. The strong breath'd horne must now salute his ear With the glad downfall of the falling deere. His quick-nos'd army with their deep-mouth'd sounds Must now prepare To chace the timerous hare, About his yet unmorgag'd grounds, The evil he hates is counsell and delay, And fears no mischief but a rainy day. The thought he takes, is how to take no thought, For bale nor blisse; And late repentance is, The last dear penniworth that he bought, He is a dainty morning, and he may, If lust ore-cast him not, b'as faire a day.
He is now out of natures protection though not yet able to guide himselfe. Just of age to be miserable, when in his own conceit he begins to be happy. His reason serves not to curbe, but to under∣stand his appetite, and prosecute the motions of it with a more ea∣ger earnestnesse. Himselfe is his own temptation. He leaves re∣pentance for gray haires, and performes it in being covetous. He conceives his youth as the season of his lust, and the houre where∣in he ought to be bad, and because he would not loose his time, he spends it. He distasteth religion as a sad thing, and is six ears el∣der for a thought of heaven. He scorns, and fears, and yet hopes for old age, but dares not imagine it with wrinkles. He doth sel∣dome any thing, which he wisheth not to do again, and is only wise after misfortunes. He suffers much for his folly, and a great deal of knowledge makes him a wise man. Every action is his danger, and every man his ambush. He is a ship without pilot, or track∣ling, and onely good fortune can steere him. Youth. Blooming years. April of our years. The morning of our daies. The time for heat and lust. Satans best opportunity. The flowry prime of age. Youthfull. Youthful as the early day. Youthful as snakes that their fresh skins resume, Or eagles having mew'd their aged plumes. Like to Medea's ram, Which from the cauldron rise a frisking lambe, Youthful as Aeson from the cauldron leapt. When rigour trains The sparkling blood through thy meandring veins. When as thy flaming marrow shall foment Thy lustfull fires. Z. Zephirus. The father of the painted flowers, And in their bosomes drops his balmy showers. The gentle wind whose mild And fruitful breath, gets the young spring with child.
The hatching breath. Gentle Favonius. The thawing wind. Zealous. So inflamed with zeale, he turnes all objects into fewell to feed it. Zodiack. Heavens painted girdle, scarfe. The heavens bright shining baudrick. That way the restlesse sun doth weare, Passing his course to finish up the year, The shining belt, about the breast of heaven. On the right shoulder like a flaming jewel. His shell with nine rich topazes, adorn'd. Lord of the Tropick, sits the scalding crab; Who when the sun gallops in full careere, His anual race, his ghastly clawes uprears, Frights at the confines of the torrid zone. The fiery teame, and proudly stops his course, Making a solstice, till the fierce steeds learn His backward paces, and so retrograde, Post downward to th' opposed Capticorne. Heavens bright Bandaleere. The oblique scarfe that knits the yeare. Sols twelve Innes. Aries. First stands the ram that Helle bore away, And makes the nights equal to the day. Which Phrixus carried safe, but Helle threw, Into that sea, which from her drowning drew The name of Hellespont. The ram that bore the golden fleece, Which Jason once in triumph brought to Greece. Taurus. Whether a cow or bull we cannot know, The parts above appear'd, but not below. Europa's bull that wore the golden hornes, On whose soft back she ore the seas was borne. Which lowing walk't upon the tender grasse, Amongst the herd, yet did in form surpasse. His colour whiter than untroden snow, Before the moist and thawing Auster blow. The flesh in swelling rolls about his neck,
His broad spread breast, long dangling dewlaps deck, His hornes though small, yet such as art invite, To imitate, than shining gems more bright, His eyes no wrath, his browes no terrour threat, His whole aspect with smiling peace repleat. Gemini. The swan-got brothers. The brother stars. Hellens bright brothers. Castor and Pollux. The egge-borne twinnes. Tindarian stars. The twins begot on Leda by a swan. Cancer. The parching crab that burns up all the grasse. The thirsty star, The summers rainy star. The scalding star. Whose crooked claws with fervour fry. The crawling crab which great Alcides slew. The Crab sent in by Juno's angry spite, To vex Alcides in his busie fight With the Lernaean Hydra. Leo. The raging Lyon. Hercules first labour. That keeps his station next the crab. Nemaean monster, whose unpierced skin, The great Alcides wrapt his body in. Molorchaean star. The shaggy constellation. July's scorching star. Virgo. The maiden star. The chast star of Erigone. The virgin constellation. Icarius sad daughter. Who when she saw, she could not give relief Unto her father, hang'd her self for griefe. The maid by whom is borne In her fair hands, the ripened ears of corne. Libra. The hanging ballance, that doth weigh the light, Giving an equal share to day and night. Astraea's shining ballance. Sorpius. That bears the deadly poyson in his taile. That boldly stretcheth out his ugly clawes. The dreadful beast that Pale Orion slew. The star that riseth at Orions faile.
Which Tellus did on purpose breed, To let Orion see, Though he did in power exceed, There stronger was than he. Sagitarius. Achilles Tutor. Dreadful archer. The armed Centaure. Thessalian archer. The double shaped star. Phillyrian fire. Whom at the Muses praier, Jove made a star. Capricorne. The winter Tropick. Showry Solstice. The half fish goat. Pan turn'd himself into that shape, When he did from Typhaeus fly. And in that forme did safe escape. Which made Jove place it in the sky. Aquarius. Heavens showry skinker. He that full pitchers powers On earth in drizling showers. The pitcher-bearing boy. Joves eagle up from Ida snatchr. Fair neighbour to the Capricorne. Pisces. Last constellation of the twelve. The suns last Inne. The scaly star. That ends the circuit of the year. The watry star. That periods the year. Zoilus. v. Cririck. That like the dog run, and snarle at the stone. Condemning that, which is too hard a bone For their thin chaps to deal with. Condemning most, what they least understand. Malignant spirits that with envious look, Read others, as they mean to read this book; And blaming many things, they cannot mend; Tell you they'r glad there is at last an End. FINIS.
Formes of Commending. IT will be Dispraise enough, for him that censures thee. The Poets theam and Patron. Time shall a Poet raise, Borne under better stars to sing his praise. If we thy years should number by thy acts, Thy years would be a Cypher to thy facts. Praise her who list, he still shall be her debter, For art nere feign'd, nor nature fram'd a better. He that will write of him, must still write more, Nay men would think their states for ever rais'd, To look on him that is so highly prais'd. Whilst we Admire all vertue in admiring thee. So brave a person to describe to men, Requires a curious pencill, not a pen. Should any power into my brain infuse, Thy worth, or all the Poets had before; I could not praise, till thou deserv'st no more. But I employ, My pen in vain to overtake his fame, All praisefull tongues do wait upon that name. Whose worth so far transcends all praise, Who writes him well, may well deserve the baies. But striving her to grace, I injure her, For ever where true worth for praise doth call, He rightly nothing gives, that gives not all. Oh what vertues be Inherent, even to the least thought of thee! To live blest, is to trace his waies. Epitome of all that books, Or ere tradition taught. I aspire Enough to worth, whilst I his worth admire. A name most dear to vertue. Perfections great exchequer. Learnings exchequer▪ Nature at her own work doth wondering stand.
I speak not this in hope t' incroach on fame, Or adde a greater luster to his name, Bright in it self enough. Servant to justice and strict honesty. Whose powerful name, Merits above the donatives of fame. A name, That he who without reverence speaks the same, Commits a sin that all his tears and praiers, Can never expiate. Circumference, And fixed center of all excellence. All others vertues is his paraphrase. He is—but time denies to tell thee what, Summe all perfections up, and he is that. For whom nature did her self engage, To do more than in man could scarce be done. I should commend Particulars, but then how should I end, Without a volume? So noble all, That envie groweth weary of her gall. Whose acts and name Become the wonder and discourse of fame. Each verdant laurel, every myrtle bough, Are strip't for wreaths t' adorn and load his brow, Triumphant wreaths, which cause they never fade, Wise elder times for kings and Poets made. A sun, the beams of whose meridian glory, Fills eyes with wonder, and all tongues with story. He had all the graceful parts that might attract love, Or conduce to the accomplishment of a perfect soul. Had Plutarch liv'd till now, to blazon forth His life (as sure he would) what prince of worth, Or Greek, or Roman, had his single story, Selected out to parallel his glory. The Hemispheare of whose praise knows no Horizon. Had the blind Greeke, one of the Muses first Priests, been con∣of so sub∣to Apollo temporary to this Heroe, how proud would he have been lime a subject to heighten his fancy; a subject adequate himself, and his whole quire of daughters. Your self being extant, well may show How far a moderne quill doth come too short, Speaking of worth. Fame that hath undertook your name to blaze,
Plaies but the envious huswife of your praise. Alone in him was nature prodigal. Of so divine, and rich a temper wrought, As heaven for him perfections depth had sought. The best whilst thou art here, Compar'd with thee, like men scarce made appear▪ That curious form made of an earth refin'd, At whose blest birth the gentle planets shin'd With faire aspects, and sent a glorious flame, To animate so beautiful a frame. The darling of the Gods and men. All that dare believe report, admire. Bright honours great example. Seems not a man but vertues name. Though all might boldly, none could justly blame him. In whom consists all that The heavens have rais'd to a perfection. Parts beyond the degree of admiration. One that whosoever will praise well, Must first set down with himselfe, what it is to be excel∣lent, for so she is. All that beheld him (and all that might behold him, did behold him) made their eyes quick messengers to their minds, to tell them they had seen, the uttermost could be seen. Of whom all expected as much as human nature could bring forth, and his vertue will not let their expectation be deceived. The senate-house of the planets were never so set to decree perfe∣ction in man. Of whose high praise, and praiseful blisse, Goodnesse the pen, heaven the paper is, The inke immortal fame doth lend. If ever vertue tooke a body to shew its else unconceive∣able beauty it was in—N. M. Where truth it self must speak like flattery. It is a praise, to praise, when thou art praisd, Not thou by praise, but praise by thee is rais'd. Where nature doth with infinite agree. Only in you the flatterer never eth, Whose desert outstrip all praise, & make it halt behind it. When tongues speak sweetly, then they speak her name. No title good enough to keep his name companie. A mind, envy cannot but call faire.
Whose name's the theam of honours tongue. All report of him, that is not faire, gives it selfe the lie, and pulls rebuke from every ear that hears it. Mortal Angel, Wants nothing of an Angell but eternity. That paragons description and wild fame, Who in the authority of merit, puts on the vouch of malice it selfe. Of whom to speak as he deserves I am unable, and in what I can, I am unworthy. All other perfections are so far from matching his, they deserve not to be mentioned, the great distance makes them appear like a litle point, scarce to be seen, and lesse to be respected. So vertuous and spotlesse, that malice is angry, she can find no cause to be angry with him. His life was a letter, written full of religion and learning, whereof his death was the seale. Her vertues stifle my pen, they croud in so fast upon it. His praises are as painful for himselfe to hear, as pleasant for others to relate. His vertues are too great to be spoken, and yet too great to be con∣cealed. Fames fingers are too foul to touch his vertues. His vertues raise A work to trouble fame, astonish praise. The element so mixt in him, That nature might stand up and tell the world, There was a man, whose fame is like the aire. Invulnerable, and all calumny against him but malitious mock∣erie. Where every God did seeme to set their seale, To give the world assurance of a man. Sing, speak, and write the praise of other men, At him kneele downe and wonder. A vertue that can give envy bounds. On whose every part, Truth might spend all her voice, same all her art, Whose graces do as far out▪strip all fame, As fame doth silence. Old men were glad their fates till now did last, And infants, that the fates had made such hast, In such a welcome time to bring them forth, That they might be a witnesse to such worth.
What others call vertue is the natural habitude of this princesse. An angell drest in flesh and blood. Such, as if a man were to choose out of all men, he could not pick another. Incarnate Cherubim. To be dislikt by him, i enough to be miserable, All whose inclinations do aime at goodnesse, And vertue to him is so natural, as I verily believe, he would be much troubled to do ill. It were hard to find a man for whom he could be changed without losse. In a place at Athens, when one named Plutarch, the eccho answer∣ed Philosophy, the same would have been done with his name and vertue. Whose vertue is a transcendent, far above the abilities and carriage of our age, a match for antiquity, in its greatest purity and seve∣rity. In which name I call Up so much truth, as could I here pursue, Would make the fables of good women true. The wiser world doth greater thee confesse, Than all the world, than thy self only lesse. Far beyond the pen, Or the weak knowledge of admiring men. Oh what a taxe and impost hast thou laid, Of worth upon thy followers, how much prais'd, Must be that vertue, that can keepe them free From th' exprobration of thy memory? Thou hast undone So much our fancy, and invention, It cannot gave thee ought, he that of thee Shall write out half seemes to write poetry. It is a strong line here, to speak but true, Hyperbole's in others are thy due. We Admire all vertues in admiring thee. With such goodnesse blest, As may merit praises best. Such goodnesse as admits no hopes of imitation, and by that only priviledged from envy, and emulation. As if both heaven and earth should undertake To extract the best from all mankind to make One perfect man.
He doth excell, In honours, courtesies, and all the parts, Court can call hers, or man would call his arts. He's prudent, valiant, just, and temperate, In him all action is beheld in state. And he is built, like some Imperial roome, For these to dwell in, and be still at home, His breast is a brave pallace, a broad street, Where all heroick ample thoughts do meet, Where nature such a large surveigh hath tane, As other soules to his, dwell in a lane. Beneath her feet pale envy bites her chain, And snaky discord whets her sting in vain. He that adventures of your worth to sing, Attempts in vain to paint a boundlesse thing. The highest pitch of perfect nature. Whom none can equal, best, but imitate. I know what ere my verses be, They will like the most servile flattery show. Though I write truth, and make the subject you. Want of invention here, is no excuse, The matter we shall find and not produce. And as it fares in crouds I only doubt, So much will passe, that nothing will get out; Who undertakes this subjct to commend, Shall find nothing so hard, as how to end. What Muse can silent be, Or litle say, that hath for subject thee. I fear to act, A sin like their black envy, that detract, As oft, as I would character in speech, That worth, which silent wonder scarce can reach. Nor dare I, unlesse impudence in verse, Would cease to be a sin, and what were crime In prose, would be no injury in rime. Praises on thee, Short of thy worth, a kinder libell be. To write is easie, but to write on thee; Truth will be thought to forfeit modesty. Language richest dresse, And highest sence, cannot thy worth expresse. To crown thy merits I shall only be
Sumtuously poore, low in Hyperbole. None can speak of him without praise. Nor praise without admiration. Whom most mens hearts adore, and all admire, Worthy the envy of angels were they capable of passions. Oh had I Virgils verse, or Tullies tongue, Or raping numbers, like the Thracians song. I have a theam, would make the rocks to dance, And surly beasts that through the desarts prance, Hie from their caves, and every gloomy den, To wonder at the excellence of men. A man of unexampled goodnesse. On purpose made by fate, That all might have one for to imitate. Not borne, but sent from heaven. Who writes of thee, Must volumes make, and write an history. Of whom men speak, when they his actions tell, Not as of man, but some great miracle. Should the stars come from heaven they could not thenc▪ Be here received with greater reverence. Whose name when it salutes the ear, Mn think they then, perfections abstract hear. V. Famous. Admirable. Ʋnspeakable. Formes of Dispraising. The basenesse of whose mind is such, that it sinks a thou∣sand degrees lower than the basest body could carry the most base fortune. An unnecessary letter in the alphabet of creatures. The cipher in Natures Arithmatick, and the accounts of all good men. To make him more culpable than he is, were but to cast inke on an Aethiops face. Oh for a name Were bad enough, but all expession's lame. A man of that stupendious composition, He seems made up of the worst of all extremities. Whose ill is grown to such a height, It makes the earth groan to support his weight. The quintessence and abstract of all evill, Clothed in flesh to play the closer Devill.
Incarnate Devill. Devill in hose and doublet. Whose shame even hoarse with age black fame shal ring. And after times with horrour shall distract, And by recounting of so vile an act, Mortality so much astonishing, Make them account their wickednesse, scarce sin To that, which long before their time hath been. That know no God more mighty than their mischief. Of the most wicked disposition, that ever infected the aire with his breath. Sts fires on barnes, and hay-stacks in the night, And bids the owners quench them with their tears. That dg up dead men from their quiet graves, And set them upright at their dear friends doores, Even when their sorrowes almost were forgot. Not clean enough to spit on. A man that is the abstract of all faults, That all men follow. The impostume of all corruptions. Who all things on the earth amends, By beeing worse than they. A disposition would turne charity it self into hate. That pursue Deeds, After which no mischief can be new. Who is no lesse Than the perfection of all wickednesse. The Stigian Quintessence. The Devils Enchiridion. In one the monster of all wicked men. None speak his name, but spit after it, for fear of being poyson'd. The type of basenesse, To whom vice is so proper, that it seems to grudge any man the practise of it, but himself. To whom murthers are but resolute acts, and treasons, matters of great consequence. The Devills factor for all wickednesse. An honest man can neither see him, nor speak of him without a blush. v. Wicked Foole. Voluptuous. Formes of protesting. By all the oathes sacred religion knowes. By all oathes made in reverential fear Of heaven, and her inhabitants. By your self, that is by all thats good.
By Styxes muddy peacelesse spring, the fear, And only sacred oath the Gods do know. By all the floods infernal here I swear An oath, whose breach the very Gods forbear, Pronounce me guilty of a blacker crime, Than ere in the large volume writ by time, The sad historian reads of. By those chast lamps that yeild a silent light, On the cold urnes of virgins. By that night, Which guilty of no crime doth only hear The vowes of recluse Nuns, and Anchorites praier, And by thy chaster selfe. Now by my fathers ashes do I swear, Of whom a reverend memory I bear. By the sad ashes of my sleeping father. By dreadful Styx, by which the Gods Nere swear and break their vow. By my best comforts. By the honour of my fathers herse. By the black brook of hell. As there comes lights from heaven, & words from breath. As there is sence in truth, and truth in vertue. By Cupids strongest bow. By the best arrow with the golden head. By the simplicity of Venus Doves, By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, And by that fire, that burnt the Carthage Queen, When the false Trojan under saile was seen. By all the vowes that ever men have broke, By all the Gods that ever men invoke. By all the virgin roses of the spring. By maid-hood, honour, truth, and every thing. By innocence I swear, and by my youth. By all thats sacred, and can make an oath. By all thats sworn by, divine, and humane. Now by these burning tapers of the skie. Now by the sacred radiance of the sun. By all the operations of the heaven. Now by yond marble heaven. In the due reverence of a sacred vow. I do engage my words. So help me every spirit sanctified.
By earth and sea, and Stigian Gods I swear. V Gods. Heaven. Sun. Moone. Stars. Formes of Conjuring, or Beseeching. I conjure thee by all the charmes that love can teach▪ By all the rites of love I thee conjure. By those fair eyes that haue enthralled mine, And by that all-alluring face of thine. So may thy growing fruit survive the frost, Nor ripening by the rapefull winds be lost. By that happy woman that bare thee, by all the joyes of thy heart, and successe of thy desires. By what more dear, a better proposer could charge you with all. By your faire beautie, for if Persians may Swear by their sun, I well may swear by that. By all that's vertuous. By all that you hold dear. By the sad ashes of your sleeping father. By the lov'd memory of all your ancestors. By the honour of thy fathers herse. I desire you by all that's sacred. Formes of giving Thanks. No word Breathes through my lips, that doth not thanks afford. I could afford To melt my self in thanks. A benefit I have received from you, never to be forgot∣ten, but with ungratefulnesse. Which whensoever I remember, without due thanks, I shal for∣get all gratitude. I must repay you, with the uncurrent coine of thankes, out of the exchequer of the poore. You have anticipated all that I intended to say, and have not left for me in all rhetorick, either complements, or commendations to returne you. This is to enforce ingratitude by excesse of obligation, and to re∣duce me to a necessity of being indebted to you after I am dead. Gratefulnesse is the poor mans vertue, and seeing I cannot be li∣beral, I will indeavour at least not to be unmindfull. If there be a vice opposite to ungratefullnesse in the excesse
of gratitude, your many favours would drive me into it. Requitall were presumption, and you may Call me ungratefull, when I strive to pay. All thanks are so due, that the greatest scarce can excuse from in∣gratitude. Your favours, and benefits to me are so much above my merit, that they are even above my▪ gratitude, if that were to be judged by words that must expresse it. The swiftest wing of recompence is slow to overtake your favours. My life wants worth to repay your favours. This dicourtesie alone your favours have done me, that I shall be forc'd to live and die ungratefull. You could not be unhappy, could either my wishes, praiers or power make you fortunate. When my pen-feather'd Muse hath learn'd to soar, And gotten wings as well as feet, look then For equal thanks from my unwearied pen. I cannot think of your courtesies, without sighing at the sense of innability to repay, and blushing that I must needs (how thankful so' I am) at least appear ingratefull. I should be ready upon all occasions to give you thanks, did not the Consideration of the greatnesse of my Debt make me de∣sperate. Sir, there is nothing you possesse you may use more freely than my self, so much hath your courtesit purchased me yours, There is none hath a more ample interest in my love, Nor any have a lodging nigher to my heart. My uttermost ambition and endeavour is to climb to those deserts may give me the name of your thankful servant. No creature bears life, Which more faithfullie studies to do you service. I am so far beneath the riches of your merits, it can be no honour to your name to rank me in the number of your servants. The least words you speak I receive with as much reverence, as an absolute and unresistable commande∣ment.
You have given so great testimonies of your love to me, that i I should not have a due resentment of them, It were fit I lost my memory. I cannot forget your favours without forfeiting my right to a memory. You have so absolutely acquired me yours, as you have left me no liberty to do what I desire, when there is any question of perfor∣ming your pleasure. Theres nothing that my sence can reach, That doth not some way me my duty teach, Eevery object, me thinks, upbraids my ingratitude. Hd I as many tongues, &c. V. Many unspeakable. My gratitude to you is as necessary as my being, and I can soon∣er cease to be, than to be unthankfull. If you expect thanks worthy your favours. I beseech you afford me the terms I may repeat after you for your satisfaction. For I confesse my incapacity to expresse the resentment your obligations cause in me. V. Forms of concluding Letters. Forms of blessing or wishing well. All the dear joyes here, and above hereafter, Crown thy fair soul. May sick men, if they have your wish be well. And heaven hate those you curse. Prosperity be your page. Successe crown all your actions. Good fortune by your lacquey, and wait upon you. The best wishes your thoughts can forge be your servants, and attend you. May each day better others happinesse. May each sun shine with a new blessing on you. Untill the heavens envying earth's good hap, Give you immortal honour, So live on earth, that heaven may thee desire, Yet slowly to the expecting stars aspire. May you carve out your fortune to your wish. Safety and honour alwayes attend you. May heaven empty her storehouse of blessings upon you. V. Happy. Forms of cursing or wishing ill. Mischief and sorrow go along with you.
Hearts discontent and sour affliction Be playfellows to keep you company. May poyson be their drink. Gall, worse than gall, the dainties that they tast, Their sweetest shade a grove of Cypresse trees, Thir chiefest prospects murdering Basilsks, Their softest touch as smart as lizards stings, Their Musick frightfull as the adders isse, And boding shriech owls make the consort full, All the foul terrours in dark seated hell, All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks, And mine to boot dart on thee. The gods send thee not death, the common plague, but feeling after death, May thy curse equall thy merits, and the Devils malice be glut∣ted in thy misery. May heaven create a new puinshment in hell for thee alone, as conceiving all the degrees there already heaped together, too little for thy wickednesse. The ravenous Vulture tear his breast, The rolling stone disturb his rest, Let him next feel Ixions wheel, And adde one fable more To lying Poets store. May he be whatsoever rage and malice wish. V. Miserable. Ʋnhappy Forms of blessing times and dayes. That blessed night, that mild aspected hour, Shall consecrated evermore remain, What gentle Planet in that hour remain, It shall be happy in the birth of men, Which was chief Lord of the Ascendent then, With whiter wooll be clad the day, It shall be marked with the whitest stone. The sun shall shine upon that happy day, And ever crown it with a glorious ray. This happy day Shall be to after times their Epocha. And whn reckon up the summe of blisse. They shall wish all their dayes to be like this.
And may there on that day for ever be, A Rubrick set to all eternitie. The golden number light upon that day Not any moments are More sainted in Fames happy Calendare, Nor shall that happy day for ever lack Its worth in fames eternal Almanack, Which none shall read, but straight their losse deplore, And blame the fates they were not born before To see this day. Times last annals eternize that day. Forms of cursing dayes and times. O let that day be guilty of all sin, That is to come, or heretofore hath been, From his unnumbred hours let time divide it, Lest in his minutes he should hap to find it. Or let him on his brows for ever wear it, That when he comes all other dayes may fear it, And the ill-boding Planets by consent, That day hold ever their sad Parliament, Be it in heavens decree enrolled thus, Black, fatal, dismall, inauspicious. O let that day be ever banish't far, And quite expung'd from times great Calendar, Succeeding years as they their circuit go, Leap o'r this day, as the sad time of woe, May the unwearied sun for ever shroud This day his face within some dismall cloud, And when the Morn shall bring its dawning light, May it be strangled in eternall night, When this day yearly comes let every one, Throw in their urn their sad and blackest stone, Let never bird that cuts the air with wing, Except the owl be this day heard to sing. Let clouds and darknesse dwell upon that day, Unblest for ever by Sols chearing ray, Let all men curse it, let it ne'r appear, Amongst those dayes that consummate the year, Let mirth and joy be banish't from that day, May it its course and curst succession lack, Nor have a name in any Almanack. Let that day be bound In clouds of pitch, nor walk th' Aethaerean round.
Let not God write it in the roll of dayes, Nor let the sun restore it with his rayes, May plagues and famine, and the worst of fate Light on that day, may universall hate Make it by all detested. may all unhappy stars Conjoyn their most malignant influence, And then extract the subtle quintessence, And throw it on this day. Let the eclipsed Moon her throne resigne, Instead of stars let blazing Meteors shine, Let deaths dark shade involve, no light appear, But dreadfull lightnings, its own horrour fear, Be it the first of miseries to all, Or last of life defam'd for funerall, O▪ be that dismall night for ever blind, Lost in it self, nor to the day rejoyn'd, Nor numbred in the swift circumference Of months and years, but vanish in offence, O let it sad and solitary prove, No sprightly musick hear nor songs of love, Let wandring Apparitions then affright The trembling Bride, and quench the nuptiall light. Forms of breaking off. But as in cutting up a man that's dead, The body will not last out to have read On every part, and therefore men direct Their speech to parts that are of most effect, So But like a winters day. I must make amends for my unpleasant∣nesse in my shortnesse, therfore &c. Day would expire E'r all were told, and would your patience tire, Should I from their originall, Our sufferings tell, should you give ear to all The annals of our toils, approaching night, First in Olympus would inclose the light, But should I all intend to show, The dayes swift course would sink before below. But day would end, And Phoebus panting steeds to seas descend, Before my scant Oration could pursue All &c. But I must free your weary patience. But I'm afraid my tedious discourse
Should give your ears a surfet and inforce, A loathing on your willing patience. But it would be a crime beyond excuse, If I your patience longer should abuse. Forms of bringing Similitudes. Have you beheld. So have I seen. Have you not seen. So we oft see. As I have seen. So I have oft observ'd. So oft hath my observing eye descried, Not much unlike. Holding resemblance with. Forms of invocating Muses. Twice sacred powers (if sacred powers there be, Whose mild aspect engyrland poesie) Ye happy sisters of the learned spring, Whose heavenly notes the woods are ravishing, Brave Thespian Ladies, at whose charming layes Each mosse thrumb'd mountain bends, each current plays Pierian singers, O ye blessed Muses, Who as a gemme too dear the world refuses, Whose truest lovers never clip with age, O be propitious in my pilgrimage, Dwell on my lines untill the last sand fall, Run hand in hand with my weak Pastorall, 'Cause every coupling cadence flow in blisses, And fill the world with envy of such kisses, Make all the rarest beauties of our clime, That daign a sweet look on my younger time, To linger on each lines inticing graces, As on their lovers lips, and chast embraces. Assist my trembling and unable quill, Oh all ye powers that hunt Parnassus hill. V. Muses. Apollo. Phoebus Forms of concluding Letters. You will impose an Obligation beyond expression upon—your &c. If you please to make an addition to all your former favours, by the acceptance of this testimony of my gratitude, I shall be the more deeply obliged to be— Time makes me put a period to my lines, but it shall, find its own e'r it force me to put one to my service, Which is as large as my desires to be— I shall receive an honour in your acceptance from your accustomed
goodnesse far above the merits and expectation of— And which I desire may supply the place of any further comple∣ment, I am— Accept I pray this short presentment of my humble service from him that lives to be I shall forfeit my right to a memory, when I forget what obligements I have to be I desire this short Letter may give you some testimonies of my gratitude, being the onely means I have to shew you in my absence how much I am My uttermost ambition is to climb to those deserts may give me the title of There is nothing else for the present concerns your knowledge, un∣lesse you will be pleased to take notice that I am I esteem not my self so unforttnate as formerly I did, since I have happened upon so fair an occasion, to let you know that I am You shall receive a larger testimony in this kind of my love, when I may have a better opportuity to assure you that I am In the mean time and ever, I shall most passionately remain It is the height of that honour I most passionately aspire to, to be esteemed. I shall sooner cease to be, than not to be perfectly But I will not be further tedious, if you will please to let me tell you, that I most passionately am Assure your self of all those that have any share in your favours, there is not any more proud of his good fortune, than my self, or more really than I am Amongst all my felicities, I account not the lowest the liberty you are pleased to grant me of stiling my self what I most truly am My occasions for the present are so importunately urgent, that it is all I can do to write thus much, and to tell you what you knew long since, that I am Think not that I complement with you, or speak Court language, when I assure you I am more than any man living I shall not fail to attend all occasions to serve you, and by that to testifie how passionately I am I am truly sensible of my disability to keep correspondence with your love, and find nothing more deficient in me, than the desert of being But I hope you will be pleased to pardon me, your goodnesse be∣ing as illimitable, as is the desire I have to tell you that I am▪
But the straitnesse of my time makes me say sooner than I inten∣ded, that I am ever absolutelie Be pleased to let these assure you that it is impossible to be more than I am, Let these assure you of my firm resolution, to be as long as I live, But I have neither time nor paper left, but onely to tell you that I am, I hope you cannot refuse me, your affection, since it is a kind of deserving it, to be so passionately as I am But since the hast of the bearer, and the straightness of the time do press my dispatch, I will for the present content my self with telling you that I am, I shall never esteem my self absolutelie miserable, whilst I have libertie to call my self I should think worse of my self, if I were one jot less than I am You shall never want my praiers for your happie return', when I may with greater joy, and lesse distance tell you that I am, But you will pardon me I hope, if I abruptlie break off this dis∣course, out of a passionate desire I have to tell you, that I most re∣allie am I shall not fail, by my care in any concernments of you, to shew you more clearlie that I am But I refer it to your prudence and pleasure, being readie in that and all things else to shew my self I shall be happy in a more seasonable opportunitie to do you that faithfull service, which must ever be acknowledged due from Thus far if you please to crown my most earnest and sollicitous desires, I shall take it for the deepest ingagement ever imposed upon Let these lines present my humble service, and demonstrate what strong desires I have to be. Accept I pray, this imperfect way of presenting my service, till I am able to give you a worthier testimonie, that I am Assure your self, there is none more trulie loves you, nor more passionatelie desirous of your happinesse than Assure your self, I so much honour and respect you, that you could not want perfect happinesse, were it in the disposall of I wish with passion I had any imployment in your service, whereby I might force you to believe that I am extreamlie In this I do not implore your belief, desiring to let you see by ef∣fects rather than words, that I am without a complement
The passion which I have to your service, is so violent, that it nourisheth in me a continual care of seeking opportunities to make it known that I am Assure your self, that of all the servants your merits have acqui∣red you, there is none more than I am I am by so many obligations yours, that my only discontent, is the want of occasions to give you testimonie that I am I beseech you honour me with your commands, that (other means failing) my obedience may oblige you to believe that I am I must discharge my heart in telling you, that I honour you more than all the rest of the world, and that I most really am Though I have often told you, how devoted I am to your servce, yet my pen shall once again assure you of the same, expecting an occasion, when I may give you more eminent proofes, that I am Assure your self, you may have more powerfull, and more consi∣derable servants, but never one more than my self I esteem too much the honour of your remembrance not to desire the continuation of it, and withall to beseech you for some employ∣ment, wherein I may witness the passion I have to your service, and to be Esteeme infallibly, that I am more than all the world besides Assure your self, I shall never be capable of other resentment, than which shall witnesse the quality that I bear of It remains in you only to allay the discontent of my mind, by gi∣ving me some employment in your service, which may witness the passion I have to maintain the qualitie of The esteeme which I make of your deserts, and the inclination which carries me to your service, obligeth me to assure you that I am Though you should forget me even to my name, I shall never change the resolution, which I have taken to be all my life Assure your self, you shall hereafter accuse me rather of importu∣nity than neglect of writing, 'tis the protestation of You may easily know without being a Prophet the dear esteeme I make of you, and may believe without any further assurance, that I am Believe assuredly, that into what extremity of adverse fortune so ever I am reduced, I will alwaies conserve the passion I have to your service, as being without fiction Though I despaire of ever making you satisfaction for your many favours, yet I shall alwaies have a good will and passion to your service, which I shall heartily offer you up, being
I content my selfe with the expectance of an occasion wherein I may witness with services, rather than words, that I am unfeignedly in heart and soul These are no discourses of complement, my heart dictates to my pen, what my pen writes to you, when I assure you that I am Your thanks have bought my service at so dear a rate, that the satisfaction, which I before received, is utterly now taken from me; Keepe) our complements I pray for some other, and remember to use more familiarly Leave of I pray, that language of complements which is un∣known to true friends, whereof I am one, and which is more You will be sooner weary in commanding, than I in executing, as being unreservedly I send you back your thanks, to the end you may make use of them, when you entertain some person less indeared to your service than I, who am Treat with me I pray with less civilitie, and more freedome, if you account me as I am I do not doubt of your power, and less your courtesie, which forceth me to believe, that you will comply with this occasion offer∣ed you, to oblige extreamly I have no greater pleasure in the world, than to make my self re∣marqued in all places I wish you had every day occasion to command my service, that I might continually have the good fortune to produce new proofes of my obedience, and stronger assurances of my being I should be happy in an emploiment, wherein I might witness, according to your merit, and my affection, how unfainedly I am. I beseech you S use my indeavours, to any thing, within my po∣wer, assuring your selfe, that I am without reserve I shall avoid no occasions, which present themselves for your ser∣vice, but will comport my self with so much passion in all your con∣cernements, that you shall be forced to confess that I am unfeign∣edly In the mean time, I hope my bare confession will be eloquence e∣nough to perswade you, what contentment I am deprived of, by the want of ability, to witness unto you how much I am The contentment I take to hear of your health and happiness, can be equalled by nothing, but the passion which I have to your service, as being But the good opinion which I hope you have conceived of me, will give a far better testimonie than my pen is able, which hath in
charge at this present, only to put you in mind, that  alwaies according to my wont I am unable to acquit my self otherwise than by prayers of the service I owe you, yet do not cease I beseech you to continue me in the number of I shall be happy to be honoured by your commands, since by that means my obedience, may give me the perfect contentment, of being able to testifie unto you, how much I am Beleeve it, you may be as confident as of the most assured thing in the world, that I am in heart and soul I shall die of impatience if I expect long, the opportunitie to witness unto you how deeply I am I should become envious of your vertuous inclinations, but that they admit no hopes of imitation, and therefore I reserve only admi∣ration to contemplate them in quality of I most passionately desire some occasion would offer it self, whereby I might in some part merit your favour by the realitie of my service, since I am, and will be all my life My disability to requite you, makes me ashamed to remember what engagements I have to be I conjure you to serve your self without exception, of all the ad∣vantages in my power, if you would really have me believe, that you count me of the number of your best friends, as I am Give him I pray an occasion by your emploiments to shew you what passion he hath to your service, who desires rather to be in ef∣fect, than appearance Believe assuredly, that in the whole train of your servants, there shall be very few able to imitate me in resolution whch I have ta∣ken to carry to my grave, the quality of Grant me I beseech you the liberty to importune you at all times to honour me with your commands, that by the readiness of my ob∣servance in your service, you may be constrained to know, that if you be extreamly generous, I am no less sensible, nor no less I shall sooner loose my self, than the remembrance of your fa∣vours, and my engagements by them to be I confess my incapacity to express the resentments which your obligations cause in me, as well as my disabilitie sufficiently to ac∣quit my self, as But since generous actions carry their recompence with them, all I can do, is to put you in mind of your nobleness, and to tell you that I am Let this acknowledgement, I beseech you, serve for a satis∣faction,
till I can better assure you that I am Accept this testimonie of his service from him that hath taken oath to live and die I shall continue for the time to come, what hitherto I have been 'Tis the counsell and friendly advice of There is none more interested in your contentments, nor more participates in any satisfaction of yours, than I am by inclination as well as reason The onely good fortune which I expect with impatience is an oc∣casion to change my words into effects, and to shew you how really I am If occasions to do you service would offer themselves as often as they do to write to you, I should give testimonie by my actions, ra∣ther than by discourse, that I am more than in complement I know your desert and condition have acquired you many ser∣vants, yet I can assure you with as much reason as ostentation, that join them all together, they are not so much as I am Let this for the present satisfie you, till I have occasions (which with continuall impatiency I expect) to give you more effectuall proofs of my being Could my endeavours take effect, or my vows accomplishment, you should not long account me in the number of your unprofitable servants, for I am But whatsoever happen, I shall never be other than If I did not apprehend, I might be importunate, I should write to you by every opportunitie that presented it self, for it is the onely consolation that I have in your absence, to put you in mind, that I will be eternally If in any thing I be able to do you service, it stands upon no∣thing but your self to give me the employment, being glad to wit∣nesse to you at all times how much I am I shall employ my best care and industrie in any of your com∣mands, when you desire proofs of the obedience of Return quickly your answer, if you will free from sortow and disquiet. The onely means to occasion my return is to signifie to me how I may be usefull to you when I am there being in a firm resolution to render you all manner of service in quality of If I could be perswaded that my absence could occasion your dis∣quiet, or my presence necessary to your service, you should see by my speedy return how much I am
The news of your sicknesse hath bred such a change in my health, that I may justly count my self in the number of those that are not well: either leave your bed suddenly, or you will constrain to take his I shall acquit my self very willinglie of my duty in any thing wherein I may be usefull to your service, of which I give you most faithfull assurance, as protesting to be all my life I can assure you, 'tis a very great satisfaction to me to see my self honoured with the favour of your remembrance, and the delightfull entertainment of your letters, wherein I read what cause I have to be Do not think that I complement, but believe infallibly, that my heart, mouth and pen conspire together every time I give you assurance, as I do now, that I am more than all the world. You wil do me a great favour to honrur me with your commands, and to believe that I am unfeignedly, and without reservation I shall never esteem my self happy till the day wherein you are pleased to give me an employment for your service, it being the onely thing in the world I aspire to, with most passion to let you see that I am Every time I think of your favours, I am touched with an ex∣traodinary impatience in expecting some opportunity to shew my self I cannot expresse my uncessant disquietnesse in seeking occasions to testifie unto you how perfectly I am It is impossible for me to expresse how strictly I am yours, nor the least part of the passion I have to your service, being both unimi∣tably, and unlimitably There are not many in the world that can vaunt with reason, that they are to that height as I am My resolution is to professe my self all my life I begin to grow weary of your favours, the disability in which I find my self will not suffer me to receive any new one, for fear I should be constrained in the end to passe for ungratefull when I am most strongly obliged to be I would say more if I made no conscience of detaining your eies▪ too long upon this paper, I shall therefore free both them and your patience, by telling you that I am, and shall be everlastingly I desire nothing of you but praiers intermingled with commands, to the end that my obedience may make me worthy the good opinion you have of Though my misfortunes be in their flood they have not drowned the respectfull observance I alwayes used in your behalf, as having made a vow to coffin up with my self the qualitie of
Believe that if I be extreamly afflicted, I am no lesse The sorrow which I endure, and the straitnesse of the time will scarce give me leave to assure you that I am▪ But whatsoever mutations and vissitudes there are in the world, I shall never change the resolution to be all my life If you knew with what impatience I expect the favour of your reply, I assure my self your charitie would oblige you to set at quiet the mind of I will lose my life, rather than my resolution to die If I had the power to comfort you with my presence, you should soon see me where my letter is now, however I beseech you where∣soever I am, and at what distance soever, I most really am If you doubt of the truth of my service make use I pray of that absolute power which you have acquired over me to oblige my en∣endeavours to all manner of proofs, that I am I never think of your many favours, but it renews the remebrance of my engagements to be I shall as soon forget my name as my obligements to prefix before it the title of I shall be content to be accounted ungratefull when I lesse am I shall suspect a great growth of vice, in me when I feel any cooling of my desires to continue everlastingly And certainly Sir, I shall never be so impious, as not to confesse my self But I see my letter is almost grown to a volume, that I may there∣fore at last make it end like me, give me leave to tell you that I am Or if that may come within the construction of a complement, believe that I speak most unfeignedly, when I tell you that I am My gratitude to you is as necessary as my being, and I can sooner leave that, than not be most truly I shall not fail when opportunitie befriends me, to give you a more expressive testimonie that I am Be pleased to take my bare word, till I can give you a more con∣vincing argument that I am I never think of the catalogue of my friends, but it puts me in mind what cause I have to give you this subscription I could say more, but the times are strict, and scarce allow the pen its full libertie, however I hope I may be bold (for it is no se∣cret) to tell you plainlie that I am Though the times be inquisitive, and urge secrecie, yet I shall ne∣ver be brought to conceal how much I am Though letters have not their wonted freenesse, and the super∣scription
be not priviledge enough to keep them sealed, till they reach the hands that ow the direction, yet I will dare to tell you, and all the world, that I most trulie am Thuogh the times be dangerous, and letters unsafe, yet as long as I dare write, I will be bold to tell you that I am Though I be debarred your sight, yet I hope I am not envied the happiness, to give you notice how passionatelie I am When the world speaks the worst of me, it is some comfort to my conscience, that I find not my self yet so vicious, as to forget what obligements I have to serve you, and to remain perpetuallie It is no small preservative against vice, to remember your ver∣tues, and the many engagements I have for ever to continue Though I am most unspeakably busie, yet my occasious shall ne∣ver be so pressing, but I will be at leisure both to be, and to tell you that I am Assure your self I shall never forget you in my prayers, as oft as in them I remember I hope you will be pleased to honour with your acceptance, this presentment of that service, which shall ever be duly acknowledged and upon all occasions exprest. I beg your acceptance of this testimony of my gratitude, and my earnest desires, to deserve the name of I shall be as glad to hear of your health and happiness, as I am thankfull for the many engagements I have to write my self I hope I need not desire you to be confident, that whatsoever is deficient in my expression, wants not a perfect supplie in the heartie affection of him that will ever remain I desire you to accept this paper present, which is all I now can tender, and which will be enough, if it can obtain your belief, that it comes from one who is Of this I desire you to rest assured, as a thing most seriously resol∣ved by him who is Assure your self you think not amisse when you think me There is none hath a more ample interest in my love, nor any have a nigher lodging to the heart of The least word you speak I receive for an unresistable comman∣dement as being You have so absolutely acquired me to your service, as you have left me no libertie to do what I desire, when there is any question of performing your pleasure, as being FINIS.
