P4121C 99827466 31884
THE SINGLE SONGS IN The New OPERA, CALL'D, The World in the Moon. Sett by Mr. Daniel Purcell, and Mr. Clark. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple Change Fleetstreet, where also may be had a General Catalogue of all the Musick-Books for this Thirty Years last past down to this pre∣sent time. 1697. Price Six Pence.
Some of the Song-Tunes Transpos'd for the Flute. Come Strephon, Phillis, Then come kind Damon, Divine Astrea hither flew,
Song in the New Opera, call'd the New World in the Moon, Sung by Mrs. Cross. Sett by Mr. Daniel Purcell. COME Strephon, Phillis, come let us troll a Jo╌v'al Hour away; and whilst the Gol╌den minutes ro╌ll, we'll Sing and Dance, Sing and Dance and Play; and whilst the Golden minutes ro╌ll, we'll —, Sing and Dan╌ce and play; —, we'll Sing and Dan╌ce and play.
A Song Sung by Mrs. Lindsey. Sett by Mr. Daniel Purcell. THen come kind Da╌mon come a╌way, to Cinthia's pow'r advance; the Sylvians they shall Pipe and play, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up the Dance; the Sylvians they shall Pipe and play, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up the Dance; the Sylvians they shall Pipe and play, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up the Dance.
A Song Sung by Mrs. Cross. Sett by Mr. J. Clark. SMile then with a Beam Di╌vine, we'll be Blest if you but shine; Hap╌py then our paines and toyls, Witt on╌ly lives when Beau╌ty smiles: happy then our paines and toyles, Witt only lives, Witt on╌ly lives when Beau╌ty smiles, Witt on—ly lives, Witt on╌ly lives when Beau╌ty smiles.
A Song Sett by Mr. Daniel Purcell, Sung by a little Girl. YOung Strephon met me the o╌ther day, and Cour╌ted me to toy, to to╌y and play. Young Strephon met me the o╌ther day, and Cour╌ted me to to╌y, to to╌y and play: He talk'd of twenty prit╌ty things, of Darts and Flames, of Darts and Flames, and Cu╌pid's Wings; what need he tell me o'er and o'er, I had a thousand Charms and more, my Glass had told me that, my Glass had told me that be╌fore, my Glass had
told me that, my Glass had told me that before; and than He fell to Sobbing, Sigh╌ing, Wooing, Wooing, Cooing, Whineing, Cringing, Vowing, Swearing, all, all, all, all, all, all, all but dying, Vow╌ing, Swear╌ing, all, all, all but dying. I knew what he meant, I saw't in his Eyes, 'twas all but a pack, all, all but a pack of flat'ring lyes; I knew 'twas a sham, all, all that he said, for Young as I am, young, young as I am, I am too old, too old to
be betray'd; for Young, young, young as I am, young, young as I am, I am too old, I am too old, too old to be betray'd; Young, young as I am, young, young as I am, I am too old, I am too old, too old to be betray'd. A Song Sett by Mr. J. Clark. DI╌vine A╌strea hither flew to Cynthia's brigh╌ter Throne, she left the I╌ron World below, to bless the Silver Moon; She left the I╌ron world be—low to bless the Silver Moon.
A Song Sett by Mr. Daniel Purcell. YOung Strephon hee has Woo'd me long, and Cour╌ted me with Pipe and Song; but I a sil╌ly, sil╌ly pe╌vish Titt, for want of Sense, for want of Witt, have poo'd and cry'd, have pish'd and fy'd, and play'd the Foole, and lost my Time, and al╌most slip't, and al╌most slip't, and al╌most slip't my Mai╌den prime. II. But now I thank my gracious Heav'n, I hope my faults are all forgiven; I've struck the Bargain, eas'd my pain, And am resolv'd to take my Swain: To Poo, and cry, And Pish, and Fye, And make a Virgin's coy pretence, Is all, all, all, is all, all, all, is all, all, all For want of Sense.
A New Song. LEt those Youths who freedom prize, far from the conqu'ring Syl╌via run: never see her kil╌ling Eyes, or hear her soft enchant╌ing Tongue. For such sure de╌struc╌tion waits, on those darts with which she wounds, no Shepherd e╌ver can escape, but falls if Syl╌via does but frown. III. Damon, to his cost has prov'd, All resistance is but vain: Heav'n has form'd her to be lov'd, And made her Queen of all the plain. IV. Damon, when he saw her face, From her beauty wou'd have fled; But the Charmer turn'd her voice, And with a Song she struck him dead. Advertisement. BY Reason Madam Purcell's AYRES and SONATA'S coming out this Trinity Term, the Press could not compleat the Collection of Choice SONGS of Mr. Henry Purcell's; for which, several Gentlemen have Subscrib'd; and also a greater Number of SONGS than was Proposed, will be Added. Therefore all Gentlemen and Ladys, that intend to Sub∣scribe, are desired to doe it before the 25th. of July; and the Books, with∣out farther delay, will be deliver'd Michaelmas-Term next. FINIS.
