R397 12648770 65250
JOHN RAY, F.R.S. Printed for J. Hinton, at the King's Arms in Paternoster Row
Miscellaneous Discourses Concerning the DISSOLUTION AND CHANGES OF THE WORLD. WHEREIN The Primitive Chaos and Creation, the General Deluge, Fountains, Formed Stones, Sea-Shells found in the Earth, Subterra∣neous Trees, Mountains, Earthquakes, Vulcanoes, the Universal Conflagration and Future State, are largely Discussed and Examined. By JOHN RAY, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church Yard. 1692.
TO THE Most Reverend FATHER in GOD, JOHN Lord Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan. My Lord, IT was no Interest or Expecta∣tion of mine, that induced me to dedicate this Discourse to your Grace. I am not so well
conceited of my own performances, as to think it merits to be inscribed to so great a Name, much less that I should oblige your Lordship, or indeed a far meaner person by such inscription. My principal motive was, that it would give me opportunity of congratulating with the sober part of this Nation, your advancement to the Archiepiscopal Dignity; and of acknowledging His Majesty's Wisdom in making choice of so fit a Person to fill that Chair, endued with all Qualificati∣ons requisite for so high a Calling; so able and skilful a Pilot to go∣vern the Church, and so prudent and faithful a Counsellor to serve himself. But I will not enlarge
in your just praises, lest I should in∣cur the unjust Censure or Suspicion of Flattery: Give me leave only to add, what I may without injury of Truth, and I think also with∣out violation of Modesty; that your Grace's Election hath the concurrent Approbation and Ap∣plause of all good men that know you, or have had a true Character of you; which may serve to streng∣then your Hands in the Manage∣ment and Administration of so dif∣ficult a Province, though you need no such Support, as being suffici∣ently involved and armed by your Vertues, and protected by the Al∣mighty Power and Providence. Those that are Good and Wise are
pleased and satisfied, when great Men are preferred to great Places; and think it pity that Persons of large and publick Spirits should be confined to narrow Spheres of Acti∣on, and want field to exercise and employ those rich Talents and Abilities wherewith they are en∣dowed, in doing all the Good they are thereby qualified and inclined to do. My Lord, I am sensible that the Present I make you, is neither for Bulk nor Worth suitable to your Person and Greatness; yet I hope you will fa∣vourably accept it, being the best I have to offer; and my boldness
may pretend some excuse from an∣cient acquaintance, and from my forwardness to embrace this oppor∣tunity of professing my name among those that honour you, and of pub∣lishing my self, My Lord, Your Graces most devoted Servant and humble Orator, John Ray.
THE PREFACE. VVERE it not customary and expected by the Rea∣der, this Discourse would need no Preface. All that I shall pre∣mise, shall be something by way of Apology or Excuse. First, For the two long Digressions I have made, the one concerning the ge∣neral Deluge in the days of Noah, the other concerning the Primitive Chaos and Creation of the World. My first Plea is, their Affinity and near Relation to my Subject, The future Dissolution of the World by fire inviting me to say something of the former Destructi∣on
of it by Water. And the destru∣ction being opposite to the formation, I had as good a Pretence to discourse likewise concerning that. My second excuse is, their agreement with my Sub∣ject in being alike matters of Ancient Tradition. Five matters of Ancient Tradition I have taken notice of, and four of them, by reason of their now-mentioned Relation one to another I have had a fair and inviting occasion to treat of in this Work. They are 1. That the World was formed out of a Chaos by the Divine Wisdom and Power. 2. That there was once an uni∣versal Flood of Waters, in which all Mankind perished, excepting some few that were saved in an Ark or Ship. 3. That the World shall one day be dissolved by Fire. 4. That there is a Heaven and an Hell, a Tartarus and an Elysium, and both eternal, the one to reward good men, and the other to punish wicked. 5. Of which I have
no occasion to treat, That Bloody Sa∣crifices are to be offered for the Expia∣tion of Sin. It may be doubted, whe∣ther these Traditions among the Hea∣then had their Original from some pas∣sages in Scripture, as that of the Chaos from the second Verse of the first Chap∣ter of Genesis. And the Earth was Tohu vabohu, which we render without form and void; and that of the Deluge, from the History of it in the seventh Chap∣ter of the same; and the future confla∣gration from several passages in the Prophets, &c.; or were antecedent to the Scripture: I rather think the latter, because we find them among some Na∣tions, which it's likely never had un∣derstanding of the Scriptures, nor in∣deed ever heard of them. Secondly, For Writing so much, for which perchance some may censure me. I am not ignorant, that men as they are mutable, so they love change; and affect variety of Authors, as well
as Books. Satiety even of the best things is apt to creep upon us. He that writes much, let him write never so well, shall experience that his last Books, though nothing inferiour to his first, will not find equal acceptance. But for mine own part, though in ge∣neral I may be thought to have writ∣ten too much; yet is it but little that I have written relating to Divinity. Thirdly, For being too hasty in huddling up and tumbling out Books. Herein I confess I cannot acquit my self wholly from blame. I know well, that the longer a Book lies by me, the perfecter it becomes. Some∣thing occurs every day in reading or thinking, either to add, or to correct and alter for the better; but should I defer the Edition till the Work were absolutely perfect, I might wait all my life-time, and leave it to be publish∣ed by my Executors. But I see that Posthumous Pieces generally prove in∣feriour
to those put out by the Authors in their lives. And perchance did the Reader know my Reasons for this speed, which I think it not fit now to lay open, he would judge them suffi∣cient to excuse me. However hasty and precipitate I am in writing, my Books are but small, so that if they be worthless, the Purchase is not great, nor the Expence of Time wasted in the perusal of them very considerable. Yet is not the worth of a Book always an∣swerable to its Bulk: But on the con∣trary  is usually esteemed  for . One hing still remains to advertise the Rea∣der of, that is, that upon second thoughts, I do revoke what I have de∣livered as my Opinion or Suspicion concerning the Continuance of the Rain at the Time of the Deluge for one hundred and fifty dayes, because it is said the Waters prevailed so long
upon the Earth, that is, as I understand it, increased. I now grant that it lasted but forty natural days; because those words of God to Noah, predicting the Continuance of the Rain. Gen. 7.4. For yet seven days and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights, &c. seem to limit it to that term. So that we must seek some other reason for the prevailing of the Water for one hundred and fifty days; which probably might be the Conti∣nuance of the Emotion of the Center of the Earth for so long time.
THE CONTENTS. THE Introduction concerning Prophecy. Chap. 1. The Division of the Words [2 Peter 3.11.] and Doctrine contained in them, viz. I. Testimonies concerning the future Dissolution of the World. 1. Of the Holy Scriptures. 2. Of ancient Chri∣stian Writers. 3. Of Heathen Philosophers and Sages. II. Seven Quotations concerning the Dissolution propo∣sed. pag. 1.2, 3 Chap. 2. The Testimonies of Scripture concerning the Dis∣solution. Dr. Hammond's Expositions, referring the most of them to the Destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem, and the Period of the Jewish State and Polity, considered, and pleaded for. p. 5, 6, &c. to 22 Chap. 3. Some Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church concerning the Dissolution of the World. p. 22, 23, &c. to 28. Chap. 4. The Testimonies of some Heathen Philosophers and other Writers concerning the Dissolution, the Epicureans. p. 28. The Stoicks, who held certain Periods of Deluges and Conflagrations. p. 29 to 34. That this Opinion of a future Conflagration was of far greater Antiquity than that Sect proved. p. 34, 35.36. The Antiquity and Ʋni∣versality of it argue it to have been derived from Noah and his Sons. p. 37, 38 Chap. 5. The first Question concerning the World's Dissolu∣tion, Whether there be any thing in nature, that may pro∣bably cause or argue a future Dissolution. Three possible means propounded and discussed. p. 39
Sect. 1. The first is, the possibility of the Waters again naturally overflowing and covering the Earth. p. 39.44, 45, &c. to 51 The old Argument for the World's Dissolution, viz. its daily Consenescency and Decay rejected. p. 40, 41, From the continual straitening of the Sea; and lowring the Mountains and high Grounds by Floods washing away and carrying down Earth; and from the Seas encroach∣ing upon the Shores, such an Overflowing shewn to be possible, p. 44, 45, &c. to p. 50. An Objection against the Diminution and Depression of the Land answered, p. 51, 52, &c. A Digression concerning the general Deluge in the Days of Noah, p. 56, 57, &c. Testimonies of Heathen Writers and ancient Coins verifying the Scripture-History of the Deluge, p. 56, 57, &c. to 63. That the Ancient Poets and Mythologists by Deucalion understood Noah, and by Deucalion's Flood the general Deluge, p. 60, 61. That there have been other particular Deluges. p. 63 The Opinion of those who held, that the Deluge was caused by a miraculous Transmutation of the Element of Air in∣to Water, p. 64, 65. That the Means assigned by the Scripture, viz. A continual Rain of forty natural Days; and the emptying the Subterraneous Abyss may suffice, so that we need not have recourse to such an assistance, p. 66. That all the Vapours suspended in the Air might contri∣bute much towards the Flood, proved, p: 67, 68. Con∣cerning the raising up the Waters out of the great Deep, p. 69, 70. An Occasional Discourse concerning the Original of Foun∣tains, p. 70, 71, &c. The Subterraneous Circulation, and perpetual motion of the Water to the Author improbable, p. 71. That the Preponderancy of the Earth, and the Water lying upon an heap in the opposite Hemisphere cannot be the Cause▪ of the Waters Ascent in Springs, proved, p 72, 73. That Rains may suffice to feed the Springs, and do feed the ordinary ones, proved, p. 74, 75. That the Rain-Water sinks down and makes its way into the Earth more than ten or twenty, or forty, or an hun∣dred foot, proved by many Arguments and Experiments, p. 76, 77, &c. to p. 82. Mr. Halley's Opinion, that Springs and Rivers owe their Original to Vapours con∣densed
on the sides of the Mountains, propounded and approved as to hot and fervid Regions; but disallowed as to the more temperate and cold ones, yet the Vapours there not wholly excluded, p. 82, 83, &c. to 91. Obser∣vations communicated by Dr. Robinson concerning the Original of Fountains, dropping Trees, &c. p. 92, 93. The Question further discussed, and proved that Vapours are a partial Cause of Springs even in temperate and cold Regions. Addit. 251, 252 Inferences upon the Supposition of the Rivers pouring into the Sea half an Ocean of Waters daily, p. 95, 96. The most probable Causes of the Deluge, viz. The Emotion of the Center of the Earth; or an extraordinary Depres∣sion of the Superficies of the Sea, p. 99, 100. The Ef∣fects of the Deluge: 1. As. to the Superficial Parts of the Earth, p. 102, 103. 2. Particularly, as to the bring∣ing in of formed Stones, or the Shells and Bones of some Sea-fishes, dispersed all over the face of the Earth. p. 104, &c. A Discourse concerning the Nature and Original of those Bodies: whether they were originally the real Shells and Bones of Fishes or Stones cast in such Molds: or whe∣ther they be primitive Productions of Nature in imi∣tation only of such Shells and Bones, not owing their Figure to them. The Arguments on both sides proposed and weighed. p. 106, 107, &c. to 132 Sect. 2. The second possible Cause of the World's De∣struction in a natural way, the Extinction of the Sun. p 133 Sect. 3. The third possible Cause of the World's Destruction, the Eruption of the Central Fire, p. 135. That the being of such a Fire is no way oppugnant either to Scri∣pture or Reason. p. 137, 138, &c. Sect. 4. The fourth possible Cause of the World's De∣struction, the Earths Dryness and Inflammability in the Torrid Zone, and the Eruption of the Vulcano's p. 141. That the Inclination of the Ecliptick to the Equator doth not diminish, p. 142. That tho there were such a drying and parching of the Earth in the Torrid Zone, it would not probably infer a Conflagration, p. 142, 143, 144. That there hath not yet been, nor in the ordi∣nary Course of Nature can be any such drying or parching
of the Earth under the Torrid Zone, p. 44, 45, 46. The possibility of the Desiccation of the Sea by natural Means denied, p. 146, 147. The Fixedness and Intrans∣mutability of Principles secures the Ʋniverse from Dis∣solution, Destruction of any present Species, and Pro∣duction of any new. p. 148, 149 A Second Digression concerning the Primitive Chaos and Creation of the World. p. 150 What the Ancients understood by it, ibid. & 151. That probably God did at first create a certain number of Prin∣ciples or simple Bodies, naturally intransmutable, and mingle them variously in the Earth and Water; and likewise the seminal Principles of Animate Bodies too; giving the Water and Earth power to hatch or bring them forth, p. 152, 170. By what Means the Waters were gathered together into one place, and the dry Land made to appear, p. 153. That subterraneous Fires and Flatus's might be sufficient for such an effect, proved from the Effects of Gunpowder, and the raising up of new Mountains, p. 153, 154, 155, &c. A Discourse concern∣ing the Equality of Sea and Land both as to the extent of each; and the height of one to the depth of the o∣ther, taken from the Shores, p. 160, 161, &c. A Dis∣course concerning the Ʋse of the Mountains, p. 165, 166, to p. 170 Chap. 6. An Answer to the Second Question, Whether shall this Dissolution be effected by natural or by extraor∣dinary Means, and what they shall be? p. 171, &c. Chap. 7. The Third Question answered, whether shall the Dissolution be gradual and successive, or momentaneous and sudden? p. 174, 175 Chap. 8. The Fourth Question resolved, Whether shall there be any Signs or Forerunners of the Dissolution of the World? p. 177, 178, 179 Chap. 9. The Fifth Question, At what period of time shall the World be Dissolved, and particularly, whether at the end of six thousand years, p. 181, 182, &c. Chap. 10. How far shall this Dissolution or Conflagration extend? Whether to the Ethereal Heavens, and all the Host of them, Sun, Moon and Stars; or to the Aereal only? p. 187, 188, &c.
Chap. 11. Containing an Answer to the Seventh Question. Whether shall the whole World be consumed and annihi∣lated or only refined and purified? p. 191, 192. The Restitution of the World proved by the Testimonies of Scripture and Antiquity, and also by Reason, p. 192, 193, 194, &c The Arguments for the Abolition, and Annihilation answered, p. 198, 199, 200 Chap. 12. The Inference the Apostle makes from the pre∣cedent Doctrine. Of Rewards, punishment, and future State. From p. 203 to the End. Several Additions and Amendments. From p. 242 to p 259
Several Books Written by Mr. John Ray, Fellow of the Royal Society, and Sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Church-Yard. CAtalogus Plantarum circa Cantabrigiam nascentium, Octavo. Cantab. 1660. Catalogus Plantarum Angliae & Insularum adjacentium, Oct. Lond. 1670, & 1677. A Collection of English and other Pro∣verbs. Cambridge. Octavo, 1672. and 1678. Observations made in a Journey through most parts of Europe. Octavo, 1673. Catalogus Stirpium in exteris Regionibus à nobis Observatarum, Londini, Octavo, 1673. Dictionariolum Trilingue secundum locos communes. Londini, Octavo, 1672, 1689. A Collection of unusual English Words, with an Account of preparing our English Minerals. Lond. Duod. 1674. and 1691. Francisci Willoughbeii Ornithologia, cum Fi∣guris: Recognovit, digessit, supplevit Joannes Raius. Londini, Fol. 1676.
The same Ornithology much Enlarged, in English. London, 1678. Methodus Plantarum nova cum Tabulis. Londini, Octavo, 1682. Francisci Willughbeii Historia Piscium cum Figuris. Recognovit, digessit, supplevit J. Raius. Oxoniae, Fol. 1686. Historia Plantarum Generalis, Vol. 2. Lon∣dini, Fol. 1686, 1688. Fasciculus Stirpium Britannicarum. Lon∣dini, Octavo, 1688. Synopsis Methodica Plantarum Britannica∣rum cum Virium Epitome. Londini, Octavo, 1690. The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation. London, Oct. 1691. The same much augmented. 1692. Miscellaneous Discourses concerning the Dissolution and Changes of the World, &c. London, Octavo, 1692.
ERRATA. PAge 19. lin. 1. for turned read tumid. lin. 30. insert a. p. 20. l. 3. After that insert they. p. 21. l. 3. r. Prophe∣cy. p. 22. l. 8. r. . p. 24. l. 17 r. testatur. p. 6. l. 18. r. . l. 27. r. . p. 27. l. 7. r. . p. 45. l. 13. r. Silt. p. 46. l. 21. r. Camarg. p. 61. l. 7. r. He. p. 81. l. 3. After the insert year. p. 62. l. 15. After of insert that. p. 79. l. 28. dee out of. p. 88. l. 12. After Alps insert For passing over a Mountain on the very Ridge of them p. 98. l. 21. For not r. at. p. 123. l. 18. dele in. p. 129. l. 16. r. lenticular. p. 185▪ l. 19. After be insert but. p. 197. 16. r. .
OF THE DISSOLUTION OF THE WORLD. THE INTRODUCTION. THERE is implanted in the Na∣ture of Man a great desire and cu∣riosity of fore knowing future Events, what shall befal them∣selves, their Relations or Dependents in time to come; the Fates of Kingdoms and Com∣mon-wealths, especially the Periodical Mu∣tations, and final catastrophe of the World.
Hence in ancient times, Divination was made a Science or Mystery, and many Nati∣ons had their Colleges or Societies of Wise∣men, Magicians, Astrologers and Sooth-say∣ers; as for example, the Egyptians, Babyloni∣ans and Romans. Hence the vulgar are ve∣ry prone to consult Diviners and Fortune-tellers. To gratifie in some measure this Curiosi∣ty; and that his people might not in any privilege be inferiour to the Nations about them, it pleased God, besides the standing Oracle of Ʋrim, not only upon special occa∣sions to raise up among the Jews extraordi∣nary Prophets, by immediate Mission; but also to settle a constant Order and Succession of them, for the maintenance and upholding whereof, there were Colleges and Semina∣ries instituted for the educating and fitting young men for the Prophetick Function. These were the Sons of the Prophets, of whom we find so frequent mention in Scripture. Moreover, it pleased God so far to conde¦scend to the weakness of the Jews, that in the infancy of their State, he permitted them to consult his Prophets concerning ordinary accidents of life, and affairs of small mo∣ment:
As we see Saul did Samuel about the loss of his Fathers Asses: which it's not like∣ly he would have done, had it not been usual and customary so to do. In the latter times of that State, we read of no consulting of Prophets upon such occasions. At last also by their own confession, the Spirit of Prophecy was quite taken away, and no∣thing left them but a Vocal Oracle, which they called Bath col, i. e. the Daughter of a Voice, or the Daughter of Thunder, a Voice out of a Voice. This Dr. Lightfoot thinks to have been a meer Fancy or Imposture. In the primitive Churches of Christians planted by the Apostles, there was also an Order of Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.28. God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, seconda∣rily Prophets, &c. This Spirit of Prophecy was an extraordinary and temporary Gift, as were the Gifts of Healing and Speaking with Tongues, continuing not long after the death of the Apostles, and Consignation of the Canon of Scripture. So that now we have no means left us of coming to the know∣ledge of future Events, but the Prophecies contained in the Writings of the Holy Pen∣men of Scripture, which we must search dili∣gently, consider attentively, and compare together, if we desire to understand any
thing of what shall befal the Christian Church or State in time to come. This Text which I have made choice of for my Subject, is part of a Prophecy con∣cerning the greatest of all Events, the Disso∣lution of the World.
2 PETER iii. 11. Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of per∣sons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? CHAP. I. The Division of the Words and Doctrine con∣tained in them, with the Heads of the fol∣lowing Discourse. THESE words contain in them two Parts, 1. An Antecedent or Doctrine, All these things shall be dissolved. 2. A Consequent, or Inference thereupon, What manner of persons ought we to be?
The Doctrine, here only briefly hinted, or summarily proposed, is laid down more fully in the precedent Verse; But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fer∣vent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. These words are by the generality of Inter∣preters, Ancient and Modern, understood of the final destruction or dissolution of Hea∣ven and Earth: in which sense I shall chuse rather to accept them at present, than with the Reverend and Learned Dr. Hammond, and some few others, to stem the Tide of Expositors, and apply them to the destru∣ction of Jerusalem and the Jewish Polity. I say then, That this World and all things therein contained, shall one day be dissolved and de∣stroyed by Fire. By Heaven and Earth in this place, the most rational Interpreters of Scripture, do un∣derstand only the whole Compages of this sub∣lunary World, and all the Creatures that are in it; all that was destroyed by the Flood in the days of Noah, and is now secured from perishing so again, that I may borrow Dr. Hammond's words, in his Annotations on this place. And again, the word Hea∣vens
(saith he) being an Equivocal word, is used either for the superior Heavens, whe∣ther Empyreal or Ethereal, or for the sublu∣nary Heavens, the Air (as the word World is either the whole Compages of the superior or inferior, or else only of the sublunary lower World) we may here resolve, that the  and , Heaven and Host, or Elements thereof, are literally the sublunary aereal Heavens, and all that is therein, Clouds and Meteors, &c. Fowls and flying Creatures, and so, fit to join with the Earth and Works that are therein. In prosecution of this Proposition, and in order to the Proof and Confirmation, and likewise the clearing and illustration of it, I shall, (1.) Give you what I find concerning the dissolution of the World; 1. In the holy Scri∣pture. 2. In Ancient Christian Writers. 3. In the Heathen Philosophers and Sages. (2.) I shall endeavour to give some answer to these seven Questions, which are obvious and usually made concerning it. 1. Whether there be any thing in Nature, which might prove and demonstrate; or argue and infer a future Dissolution of the World? 2. Whether shall this Dissolution be brought about and effected by Natural, or by Extra∣ordinary Means and Instruments; and what
those Means and Instruments shall be? 3. Whether shall the Dissolution be gra∣dual or sudden? 4. Whether shall there be any Signs and Fore-runners of it? 5. At what Period of Time shall the World be dissolved? 6. How far shall this Conflagration ex∣tend? Whether to the Ethereal Heavens, and all the Host of them, Sun, Moon and Stars, or to the Aereal only? 7. Whether shall the Heavens and Earth be wholly dissipated and destroyed, or only refined and purified?
CHAP. II. The Testimonies of Scripture concerning the Dissolution of the World. 1. THen, Let us consider what we find delivered in the holy Scriptures, concerning the Dissolution of the World. And first of all, This place, which I have made choice of for my Text, is in my opinion the most clear and full, as to this particular, in the whole Scripture; and will give light for the Solution of most of the proposed Que∣stions. V. 10. The day of the Lord shall come as a thief, &c. This answers the third Question, Whether the Dissolution shall be gradual or sudden? Wherein the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and all the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And again, V. 12. Wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. This answers the second Question, What the Means and Instruments of this Dissolution shall be? V. 13. Nevertheless
we according to his promise, look for a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. This gives some light toward the answering of the last Question, Whether shall the Heavens and the Earth be wholly burnt up and destroyed, or only renewed and purified? These Words as clearly as they seem to refer to the Dissolution of the World, yet Dr. Hammond doubts not to be understood of the remarkable destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish State, he thus pa∣raphrasing them. V. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the Hea∣vens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. But this Judgment of Christ, so remark∣able on the Jews, shall now shortly come, and that very discernably; and the Temple shall suddenly be destroyed, the greater part of it burnt, and the City and People utterly consumed. V. 11. Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought
ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? Seeing then this destruction shall thus in∣volve all, and now approacheth so near, what an engagement doth this lay upon us to live the most pure strict lives that ever men lived? V. 12. Looking for and hastning unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. Looking for the coming of Christ, for our deliverance, and by our Christian lives quick∣ning and hastning God to delay it no lon∣ger; that Coming of his, I say, which as it signifies great mercy to us, so it signifies very sharp destruction to the whole Jewish State. V. 13. Nevertheless we according to his pro∣mise, look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. Instead of which we look for a new Chri∣stian State, wherein all provision is made by Christ for righteousness to inhabit, according to the promise of Christ concerning the puri∣ty
that he should plant in the Evangelical State. How he makes out and confirms this Paraphrase, see in his Annotations upon this place. So confident is he of the Truth of this his Interpretation, that he censures the usual one as a great Mistake, in his Annota∣tion on v. 10. where he thus writes; What is here thus expressed by S. Peter, is ordina∣rily conceived to belong to the end of the World, and by others applyed to the end of this World, and the beginning of the Millen¦nium, or thousand years. And so, as S. Peter here saith, v. 16. many other places in S. Paul's Epistles, and in the Gospel, especi∣ally Matth. 24. are mistaken and wrested▪ That it doth not belong to either of those but to this fatal day of the Jews, sufficient∣ly appears by the purport of this whole Epistle, which is, to arm them with Constan¦cy and Perseverance till that day come; and particularly, in this Chapter, to confute them who object against the Truth of Christ's Predictions, and resolve it should not come at all: Against whom he here opposes the Certainty, the Speediness, and the Terrible¦ness of its coming. That which hath given occasion to those other common Mistakes, is especially the Hideousness of those Judg∣ments, which fell upon that People of the
Jews, beyond all that ever before are re∣ated to have fallen upon them, or indeed any other people, which made it necessary or the Prophets, which were to describe it  and who use Tropes and Figures, and not lain Expressions, to set down their Predicti∣ns) to express it by these high Phrases, of he passing away and dissolving of Heaven and Earth and Elements, &c. which sounding very tragically, are mistaken for the great nd final Dissolution of the World. So far the Doctor. Two things there are in this Chapter, which seem to contradict this In∣erpretation; First, That the Destruction ere spoken of, is compared with Noah's lood; and the Heaven and Earth to be dis∣olved by this, made parallel, and of equal extent to the World destroyed by that. Of this the Doctor was well aware, and there∣fore grants, that the 7th Verse, But the Hea∣vens and the Earth which are now, by the me word are kept in store, reserved unto fire gainst the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, is to be understood of the general and final destruction of the World by fire, but the following Verses to be an Answer to the first part of the Atheists Objection, viz. Where is the promise of his coming? To me it seems, that all refer to the same matter. The se∣cond thing which seems to contradict the
Doctor's Interpretation, is, the Apostles citing for the instruction and confirmation of the Believers, and in answer to the Atheists Ob¦jection (Where is the promise of his coming?  that place of the Psalmist, Psal. 90.4. Tha one day is with the Lord as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day. For th Apostle seems to suppose, that the time o Christ's coming, might possibly be a thousand years off; and that they were not to thin much, or distrust the promise, if it were so for though it were predicted as thin shortly to come, yet they were to conside that a thousand years in God's sight, is but very short time; so that it might be fore tol as shortly to come, though it were a thou¦sand years off. Whereas it might seem im¦proper to mention a thousand years to sup¦port them in expectation of an Event th was not twenty years to come. Another place where mention is made  Christ's coming to Judgment, and the Diss¦lution of the World, is Matth. 24. to whic may be added as parallel, Mark 13. an Luke 21. In which places you have con¦derable, 1. The Suddenness of Christ's com¦ing, v. 27. As the lightning comes out of t East, and shineth even unto the West, so sh the coming of the Son of Man be. 2. The Sig of his coming, v. 29. Immediately after t
tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkned, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of Heaven shall be shaken. 3. The manner of his coming, v. 30. And then shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven: and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, when they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great glory. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. 4. The Uncertainty of the time of his coming, and this dissolution as to us, But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no not the Angels in Heaven: and Mark adds, neither the Son, but the Father only. All this Prophecy Dr. Hammond under∣stands of the destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem, and whole Nation of the Jews; as may be seen in his Paraphrase and Annotations upon this place. And in∣deed our Saviour himself seems to limit it to this, saying, v. 24. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass away, till all these things be fulfilled. For if these Pro∣phecies look further than the destruction of Jerusalem, even to Christ's coming to Judg∣ment, how could it be true, that that gene∣ration
should not pass away till all those things were fulfilled? Whereas we see, that that Generation is long since passed away, and yet the end is not yet? And indeed Expositors that understand them of the end of the World, and Christ's second coming to Judgment, are hard put to it to answer this Objection. S. Chrysostom will have this word  to be understood not of the Ge∣neration of men then living, but of the Ge∣neration of the faithful, which should not fail till the end of the World.  (saith he) , &c. He denominates a Generation not on∣ly from living together in the same time, but from having the same form and manner of re∣ligious Worship and Polity; as in that place, This is the generation of them that seek thee, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Beza under∣stands  of the present Age, and will have it to be of the same valor with  in Hebrew, and  to refer not to all particulars mentioned in this Chapter, but only to those which are spoken of the de∣struction of the City and Nation of the Jews; But (saith he) if any one urgeth the universal Particle, Vertere licebit, Fiant omnia, viz. quae ultimam illam diem praecessura dixit. Nam
ab illo tempore coeperunt fieri, & adhuc per∣severant illa signa, suo demum tempore. Filio hominis venturo. But on the other side, 1. Some passages there are in this Chapter, which are hardly applicable to the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Dissolution of the Jewish Common∣wealth; as the appearing of the Sign of the Son of man in heaven, and the Tribes seeing the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. And his sending his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet. 2. The coming of Christ is in like man∣ner described in places which undoubtedly speak of his coming to Judgment at the end of the World. As in 1 Cor. 15.52. mention is made of the Trumpets sounding at the time of Christ's coming: and 1 Thess. 4.16. it is said, The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: and v. 17. We that are alive shall be caught up together with them [that are risen] in the clouds to meet the Lord in the Air. All which places are perfectly parallel, and seem manifestly to al∣lude to the fore-mentioned words, Matth. 24.30, 31. I am apt to think, that these Pro∣phecies may have a double respect; one to the City, Temple, and Nation of the Jews; another to the whole World at the great
day of Doom: and that the former is indeed Typical of the latter: and so they have a double completion; the first in the destru∣ction of Jerusalem and the Jewish Polity: In reference to which, it is truly said, This ge∣neration shall not pass away till all these things be fulfilled. The second in the final Dissolution of the World, which is yet to come. But to proceed, Another place which is usually understood of the Dissolution of the World by fire, is 2 Thess. 1.7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heave with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, &c▪ Other parallel places may be seen, Rev. 6▪ 12, 13, 14. Rev. 10.6. Rev. 21.1. And  saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passe away, and there was no more Sea, Heb. 12▪ 26, 27. These places speak more directly of the Dissolution of the World, and th coming of Christ to Judgment. Others ther are that speak only concerning the time o it, 1 Pet. 4.7. But the end of all things is a hand. James 5.9. Behold the Judge standet before the door. 1 John 2.18. Little chil¦dren it is the last time; or as some translat it, the last hour, . Heb. 10.37▪ Yet a little while, and he that shall come, wil come, and will not tarry.
Luke 18.17. I tell you he will avenge them speedily. All these places the fore-mentioned Dr. Hammond still applies to that famous Pe∣riod of the destruction of the City, Temple and Polity of the Jews: and in conclusion hath left us but one place in the New Testa∣ment, to prove the general Conflagration of the World, viz. 2 Pet. 7.7. Now because some have been offended at these Interpretations of his; others have spoken very flightingly of them: I shall briefly sum up what hath been alleged in de∣fence of them, by this great man. 1. That the Prophets use to set down their Predictions in Tropes and Figures, and not in plain expressions, (their Style being Poetical). And therefore in describing those hideous Judgments which fell upon that people of the Jews, beyond all that ever before fell upon them, or indeed any other people, they found it necessary to employ those High and Tragical Phrases of the passing away and dissolving Heaven, and Earth, and Ele∣ments. And that this was the manner of the Prophets, may be proved; because we find the destruction of other places descri∣bed in as High Strains, as Lofty and Tra∣gical Expressions as this of Jerusalem. For example, that of Idumaea, Esay 34.9. The streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and
the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof shall go up for ever. And in the 4th Verse he seems but to Preface to this De∣struction in these words, And all the host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their hosts shall fall down as the leaf falleth off from the Vine, and as a falling Fig from the Fig tree; For my Sword shall be bathed in Heaven: Behold it shall come down upon Idumaea. And in the Burden of Babylon. Chap. 13.8, 9. we have these words, Behold the day of the Lord Cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger to lay the Land desolate: For the Stars of Heaven and the constellations there∣of shall not give their light: The Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine. 2. All the Predictions in that famous place, Matth. 24. to which all other places in the New Testament relating to this mat∣ter are parallel, are by our Saviour himself restrained to the destruction of Jerusalem, and the full completion of them limited to the duration of that Age: Verse 34. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled. What rea∣son then can we have to extend them fur∣ther;
3. In most of the places where this com∣ing of Christ is mentioned, it is spoken of as near, and at hand; as in the places last cited. Now, (saith the Learned Doctor) in his Note upon Luke 18.7. I tell you he will avenge them speedily: All which if (when it is said to approach and to be at the door) it belonged to the Day of Judgment (now after so many hundred years not yet come) what a  were this? what a de∣laying of his coming? and consequently, what an Objection against the truth of the Christian Religion? As Mahomet having promised after his death he would presently return to life, and having not performed his Promise in a thousand years is by us justly condemned as an Impostor. 3. That this place of S. Peter, out of which I have taken my Text, doth not be∣long to the end of the World sufficiently appears (saith he) by the purport of this whole Epistle, which is to arm them with constancy and perseverance till that Day come, and particularly in this Chapter to confute them who object against the truth of Christs Predictions, and resolve it should not come at all; against whom he here op∣poses the certainty, the speediness, and the teribleness of its Coming. And for that other famous Place, 2 Thessal. 1.8, 9. that
it belongs to the same Period; see how he makes out in his Annotations. I shall now superadd some places out of the Old Testament, which seem to speak of the Dissolution of the World, Job 14.12. Man lieth down and riseth not till the Heavens be no more. Psalm 102.5, 6. quoted Heb. 1.10, 11. Of old hast thou laid the foundati∣ons of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed. Esay 34.4. And all the host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all their host shall fall down as a leaf falleth from the Vine, &c. Esay 51.6. The Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old like a garment. Joel 2.31. The Sun shall be turned into dark∣ness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and terrible day of the Lord comes. Malachi 4.1. Behold the day cometh that shall burn like an Oven, &c. Deut 32, 22. For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell, and shall consume the Earth with her encrease, and set on fire the foundations of the Mountains. I must confess that the Prophetick Books are full of figurative Expressions, being written in
a Poetick Style, and according to the strain of the Oriental Rhetorick, which is much different from the Euporean, affecting lofty and turned Metaphors and excessive Hyper∣bola's and Aggravations, which would either sound harsh to our Ears, or import a great deal more to us than they did to them. This is obvious to any one that reads their Books; and may clearly be demonstrated from the Titles that their Kings assumed to themselves as well Anciently as lately, viz. Sons of the Sun, Brethren of the Sun and Moon, Partners of the Stars, Lions Crown∣ed in the Throne of the World, Endued with the strength of the whole Heaven, and Vir∣tue of the Firmament. Now we cannot possibly imagine them so vain as to think themselves literally to be such: no sure, all they meant by these Expressions was that they were great, and honourable, and power∣ful. Now the Prophetick Books of the Old Testament being written in a Style somewhat conformable to the Oratory of those Countreys, are not (I humbly con∣ceive) in every tittle to be so exactly scan∣ned and literally expounded, but so to be interpreted as a Jew or an Asiatick would then have understood them. And this I ra∣ther think, because there be divers passages in the Prophets, which cannot be verified in
strict literal sense; As in the place before quoted, Esay 34.9. It is said of the streams of Idumaea that should be turned into Pitch, and the dust thereof into Brimstone; and the Land thereof should become burning Pitch; and should not be quenched night nor day, but the smoke thereof should go up for ever. And of the City of Tyre it is said Ezek. 26.14. It shall be built no more. And verse 19. When I shall make thee a desolate City like the Cities that are not inhabited, when I shall bring up the Deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee. And verse 21. which is thrice repeated, I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more: though thou be sought for, thou shalt never be found again, saith the Lord God. And yet we see that the City of Tyre, though it was in∣deed wholly dispeopled at that time, the Inhabitants transferring themselves into A∣frica, when it was besieged by Nebuchad∣nezzar; yet was it afterward peopled again, and continues a City inhabited to this day. And of Babylon, it is said that there should none remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it should be desolate for ever. Jer. 51.62. Esay 13.20. and of the Land of Babylon, Verse 29. that it should be a de∣solation without an Inhabitant. And though indeed this Prophesy was I think as to
the City at last verified in the Letter; yet did Babylon long continue a great City af∣ter this Paraphrase: And the Land of Ba∣bylon is now inhabited, there being at this day a great City not far from the place where Babylon stood. So that these places import no more, then that there should be a very great Destruction and Devastation of those Cities and Countries. As for those places in the Old and New Testament, where∣in mention is made of the last Days and the last Times, it is clear that they are to be understood of the Age of the Messiah, all the time from the Exibition of the Mes∣siah to the end of the World, Esay 2.1▪ And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Na∣tions shall flow to it; which very words we have repeated Michah 4.1. So that Pro∣phesie of Joel 2.28. quoted Acts 2.17. And it shall come to pass in the last days saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, &c. is to be understood. Hence the last Days have among the Jews proverbially signified the days of the Messiah, as Doctor Hammon in his Annotations upon this place tells us; who also Notes, that in that place of Joel, the last days do literally signifie
the last days of the Jews, immediately pre∣ceding their destruction, called there the Great and terrible Day of the Lord. So Heb. 1.2. by , in these last days is meant the days of the Messias. So 1 Pe 1.20. 2 Pet. 3.3. 1 Tim. 4.1. 2 Tim. 3.1▪ mention is made of the last days in this sense In like manner the end of the World, , Heb. 9.26. But now onc in the end of the World hath he appeared t put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. An  the Ends of the World, i 1 Cor. 10.11. Ʋpon whom the ends of th World are come, signifie the Age of the Mes¦sias, though indeed the former seems mor peculiarly to denote the shutting up of th Jewish Age or Oeconomy. CHAP. III. The Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, concerning the Dissolution of the World. 2. I Proceed now to what the Ancient Fa¦thers of the Church and Christian Writers have delivered concerning the Dis¦solution of the World.
That there shall be a Dissolution of this World, and that it shall be by Fire, is so cer∣tain and clear among them, that it would be superfluous to cite Particulars to prove t: nay, so general and unanimous is the consent of all Christians in this Point, that, as Origen observes in his third , and the learned Doctor Hakewill after him, whereas there can hardly be named any Ar∣ticle of our Faith, which some Hereticks have not presumed to Ipugne or call in Questi∣on, yet not any to be met with who que∣stions this; but herein all agree, being com∣pelled (saith Origen) by the Authority of the Scriptures. As for the time of this Dissolu∣tion the Ancient Christians held it to be at hand, as might easily be proved by many Testimonies, were it not granted on all ands. And here it may be worth the ob∣serving, that the longer the World stood, the further off generally have Christians set the day of Judgment, and end of it. Many of the Ancients did conceive, that the Dissolu∣tion should be at the end of six thousand years. As for Example, Justin Martyr in Quoest. & Resp. ad Orthodoxos, if he be the Author of that Piece, where this Question (When the end of the World should be?) be∣ing put, the Answer is, , &c. We may rational∣ly
conjecture and conclude from many Scrip¦ture Expressions, that they are in the right who say, that the World will last six thousan years. For in one place it saith, in these las days, and in another, Upon whom the ends of the World are come, and in a third, Whe the fulness of time was come. Now it i evident that these things were spoken in th sixth Millenary. Irenoeus adv. haeres. lib. 5. cap. ult. Wh gathers so much from t Similitude of th six days Creation, after which six days wa the Sabbath, that is, the day of Rest; H¦autem (saith he) est & praeteritorum narr¦tio, & futurorum prophetia. Dies enim ¦nus mille annos significabat, sicut Scriptura, te¦stantur; 2 Pet. 3. Mille anni ante Dominum sic Dies unus: ergo sicut consummatus fuit mun¦dus in sui creatione intra sex dierum spati¦um, & postea quies; sic in sui fine consumma¦bitur intra spatium sex millium annorum, de¦inde vera & perpetua quies subsequetur This is both a Narration or History of what is past, and a Prophesie of things to come For one day signified a thousand years, as the Scriptures testifie, A thousand years in the sight of God are but as one day. There∣fore as the World at the first Creation was consummated in the space of six days, and afterwards followed the Sabbath or
Rest; so in the end its duration shall be con∣ummated within the space of six thousand ears; and then shall follow the true and erpetual Rest. To these I might add Lactantius, in his Se∣enth Book of Institut. Cap. 14. who useth he same Argumentation with Irenoeus, Ergo uoniam sex diebus cuncta Dei opera perfecta unt: per secula sex, id est, sex annorum mil∣ia manere in hoc statu mundum necesse est. Dies enim magnus Dei mille annorum circulo erminatur, sicut indicat Propheta, qui dicit, Ante oculos tuos, Domine, mille anni tan∣uam dies unus, &c. S. Augustine, l. 20. De Civitate Dei. S. Hieronymus Comment. in Mich. cap. 4. Most clear and full to this pur∣ose is Eustath. in his Comment. in Hexaë∣eron , &c. We reckon (saith he) that the Creation shall ontinue till the end of the sixth Chiliad, be∣ause God also consummated the Ʋniverse in six days; and I suppose that the Deity oth account days of a thousand years long; For that it is said, A thousand years are in he sight of the Lord as one day. Howbeit he most of them did not propose this Opi∣nion as an undoubted Truth, but only as a Modest Conjecture. And S. Austine is very angry with them, who would peremptorily conclude from so slight an Argumentation.
This Conceit is already confuted, an the World hath long outlasted this ter according to their Computation who follow¦ed the Septuagint or Greek account, and rec¦ned that Phaleg lived about the three tho¦sandth year of the World, and had his Na from his living in the division of Time, the being to come after him three thousa years, that is, just so many as were past b¦fore him. As concerning the future Condition of t World after the Conflagration, I find it t general and received Opinion of the Ancie Christians, that this World shall not be a¦nihilated or destroyed, but only renewe and purified. So Eusebius, . The World shall not be wholly ¦stroyed, but renewed. Divers passages I mig produce out of him to the same purpose Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. 15. . He folds up the Heaven not that he might destroy them, but th he might rear them up again more beaut¦ful. Again, Cyril upon this place, , &c. So that this Renovation i respect of the Creation shall be such a kin of thing as the Resurrection in reference t
Mans Body. Oecumenius upon this place, He saith, new Heavens and a new Earth, , yet not different in matter; And again, . They shall not be destroyed or annihilated, but only renewed and purified. And upon Revel. 21.2. . This he saith, not denoting the Non-existence of the Crea∣tion, but the Renewing. In this manner he expounds Psalm 102.5, 6. and proceeding, saith, We may here take notice, that the A∣postle doth not use the word , as if the Heaven and Earth were annihilated and brought to nothing, but , they passed away or removed, or changed State. Saint Hierome upon the Psalms, Psalm 102. saith, Ex quo ostenditur perditionem coelorum non interitum sonare, sed mutationem in melius. From which words [as a Vesture shalt thou change them] may be shewn and made out, that the Dissolution of the Heavens doth not signifie their utter destruction or annihilation, but only their change into a better State. I might add abundance more Testimonies, but these I think may suffice.
CHAP. IV. The Opinions of the Ancient Heathen Philoso∣phers, and other Writers concerning the Dis∣solution. 3. IT follows now than I give you an ac¦count, what the Ancient Philosopher and Sages among the Heathen thought an delivered concerning this Point. Two o the four principal Sects of Philosophers hel a future Dissolution of the World, viz. Th Epicureans and Stoicks. As for the Epicureans, they held that a the World was at first composed by th fortuitous concourse of Atomes, so it should at last fall in pieces again by their fortuitou Separation, as Lucretius hath it, lib. 5. Principio maria ac terras coelúmque tuere, Horum naturam triplicem, tria corpora Memmi, Tres species tam dissimiles, tria talia texta Ʋna dies dabit exitio, multós{que} per annos Sustentata ruet moles & machina mundi. But now to prove all this: first cast an Eye And look on all below, on all on high, The solid Earth, the Seas, and arched Sky
One fatal Hour must ruine all, This glorious Frame, that stood so long, must fall. This Opinion of theirs is consonant enough to their wild Principles save only in that point of its suddenness, Ʋna dies dabit exi∣tio, &c. one day shall destroy or make an end of it. The Stoicks were also of Opinion that the World must be dissolved, as we may learn from the Seventh Book of Laertius in the Life of Zeno. , &c. They hold that the World is corruptible for these Reasons, 1. Because it was generated and had a beginning. 2. Because That is corruptible in the whole, whose parts are corruptible: But the parts of the World are corruptible, being daily transmuted one in∣to another. 3. That which is capable of Mutation from better to worse is corrup∣tible. But such is the World; sometimes being afflicted with long Heats and Droughts, ometimes with continued Showers and In∣ndations. To those we may add 4. ac∣cording to some of their Opinions, Because the Sun and Stars being fed with Vapours exhaled from the Earth, all the moisture will at length be drawn out, and the World ly on fire. They were afraid Minut. Felix. nè humore
omni consumpto totus mundus ignesceret. This Dissolution of the World they held should be by Water and by Fire alternately at cer∣tain periods, but especially by Fire, which they call . Philo,  The Stoicks say that the cause of the de¦struction of the World is the irresistible force of Fire that is in things, which in lon periods of time consumes and dissolves al things into itself. Euseb. Praep. lib. 19 . The mo ancient of that Sect held, That at certain v Periods of time all things were rarified int Air, being resolved into an Ethereal Fire This  of the Stoicks we find men¦tioned by many, both Christian and He¦then Writers, as besides the fore-quoted, M¦nutius Felix, Justine Martyr, Clemens Alex¦andrinus in 5 Strom. Plutarch; Seneca an others. The time of this Conflagration Se¦neca determins not, but saith only, it shal be when God pleases. 3 Quaest. nat. cap 20.8. Cùm Deo visum, vetera finire, ordi¦meliora; When it shall seem good to God  put an end to old things, and to begin better
Some there be who tell us of the Annus Platonicus or magnus, by which they un∣derstand such a period of time, as in which all the heavenly Bodies shall be restored to the same Site and distance they were once in, in respect of one another: As supposing that all the Seven Planets were at the moment of Creation in the first degree of Aries, till they come all to be in the same degree again, all that space of time is called the Great Year, Annus magnus: In this Year they tell us that the height of Summer is the Confla∣gration, and the depth of Winter the Inun∣dation; and some Astrologers have been so vain as to assign the time both of the In∣undation and Conflagration, Seneca 3. Quaest. Nat. cap. 20. Berosus, qui Belum interpreta∣tus est, dicit, cursu ista syderum fieri, & adeò quidem affirmat, ut conflagrationi atque di∣luvio tempus assignat. Arsura enim terrena contendit, quando omnia sydera in Cancro con∣venerint: inundationem futuram, quando ea∣dem syderum turba in Capricorno convenerit. Berosus, who interpreted Belus, saith, that those things come to pass according to the course of the Stars: and he so confidently af∣firms it, that he assigns the time both for the Conflagration and Inundation. For that all Earthly Bodies will be burnt up, when all the Stars shall meet in Cancer; and the Inun∣dation
will fall out, when the same shall be in conjunction in Capricorn. Concerning the man∣ner of this Conflagration, they held it should be sudden. Senec. Natura subitò ad ruinam, & toto impetu ruit; licet ad originem parcè uta∣tur viribus, dispensétque se incrementis fal∣lacibus. Momento fit cinis, diu sylva, &c. Nature doth suddenly and with all its force rush on to Ruin, though to the rise and for∣mation of things it useth its strength sparing∣ly, dispensing its influence and causing them to grow by insensible degrees; a Wood is long in growing up, but reduced to ashes almost in a moment. And some of them were so absurd as to think, that the Stars should justle and be dashed one against a∣nother; Senec. lib. de consolatione ad Marci∣am: Cùm tempus advenerit: quo se mundus revocaturus extinguat, viribus ista se suis cae∣dent; & sydera syderibus incurrent; & omni flagrante materia, uno igne, quicquid nunc ex di∣sposito lucet ardebit. Here by the way we may with Doctor More [Souls Immortality, lib. 3. cap. 18.] take notice how Coursly, not to say, Ridiculously, the Stoicks Philosophize, when they are turned out of their Road∣way of Moral Sentences, and pretend to give an account of the Nature of Things. For what Errours can be more gross than they entertain of God, of the Soul, and o
the Stars; they making the two former Corporeal Substances, and feeding the lat∣ter with the vapours of the Earth, affirm∣ing that the Sun sups up the Water of the great Ocean to quench his Thirst, but that the Moon drinks off the lesser Rivers and Brooks, which is as true as that the Asse drank up the Moon. Such Conceits are more fit for Anacreon in a drunken Fit to stumble upon, who to invite his Compa∣nions to Tiple, composed that Catch, , . then to be either found out or owned by a serious Philosopher. And yet Seneca migh∣tily triumphs in this Notion of foddering the Stars with the thick Fogs of the Earth, and declares his Opinion with no mean Strains of Eloquence, &c. As for the extent of this Conflagration, they Held that not only the Heavens should be burnt, but that the Gods themselves should not escape Scot-free. So Seneca, Re∣soluto mundo, & Diis in unum consusis. And again, Atque omnes pariter Deos Perdet nox aliqua & Chaos. Is not this wise Philosophy? If their Morality were no better than their Physicks, their Wise man they boast of might
be so denominated , as they of Gotham. But let us look a little further, and we shall find that the Stoicks were not the first Authors of this Opinion of the Conflagra∣tion; but that it was of far greater Antiquity than that Sect. Others of the more ancient Philosophers having entertained it, viz. Em∣pedocles, as Clemens Alexandrinus testifies in his 5 Strom. . 2. Heraclitus, as the same Clemens shews at large out of him in the same place. , amp;c. And Laertius in the Life of Heraclitus, He taught . That there is but one World, and that it was generated out of Fire, and again burnt up or turned into Fire at certain periods alternately throughout all Ages. I might add to these the Ancient Greek Poets, Sophocles and Diphilus, as we find them quoted by Justine Martyr and Clemens A∣lexandrinus. Neither yet were these the first Inventers and Broachers of this O∣pinion, but they recieved it by Tradition from their Forefathers, and look'd upon it as an Oracle and Decree of Fate. Ovid speaks of it as such in the first of his Meta∣morphosis;
Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, affore tempus, Quo mare, quo tellus, correptáque regia coeli Ardeat, & mundi moles operosa laboret. —Besides by Doom Of certain Fate, he knew the time should come, When Sea, Earth, ravisht Heaven, the curious Frame Of this Worlds Mass should shrink in purging Flame. And Lucan.Lib. 7. Hos Caesar, populos si nunc non usserit ignis, Ʋret cum terris, uret cum gurgite ponti: Communis mundo superest rogus ossibus Astra Misturus.— If now these Bodies want their Fire and Urn, At last with the whole Globe they'll sure∣ly burn; The World expects one general Fire: and Thou Must go where these poor Souls are wan∣dring now. Now through some are of an Opinion that by Fata here are to be understood the Sibylline
Oracles, and to that purpose do alledge some Verses out of those extant under that Title, as Lactantius in his Book De ira Dei, cap. 23. , . And in another place there is mention made of a River of Fire that shall descend from Heaven, and burn up both Earth and Sea. Tunc ardens fluvius caelo manabit ab alto Igneus, at{que} locos consumet funditus omnes, Terrám{que}, Oceanúm{que} ingentem, & caerul ponti, Stagná{que}, tum fluvios, fontes, Ditém{que} se¦verum, Coelestémque polum, coeli quoque lumina i unum Fluxa ruent, formâ deletâ prorsus eorum, Astra cadent, etenim de caelo cuncta revuls From Heaven then shall flaming River flow, And quite disorder all things here below; The Whole shall melt into one single Mass All forms destroy'd, into old Chaos pass.
Yet because the Verses now extant under the Name of Sibylline Oracles are all suspected to be false and pseudepigrapha; and many of them may be demonstrated to be of no greater An∣tiquity than the Emperor Antoninus Pius his Reign: and because it cannot be proved, that there was any such thing in the Ancient genuine Sibylline Oracles; I rather think, (as I said before) that it was a Doctrine of Ancient Tradition, handed down from the first Fathers and Patriarchs of the World. Josephus in his Antiquities runs it up as high as Adam; from whom Seth his Son received it; his Father, saith he, fore telling him. . That there should be a Destruction of the Uni∣verse, once by the violence of Fire, and again by the force and abundance of Water; in consequence whereof he erected two Pil∣lars, one of Brick, which might endure the Fire, and another of Stone, which would resist the Water; and upon them engraved his Astronomical Observations, that so they might remain to Posterity: And one of these Pillars he saith, continued in Syria until his days. Whether this Relation be true or not, it may thence be collected, that this was an Universal Opinion, received by Tradition, both among Jews and Gentiles,
That the World should one day be consumed by Fire. It may be proved by good Autho∣rity, that the Ancient Gaules, Chaldaeans and Indians had this Tradition among them which they could not receive from the Greek Philosophers or Poets, with whom they had no entercourse; but it must in al probability be derived down to both from the same Fountain and Original; that is from the first Restorers of Mankind, Noa and his Sons. I now proceed to the Third Particular proposed in the beginning; that is, to give answer to the several Questions concerning the Dissolution of the World.
CHAP. V. he first Question concerning the World's Dis∣solution, Whether there be any thing in Na∣ture that may probably cause or argue a future Dissolution? Three probable Means propounded and discussed. SECT. I. he Waters again naturally overflowing and covering the Earth. THE First Question is, Whether there be any thing in Nature, which may ove and demonstrate, or probably argue nd infer a future Dissolution? To which I swer, That I think, there is nothing in ature which doth necessarily demonstrate future Dissolution: but that Position of the eripatetick Schools may, for ought I know, e true Philosophy, Posito ordinario Dei con∣rsu mundus posset durare in aeternum. Sup∣sing the ordinary concourse of God [with econd Causes] the World might endure for ver. But though a future Dissolution by
Natural Causes, be not demonstrable; y some possible, if not probable, Accidents the are, which, if they should happen, might i¦fer such a Dissolution. Those are Four, T Possibility of 1. The Waters again overflowing and ¦vering the Earth. 2. The Extinction of the Sun. 3. The Eruption of the Central Fire  closed in the Earth. 4. The Dryness and Inflammability of t Earth under the Torrid Zone, and the Er¦tion of all the Vulcano's at once. But before I treat of these, it will not amiss, a little to consider the old Argum for the Worlds Dissolution, and that is, daily Consenescence and Decay: which, if can be proved, will in process of time, ¦cessarily infer a Dissolution. For as the ¦postle saith in another case, That which ¦cayeth and waxeth old is ready to va away, Heb. 8.13. That which continua wastes, will at last be quite consume that which daily grows weaker and weak will in time lose all its force. So the A and Stature and Strength of Man, and  other Animals, every Generation decreasi they will in the end come to nothing. A that all these, and all other things do s¦cessively diminish and decay in all Nature
Perfections and Qualities, as well as Moral, th been the received Opinion, not only of e Vulgar, but even of Philosophers emselves from Antiquity down to our es Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 7. c. 16. In ple∣m autem cuncto mortalium generi minorem dies mensuram staturae propemodum observa∣r: rarosque patribus proceriores consumente ertatem seminum exustione; in cujus vices nc vergat aevum. Terra malos homines nunc educat atque pu sillos. Juvenal. Sat. nd Gellius Noct. Att. lib. 3. c. 10. Et nc quasi jam mundo senescente rerum atque ominum decrementa sunt. I might accumu∣te places out of the Ancients and Moderns  this purpose, but that hath been already one by others. But this Opinion, how general soever it as formerly, was inconsiderately and with∣ut sufficient ground, taken up at first; and fterwards without due examination embra∣ed and followed; as appears by Dr. Hake∣il's Apology, wherein it is so fundamen∣ally confuted; that it hath since been re∣ected by all considerate Persons. For that Author hath at large demonstrated, that nei∣her the pretended decay of the Heavenly
Bodies in regard of Motion, Light, Heat  Influence: or of any of the Elements: n¦ther the pretended decay of Animals, a particularly and especially of Mankind, i regard of Age and Duration, of Streng and Stature, of Arts and Wits, of Manne and Conversation, do necessarily infer a decay in the World, or any tendency to Dissolution. The only Objection agai this Opinion, is the Longaevity of the An¦diluvian Patriarchs, and of some also (I me the first) of the Postdiluvian. For immed¦ately after the Flood the Age of Man d gradually decrease every Generation in gre proportions; so that had it continued so to  at that rate, the Life of Man had soon ca to nothing. Why it should at last settle  Threescore and Ten Years, as a mean Ter and there continue so many Ages, witho any further Change and Diminution, is, confess, a Mystery too hard for me to revea However, there must be a great and extr¦ordinary Change at the time of the Floo either in the Temperature of the Air,  Quality of the Food, or in the Temper an Constitution of the Body of Man, which i¦duced this decrement of Age. That th Temper and Constitution of the Bodies  the Antediluvians was more firm and d¦rable than that of their Posterity after th
Flood; and that this Change of the Term of Life was not wholly to be attributed to Mi∣racle, may both be demonstrated from the gradual decrease of the Age of the Postdilu∣vians. For had it been miraculous, why should not the Age of the very first Genera∣tion after the Flood have been reduced to that Term? And what account can we give of their holding out for some Generations against the inconveniencies of the Air, or de∣teriority of Diet, but the strength and firm∣ness of their Constitutions? which yet was originally owing to the Temperature of the Air, or Quality of their Diet, or both; see∣ing a Change in these (for there was no other visible Cause) did by degrees prevail against, and impair it. What influence the lying so long of the Water upon the Earth might have upon the Air and Earth, in chan∣ging them for the worse, and rendring them more unfit for the maintenance and continu∣ation of Humane Life, I will not now dispute. But whatever might be the Cause of the Lon∣gaevity of the Antediluvians, and the contra∣cting of the Age of the Postdiluvians, it is ma∣nifest, that the Age of these did at the last settle, as I said, at or about the Term of Threescore and Ten, and hath there conti∣nued for Three Thousand Years without any diminution.
I proceed now to the Accidents which might possibly, in process of Time, infer a Dissolution of the World. 1. The possibility of the Water, in process of Time again overflowing and covering o the Earth. For, First of all, The Rains continually washing down and carrying away Earth from the Mountains, it is necessary, that as wel the height as the bulk of them should an∣swerably decrease; and that they do so, i evident in Experience. For, as I have else where noted, I have been informed by a Gen∣tleman of good Credit, that whereas th Steeple of Craich in the Peak of Derbyshire in the memory of some Old Men then liv∣ing [1672.] could not have been see from a certain Hill lying between Hopton an Wirksworth, now not only the Steeple, bu a great part of the Body of the Church may from thence be seen; which comes to pas by the sinking of a Hill between the Church and place of view: a parallel example where to the Learned Dr. Plot gives us, in a Hill be¦tween Sibbertoft and Hasleby in Northampton¦shire, Hist. Nat. Stafford. p. 113. And thu will they continue to do so long as there fall any Rains, and as they retain any declivi∣ty, that is, till they be levelled with the Plains.
2. By reason of the abundance of Earth thus washed off the Mountains by Shots of Rain, and carried down with the Floods to the Sea; about the out-lets of the Rivers, where the violent Motion of the Water ceases, settling to the bottom, and raising it up by degrees above the Surface of the Water, the Land continually gains upon, and drives back the Sea: The Egyptian Pharos or Light∣house of Old Time stood in an Island a good distance from Land, which is now joyned to the Continent, the interjacent Fretum having been filled up by the Sill brought down by the River Nilus in the time of the Flood sub∣siding there. Indeed the Ancient Historians do truly make the whole Land of Egypt to have been , the Gift of the Ri∣ver, and by this means gained from the Sea. Seneca in the Sixth Book of his Nat. Quest. chap. 26. gives this account, Egyptus ex imo tota concrevit. Tantum enim (si Ho∣mero fides) aberat à continenti Pharos, quantum navis diurno cursu metiri plenis lata velis po∣test. Sed continenti admota est. Turbidus enim defluens Nilus, multúmque secum limum trahens, & eum subinde apponens prioribus terris, Aegyptum annuo incremento semper ul∣tra tulit. Inde pinguis & limosi soli est, nec ulla intervalla in se habet; sed crevit in soli∣dum arescente limo, quo pressa erat & cedens
structura, &c. That is, All Egypt is but a Concretion of Mud. For (if Homer may be believed) the Pharos was as far distan from the Continent, as a Ship with full sai could run in a days time; but now it is joyne to it. For Nilus flowing with troubled Wa¦ters brings down a great deal of mud and Silt and adding to it the old land, carries o Egypt further and further still by an annua increase. Hence it is of a fat and mudd soil, and hath no pores or cavities in it. A this reason he gives why it is not troubled wit Earthquakes. Thus by reason of the gre Rivers, Po, Athesis, Brenta, and others, whic empty themselves into the Lagune, or Sha¦lows about Venice in Italy, and in times o floods bring down thither great store  earth, those Lagune are in danger to, be i time atterrated, and with the City situate i the midst of them, added to the firm Lan Thus in the Carnarg, or Isle that the Rive Rhosne makes near Arles in Provence, the hath been so much lately gained from th Sea, that the Watch tower had, in the memo¦ry of some Men, been removed forwar three times, as we were there informed And it seems to me probable, that the who Low Countreys were thus gained from th Se. For Varenius in his Geography tel us, That sinking a Well at Amsterdam, a
near an hundred foot depth, they met with a bed or floor of Sand and Cockle-shells; whence it is evident, one would think, that of old time the bottom of the Sea lay so deep, and that that hundred foot thickness of Earth above the Sand, arose from the Se∣diments of the Waters of those great Rivers, the Rhine, Scheld, Maes, &c. which there∣abouts emptied themselves into the Sea, and in times of Floods brought down with them abundance of Earth from the upper grounds. The same Original doubtless had that great Level of the Fens, running through the Isle of Ely, Holland in Lincoln∣shire and Marshland in Norfolk. That there hath been no small quantity of Earth thus brought down, appears also in that along the Channels of most great Rivers, as for example, the Thames and Trent in England, especially near their Mouths or Out-lets, between the Mountains and higher grounds on each side, there are large Levels and Plains; which seem to have been originally part of the Sea, raised up, and atterrated by Earth and Silt brought down by those Rivers in great Floods. Now the Rain thus continually washing away, and carrying down Earth from the Mountains and higher Grounds, and raising up the Vallies near the Sea, as long as there
is any descent for the Rivers, so long will they continue to run, carry forward the low ground, and streighten the Sea, which also by its working, by reason of the declivity, ea∣sily carries down the Earth towards the lower and middle part of its Channel [alveus] and by degrees may fill it up. Moreover, the Clouds still pouring down Rain upon the Earth, it will descend as far as there is any declivity; and where that fails, it will stagnate, and joyning with Sea, cover first the skirts of the Earth, and so by degrees higher and higher, till the Whole be co∣vered. To this we may add, that some assistance toward the levelling of the Mountains, may be contributed by the Courses and Catar∣racts of subterraneous Rivers washing away the Earth continually, and weakning their foundations, so by degrees causing them to founder, subside, and fall in. That the Moun∣tains do daily diminish, and many of them sink; that the Vallies are raised; that the Skirts of the Sea are atterrated, no man can deny. That these things must needs in pro∣cess of time have a very considerable and great effect, is as evident; which what else can it be, then that we have mentioned? Varenius in his Geography putting the Question, Whether the Ocean may again
come to cover all the Earth, and make an Universal Deluge; answers, That we may conceive a way how this may naturally come to pass. The manner thus, Supposing that the Sea by its continual working doth un∣dermine and wash away the Shores and Cliffs that are not rocky, and carry the Earth thereof down towards the middle, or deep∣est parts of its Channel, and so by degrees fill it up. By doing this perpetually, it may, in a long succession of Time, carry all away, and it self cover the whole Earth. That it doth thus subvert and wash away the Shores in many places is in experience true. About Dort in Holland and Dullart in Friesland, and in Zealand many Villages, some say Three Hundred, have been drown'd by the encroachments of the Sea, as some of their Towers and Steeples still extant above the Waters do testifie. On the Tuscan Shore, Kircher tell us, that not far from Ligorn he himself had observed a whole City under Water, that had been in former times drown'd by the Inundation of the Sea. And over against Puteoli in the Sinus of Baia, he tells us, that in the bottom of the Sea, there are not only Houses, but the traces and footsteps of the Streets of some City mani∣festly discernable. And in the County of Suffolk, almost the whole Town of Donewick,
with the adjacent Lands, hath been under∣mined and devoured by the Sea. This washing away of the Shores is, I conceive, in great measure to be attributed to the fore-mentioned streightning and cut∣ting short of the Sea, by the Earth and Silt that in the times of Floods are brought down into it by the Rivers. For the Vulgar have a Proverbial Tradition, That what the Sea loses in one place, it gains in another. And both together do very handsomly make out and explain, how the Earth in a Natural way, may be reduced to its primitive state in the Creation, when the Waters covered the Land. But this according to the lei∣surely proceedings of Nature, would not come to pass in many Ages, I might say, in Ages of Ages: Nay, some think, that those vast Ridges and Chains of Mountains, which run through the middle of the Continents are by reason of their great height, weight and solidity, too great a Morsel ever to be devoured by the Jaws of the Sea. But whe∣ther they be or not, I need not dispute though I incline to the Negative, because this is not the dissolution the Apostle here speaks of, which must be by Fire. But I must not here dissemble an Obje∣ction I see may be made, and that is, That the Superficies of the Earth is so far from being
depressed, that it is continually elevated. For in ancient Buildings, we see the Earth raised high above the foot of them. So the Pantheon at Rome, which was at first ascen∣ded up to by many [eight] Steps, is now descended down to by as many. The Basis and whole Pedestal of Trajan's Pillar there was buryed in the Earth. Dr. Tancred Robinson in the year 1683. ob∣serv'd in some places, the Walls of old Rome, to lye Thirty and Forty Foot under ground; so that he thinks the greatest part of the Remains of that Famous Ancient City is still buried, and undiscovered; the prodigi∣ous heaps of Ruines and Rubbish inclosed within the Vineyards and Gardens being not half dig'd up or search't, as they might be, the tops of Pillars peeping up and down. And in our own Country we find many Ancient Roman Pavements at some depth under ground. My Learned and Ingenious Friend Mr. Edward Lloyd, not long since in∣form'd of one, that himself had seen buried deep in the Church-yard at Wychester in Glo∣cestershire. Nay, the Earth in time will grow over and bury the Bodies of great Timber Trees, that have been fallen, and lye long upon it. To which I answer, As to Buildings, 1. The Ruines and Rubbish of the Cities where∣in
in they stood, might be conceived to bury them as deep as they now lye under ground. And by this means it's likely the Roman Pavements we find, might come to be covered to that height we mentioned▪ For that the places where they occur, were anciently Roman Towns subverted and ru∣ined, may easily be proved; as particularly in this we mention'd, from the Termination Chester; whatever Town or Village hath that addition to its Name having been anci∣ently a Roman Town or Camp: Chester seeming to be nothing but Castra. 2. It is to be consider'd, That weighty Buildings do in time overcome the resistance of the foundation, unless it be a solid Rock; and sink into the ground. Nay, the very soft Water, lying long upon the bottoms of the Sea or Pools, doth so compress and sadden them by its weight, that the very Roads that are continually beaten with Horses and Carriages, are not so firm and sad: And in the Sea, the nearer you dig to the Low Water Mark, still the sadder and firmer it is: and it's probable still, the further the sadder; which seems to be confirmed by the strong fixing of Anchors. [This firmness of the Sand, by the weight of the incumbent Water, the people inhabi∣ting near the Sea are so sensible of, that I
have seen them boldly ride through the Water cross a Channel three Miles broad, before the Tide was out, when in some places it reacht to the Horses Belly.] A semblance whereof, we have in Ponds, which being newly dig'd, the Water that runs into them, sinks soon into the Earth, and they become dry again, till after some time, by often filling, the Earth becomes so solid, through the weight of the Water, that they leak no more, but hold Water up to the brink. Wittie Scarborough Spaw, p. 86. What force a gentle, if continual pres∣sure hath, we may understand also by the Roots of Trees, which we see will some∣times pierce through the Chinks of Stone Walls, and in time make great Cracks and Rifts in them; nay, will get under their very foundations. The tender Roots of Herbs overcome the resistance of the ground, and make their way through Clay or Gra∣vel. By the by, we may here take notice, that one reason why plowing, harrowing, sifting, or any comminution of the Earth ren∣ders it more fruitful, is, because the Roots of Grass, Corn, and other Herbs can, with more facility, creep abroad, and multiply their Fibres in the light and loose Earth. That the rotting of Grass and other Herbs upon the ground, may in some places raise
the Superficies of it, I will not deny; th is, in Gardens and Enclosures, where th ground is rank, and no Cattel are admitte to eat off the Fogg or long Grass: but elsewhe the raising of the Superficies of the Eart is very little and inconsiderable; and not at all, unless in level grounds, which ha but little declivity: For otherwise the So would by this time have come to be of a ver great depth, which we find to be but shallo Nor do I think, that so much as the Trunk of fall'n Trees, are by this means covered but rather, that they sink by their ow weight, in time overcoming the resistance o the Earth, which without much difficult yields, being soaked and softned by th Rains insinuating into it, and keeping i continually moist in Winter time. But  these Buildings be situate in Valleys, it i clear, that the Earth brought down from th Mountains by Rain, may serve to land the up. Again, the Superficies of the Earth may be raised near the Sea Coast, by they continual blowing up of Sand by the Winds▪ This happens often in Norfolk, and in Corn∣wall, where I observed a fair Church, viz. that of the Parish called Lalant, which is the Mother Church to St. Ives, and above two Miles distant from the Sea, almost covered with the Sand; little being extant above it, but
the Steeple and ridge of the Roof. Nay, a great part of St. Ives it self lyes buried in he Sand: and I was told there, that in ne night there had been a whole Street of Houses so covered with Sand, that in the morning they were fain to dig their way out of their houses through it. All along the Western Shoar of Wales, there are great Hills of Sand, thus blown up by the Wind. We observed also upon the Coast of Flanders and Holland the like Sandy Hills or Downs. But there are not many places liable to this Accident, viz. where the bottom of the Sea is Sandy, and where the Wind most frequently blows from off the Sea; where the Wind sets from the Land toward the Sea this happens not; where it is indifferent, it must in reason carry off as much as it brings on, unless other Causes hinder.
A Digression concerning the D¦luge in the Days of Noah. BEfore I proceed to the Second Partic¦lar, being as it were, led and invite thereto by what hath been said, I shall mak a Digression, to discourse a little concerni the general Deluge in the days of Noah.  shall not enlarge much upon it, so as t take in all that might be said, but confir my self to Three Heads. 1. I shall confir the Truth of the History of the Deluge re¦corded in the Scripture, by the Testimonie of some ancient Heathen Writers. 2. I shal consider the Natural Causes or Means where∣by it was effected. 3. I shall enquire con∣cerning the Consequents of it, what consi∣derable effects it had upon the Earth. First then, I shall produce some Testimo∣nies of Ancient Heathen Writers concerning the Deluge. The First shall be that of Berosus, recor∣ded by Josephus, in the fifth Chapter of his first Book of Jewish Antiquities,
, &c. That is, Berosus the aldaean relating the Story of the Deluge ites thus. It is reported, that there is he part of the Vessel [the Ark] still re∣ining at the Mountain of the Gordyaeans; d that certain persons scraping off the Bi∣nen or Pitch, carry it away; and that n make use of it for Amulets, to drive ay Diseases. A Second Testimony the same Josephus ords us in the same place, and that is, of Ni∣aus Damascenus; who, saith he, gives us  History of the [Ark and Deluge] in se words, About Minyas in Armenia there a great Mountain called Baris; to which s reported, that many flying in the time of Deluge were saved, & that a certain person s carried thither in an Ark, which rested the top of it; the reliques of the Tim∣ whereof were preserved there a long e. Besides these, Josephus tells us in the e place, that Hieronymus the Egyptian, who ote the Phoenician Antiquities, and Mna∣s, and many others, whose words he al∣ges not, make mention of the Flood. Eusebius superadds two Testimonies more. e one of Melon to this effect. There de∣ted from Armenia at the time of the De∣e, a certain man, who together with his ns had been saved; who being cast out of
his House and Possessions, was driven aw by the Natives. This man passing over t intermediate Region, came into the mou∣tainous part of Syria, that was then de¦late. This Testimony makes the Delu Topical, and not to have reached ¦menia. The other is of Abydenus an ancient W¦ter in the same Eusebius, Praepar. Evang▪ lib. 9. cap. 4. , &c. ¦ter whom others reigned, and then Sisith (so he calls Noah.) To whom Saturn fo told, that there should be a great Flood Waters upon the Fifteenth Day of  Month Desius; and commanded him to h all Writings [or whatever was commi to Writing] in Heliopolis of the Syppari. Which Sisithrus as soon as he had perform presently sailed away to Armenia, wh what God had predicted to him, imme¦ately came to pass [or came upon hi The third day after the Waters ceased, sent forth Birds, that he might try whe they could espy any Land uncovered Water. But they finding nothing but S and not knowing whither to betake the¦selves, returned back to Sisithrus. In l manner, after some days he sent out oth
with like success. But being sent out the third time, they returned with their feet fouled with Mud. Then the Gods caught up Sisithrus from among men: But the Ship remained in Armenia, and its Wood afforded the Inhabitants Amulets to chase away ma∣ny Diseases. These Histories accord with the Scripture as to the main, of the being of a Flood, and Noah escaping out of it; only they adulterate the Truth, by the admixture of a deal of fabulous stuff. Cyril in his first Book against Julian, to prove the Deluge, alledges a passage out of Alexander Polyhistor. Plato himself (saith he) gives us an obscure intimation of the Deluge, in his Timaeus, bringing in a certain Egyptian Priest, who related to Silon out of the Sacred Books of the Egyptians, that be∣fore the particular Deluges known and ce∣lebrated by the Grecians, there was of old an exceeding great Inundation of Waters, and devastation of the Earth; which seems to be no other than Noah's Flood. Plutarch in his Book De Solertia Anima∣lium tells us, That those who have written of Deucalion's Flood, report, that there was a Dove sent out of the Ark by Deucalion, which returning again into the Ark, was a sign of the continuance of the Flood, but flying quite away, and not returning any
more, was a sign of Serenity, and that the Earth was drained. Indeed Ovid and other Mythologist make Deucalion's Flood to have been uni∣versal: and it's clear, by the Description O∣vid gives of it, that he meant the genera Deluge in the days of Noah. And that by Deucalion, the Ancients together with Ovid understood Noah; Kircher in his L. 2. c. 6. Arca No doth well make out. First, For that the Poe Apollonius makes him the Son of Prome∣theus in his third Book, — . Where Prometheus the Son of Iapetus bega the Renowned Deucalion. 2. Berosus affirm Noah to have been Scythian. And Luci in his Book De Dea Syria tells us, tha many make Deucalion to have been so too 3. The Scripture testifies, that men were gene¦rally very corrupt and wicked in the days o Noah. And Andro Teius a very ancient Wri∣ter testifies, that in Deucalion's time ther was a great abundance of wicked men, which made it necessary for God to destroy Mankind. 4. The Scripture saith, that Noah was a Just Man, and Perfect in his Genera∣tion. And Ovid saith of Deucalion, that
Non illo melior quisquam, nec amantior aequi Vir fuit, aut illâ [Pyrrhâ uxore ejus] reve∣rentior ulla Deorum. And a little after, Innocuos ambos, cultores numinis ambos. 5. Apollonius saith of Deucalion, , the first ruled over men. Which may very well be attributed to Noah the Father and Restorer of Mankind, whose right the Kingdom was. 6. The sending out of a Dove, to try whether the Waters were abated, and the Flood gone off, is (we have seen) by Putarch attributed to Deuca∣lion. 7. Lucian in his Timon, and in his Book de Dea Syria, sets forth the Particulars of Deucalion's, after the example of Noah's, Flood. , &c. Deucalion was the only man that was left for a second Generation, for his Pru∣dence and Piety sake: And he was saved in this manner. He made a great Ark, and got aboard it, with his Wife and Children: And to him came Swine, and Horses, and Lions, and Serpents, and all other living Creatures, which
the Earth maintains, according to their kind by pairs; and he received them all, and they hurt him not; for there was by Divine Instinc a great friendship among them; and they sailed together in the Ark, so long as the W¦ters prevailed. And in his Timon he saith that Noah laid up in the Ark plenty of a Provisions for their sustenance. By all this it appears, that the Notion o a general Flood was every where curren among the people, especially in those Cou¦treys where the Ark rested, and where Noa afterward lived. And hence it was, that th Apameans, whether of Mesopotamia, or Syri or Bythinia, (for there were three Cities  Name) coined Moneys in honour of th Emperours Septimius Severus, and Philipp Arabs, having on the Reverse the Figure  an Ark, with a Man and a Woman standin before it; and a Man and a Woman lookin out of it; and two Doves above it, one fl¦ing with a Branch of a Tree in its Mout another resting upon it. The Figur whereof, and a Learned Discourse thereupo out of Falconerius, may be seen in Kirche L. 2 c. 6. Arca Noae. Which Moneys though the were coined long after our Saviour's time, an the divulgation of the Scriptures; yet bein done by Ethnicks, do shew that the Story  the Deluge was known, and famous, an
generally credited among them, as being near the place where Noah lived and con∣versed after the Flood. Howbeit I do not deny, that there was such a particular Flood in Thessaly, as they call Deucalion's, which happened Seven Hun∣dred and Seventy Years or thereabouts after the general Deluge. I acknowledge also a more ancient Flood in Attica in the time of Ogyges, about Two Hundred and Thirty Years be∣fore Deucalion's, by which the Countrey was so marred, that it lay waste and uncultiva∣ted without Inhabitants for almost Two Hundred Years. Other particular Deluges, and Irruptions, or Inundations of the Seas, besides these, we read of in Histories; which I shall not stand to enumerate. He that desires an Ac∣count of them, may consult Sr. Walter Raleigh's History of the World, p. 89. How∣beit the Consideration of them may be of use to us, when we shall come to treat of the Effects of the Flood upon the Earth. So I dismiss this first particular, and proceed to the second: What were the instrumental Causes or Means of the Flood? Whether was it effected by natural or supernatural Means only? Whether was God no further concerned in it, than in so ordering second
Causes at first, as of themselves necessarily to bring it in at such a time? First, Those that hold this Deluge was altogether miraculous, and that God Al∣mighty created Waters on purpose to serve this occasion, and when they had done their work destroyed them again, dispatch the Business, and loose or cut the Knot in a few words. And yet this Hypothesis is not so absurd and precarious, as at first sight it may seem to be. For the World being al∣ready full, there needed not, nor indeed could be any Creation of Water out of no∣thing, but only a Transmutation of some other body into Water. Now if we grant all natural Bodies, even the Elements them∣selves, to be mutually transmutable, as few men doubt, and some think they can de∣monstrate; why might not the Divine Power and Providence bring together at that time such natural Agents, as might change the Air or Aether, or both together into Water; and so supply what was wanting in Rains, and extraordinary Eruptions of Springs▪ To them that argue the Improbability o such a change, from the great quantity o Air requisite to the make of a little Water; it may be answered, That if Air, and al Bodies commixt with it, were together chan∣ged
into Water, they must needs make a bulk of Water of equal quantity with them∣selves, unless we will grant a Peripatetical Condensation and Rarefaction; and hold that the same Matter may have sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser quantity or extension. This Cause [the conversion of Air into Water] the Learned Jesuite Athanasius Kir∣cher, in his Book De Arca Nooe, alledges as the undoubted instrumental Cause or Means of the Deluge in these words, Dico totum il∣lud aereum spatium usque ad supremam regio∣nem aeris, praepotentis Dei virtute, in aquas, per inexplicabilem nubium coacervatarum mul∣titudinem, quâ replebatur, conversum esse; cujus ubertas tanta fuit, ut Aer supremus cum inferiori in Oceanum commutatus videri potuerit, non naturae viribus, sed illius cujus voluntati & imperio cuncta subsunt. That is, I affirm, That all that Aereal space that reaches up to the supreme Region of the Air, was, by the power of the Omnipotent God, and instrumentality of an inexplicable multitude of Clouds amassed together, wherewith it was filled, changed into Water, so that the upper and lower Air might seem to be transmuted into an Ocean, not by the strength of Nature, but of him to whose Will and Power all things are subject. And he is so confi∣dent
Arcae Noael l. 2. c. 4. that this Deluge, in which the Wa∣ter was raised fifteen Cubits above the high∣est Mountains, was not, nor could be ef∣fected by natural Causes; but by the right hand of the Most High God only; that he saith, No man can deny it, but he who doth not penetrate, how far the power of Nature can extend, and where it is limited. To conclude, this Hypothesis hath the Suffrages of most Learned Men. But because the Scri∣pture assigning the Causes or Means of the Inundation, makes no mention of any con∣version of Air into Water, but only of the breaking up the Fountains of the Great Deep, and the opening of the Windows of Heaven, I suppose those Causes may be suffi∣cient to work the Effect, and that we need not have recourse to such an Assistance. As for those that make the Deluge Topi∣cal, and restrain it to a narrow compass of Land; their Opinion is I think sufficiently confuted by the fore-mentioned ingenious Author, to whom therefore I refer the Reader. I shall not undertake the Defence or Con∣futation of any other Hypothesis: only tell you which at present seems to me most pro∣bable, and that is theirs, who for a partial cause of the Deluge, assign either a change of the Center of the Earth, or a violent de∣pression
of the Surface of the Ocean, and a forcing the Waters up from the subterrane∣ous Abysse through the Channels of the Fountains that were then broken up and opened. First then, let us consider what Causes the Scripture assigns of the Flood; and they are two: 1. The breaking up the Fountains of the great Deep: 2. The opening of the Win∣dows of Heaven. I shall first treat of this last. By the opening of the Windows of Heaven, is (I suppose) to be understood the causing of all the Water that was suspended in the Air to descend down in Rain upon the Earth; the effect hereof here mentioned be∣ing a long continuing Rain of Forty, nay, perchance One Hundred and Fifty Days. And that these Treasuries of the Air will afford no small quantity of Water, may be made appear, both by Scripture and Reason. 1. By Scripture, which opposes the Waters that are above the Heavens or Firmament, to those that are under them; which if they were not , and in some measure equal, it would never do. Gen. 1.6. God is said to make a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and to divide the Waters which were under the Firmament, from the Waters which were above the Firmament. And this was the work of a whole day, and conse∣quently
no inconsiderable thing. By the Hea∣vens or Firmament in this place, is to be un∣derstood the inferiour Region of the Air, wherein the Fowls fly: who Gen. 1.20. are said to fly above the Earth, in the open Fir∣mament of Heaven; though elsewhere it be taken for the Celestial Regions, wherein the Sun, and Moon, and Stars are placed. 2. The same may be made appear, by Reason grounded upon Experience. I my self have observed a Thunder-Cloud in pas∣sage, to have in less than two hours space powred down so much Water upon the Earth, as besides what sunk into the parched and thirsty ground, and filled all Ditches and Ponds, caused a considerable Flood in the Rivers, setting all the Meadows on flote. [And Dr. Wittie in his Scarborough Spa tells us of great Spouts of Rain that ordi∣narily fall every year some time or other in Summer, that set the whole Countrey in a Flood.] Now had this Cloud, which might, for ought I know, have moved Forty Miles forward, stood still and emptied all its Water upon the same spot of ground it first hung over, what a sudden and incre∣dible Deluge would it have made there? and yet what depth or thickness of Vapours might remain uncondensed in the Air above this Cloud, who knows? Now it is to
be considered, that not only the Air above the Dry Land, but also all that covers the whole Ocean, is charged with Vapours, which are nothing else but diffused Water: all which was brought together by Winds, or what other Means seem'd good to God, and caused to distil down in Rain upon the Earth. And you may easily guess that it was no small quantity of Water that was supplyed this way, in that it sufficed for a Rain that lasted more than Forty Days, as I shall afterwards shew, if I understand the Text a right. And that no ordinary Rain neither, but Catarracts or Spouts of Water; for so the Septuagint interprets the words, , And the Catarracts or Spouts of Heaven were opened. I return now to the first Cause or Means of the Deluge assigned by the Scripture, and that is the breaking up of all the fountains of the great Deep. By the great Deep in this place, I suppose, is to be understood the Subterra∣neous Waters, which do and must necessa∣rily communicate with the Sea. For we see, that the Caspian and Mediterranean Seas, to mention no others, receive into themselves many and great Rivers, and yet have no visible Out-lets; nay, this latter, receives also abundance of Waters from the great
Ocean, running in at the Streights of Gi∣braltar: and therefore by Subterraneous Passages, must needs discharge their Waters into the Abyss of Waters under the Earth, and by its intervention into the Ocean again. By the breaking up of the Fountains of the Great Deep, is I conceive meant, the making great Issues and Apertures for these Subter∣raneous Waters to rush out. You will say▪ how could that be, sith the Water keeps its level, and cannot ascend to a greater height above the common Center, than the Super∣ficies of the Sea is, much less force its way▪ remove Obstacles, and break open Passages? I answer, According to them that hold that all Rivers come from the Sea by Subter∣raneous Passages, it is no more than daily happens. For they must needs grant, tha the Water in the Subterraneous Channels, is raised as far above the level of the Ocean▪ as are the Heads and Fountains of great Ri∣vers. Which considering the height of their first Springs up the Mountains, the length of their Courses, and swiftness of their Streams for a great part of the way, is very considerable, a constant declivity being ne∣cessary to their descent. And therefore  can by no means assent to the Learned Do∣ctor Plot, (if I understand him alright) Hist. Nat. Staf∣ford, p. 79. That the Valleys are as much below the Surface
of the Sea, as Mountains are above it. For how then could Rivers descend down to the Sea through those Valleys; the Sea would rather run into them, and make Si∣uses; or else, if they were enclosed, the Water would stagnate there, and make Pools. If this be done by way of Filtration (which seems to be the most likely Means of raising the Water) I do not see, but these Filtres may suck up the whole Ocean; and, f Apertures and Out-lets large enough were made, powre it out upon the Earth in no ong time. But I cannot be fully reconciled o this Opinion, though it hath great Advo∣cates, especially the fore-mentioned very Learned and Ingenious Person Doctor Ro∣bert Plot. I acknowledge Subterraneous Waters: I grant a Confluence and Commu∣nication of Seas by under-ground Channels and Passages. But this inferiour constant Circulation and perpetual Motion of Water seems to me not yet sufficiently proved and made out. I think that the Patrons and Abettors of this Opinion, have not satisfa∣ctorily demonstrated, how it is, or can be performed. To what is offered concerning the Center of Gravity being nearer to our Continent, by reason of the Preponderan∣cy of the Earth, and the Waters lying as it were on an heap in the other Hemisphere, I
answer, 1. That though Earth be inde specifically heavier than Water, yet consi∣dering that Water is a close imporous Body (I understand greater Pores) but the Earth every where full of great and small Pores and Cavities, I know not but taking a bulk thereof equal to the Ocean, the Water may be as heavy as it. 2. In the present terra¦queous Globe, the New World which lye between the two great Seas, and almost op¦posite to our Continent, doth in some mea¦sure counterpoise the Old, and take off a great part of the advantage, which by rea¦son of its Preponderancy, it might other¦wise have. Moreover, I am of Mr. Brierwood Opinion, that there may be, and is a va Continent toward the Southern Pole oppo¦site to Europe and Asia, to counterpoise the on that side; nay, I do verily believe, tha the Continents and Islands are so proporti¦onably scattered and disposed all the Worl over, as if not perfectly and exactly, yet ve¦ry nearly to counterballance one another; s that the Globe cannot walter or reel toward any side: and that the Center of the conve Superficies of the Sea, is the true Center o the whole Terrestrial Sphere, both of Motio and of Gravity. 3. The Sea being no wher above a German Mile deep. (for which w have good Authority) in most places no
alf so much, taking then as a middle term alf a Mile. Suppose it every where half  Mile deep, (the Earth below the Sea, we ave no reason to suppose of different Gra∣ity) What proportion hath this two Miles hickness of Water, to the whole Terraque∣us Globe, whose Semidiameter, is by the ccount of Mathematicians Three Thousand Four Hundred and Forty Italian Miles. What ittle advantage then can it have of the Earth opposite to it, in point of Preponde∣ancy? 4. Granting the Center of Gravity should be nearer our Continent: The Cen∣er being the lowest place, and the Water  fluid Body, unless stopped, where it found declivity, it would descend as near as it could to it, without any regard of the Earths Preponderancy. And though we should grant, that the driness of the Shoars might stop it, and cause it to lye on a heap, yet would it run up the Channels of Rivers, till it came as near as possible to the Center of Gravity. Indeed the Rivers themselves could not descend, but must run towards the middle of the Continent. All this I think will follow from this Hypothesis by as good consequence, as the Waters being forced through the Subterraneous Channels out at the Springs. Again, I do not pe∣remptorily affirm, that all Fountains do
proceed from Rain; only I contend, th Rain may suffice to feed them, and that pr¦bably it doth feed ordinary Springs. Th the Ingenious French Author doth well d¦monstrate in the River Seine, and I believe is demonstrable in most other Rivers. The little Brook that runs near my Dwe¦ling, and hath its Head or Source not abo Four or Five Miles off, where there is  extraordinary Eruption of Water, all alo its Course receives small Rivulets on bo sides; which though they make a consid¦rable Stream at Five Miles distance from t Fountain-head, yet singly are so small, th they may very well be conceived to dra down from the higher Grounds that ly about them. And taking the whole tog¦ther, it is a very considerable length a breadth of Land, that contributes to the mai¦tenance of this little River. So that it ma easily be believed, that all its Water ow its original to Rain: Especially if it be con¦dered further, that in Winter-time after t Rains are fallen, the Ground sated, and th Ditches full, the Stream of this River durin the whole Winter following, is for the mo part, unless in Frosts, double of what it wa in Summer. Which Excess can procee from nothing but Rain; at least it woul be rashness to assign any other Cause, whe
there is so obvious and manifest an one. Moreover, that Rain affords no small quan∣tity of Water, is clear also from great Floods, wherein it might be proved, that in few days there descends more Water than would supply the ordinary Stream for a good part of Summer. Now to compare great things with small: I have seen many of the biggest Rivers in Europe, the Danow, Rhine, Rhosne and Po; and when I consider the length of their courses, the multitude of considerable Rivers and Brooks they receive; and all these from their first rise, made up by de∣grees by little Rivulets and Gills, like my neighbouring Brook; the huge Mountains and vast extent of higher Grounds they drain: To me it seems (and I have seen all their Streams near their Out-lets, except the Danows, and it's after Four Hundred Miles descent) that they do not bear any greater proportion to the Rivers and Rivulets they receive, and the immense Tracts of Land that feed them, than my Brook doth to its small Rills and compass of Ground. But in this, I confess, I do not descend to the niceness of Measuring and Calculation, but satisfie my self with rude conjectures, taking my measures, as the Cestrians say, by the Scale of the Eye.
It will here be objected, That the Rain never sinks above Ten Foot deep at most into the Earth, and therefore cannot supply the Springs. Answ. This indeed, if it were true, would much enervate, nay, quite overthrow our Opinion: And therefore we must for∣tifie this Point, and effectually demonstrate beyond all possibility of denyal or contra∣diction, That Rain-water doth sink down, and make its way into the Earth, I do not say Ten, or Twenty, nor Forty, but an Hun∣dred, nay, Two or Three Hundred Foot or more. First then, in Pool-hole in the Peak of Darbyshire, there are in some places constan droppings and destillations of Water from the Roof: under each of which (to note that by the by) rises up a Stone Pillar, the Wate precipitating some of those stony Particles which it had washed off the Rocks in pas∣sing through their Chinks. These droppings continue all the Summer long. Now i seems clear to me, that the Rain-water ma¦king its way through the Veins and Chink of the Rocks above it, and yet but slowly by reason of the thickness of the Moun∣tain, and straitness of the passages, supplie that dropping all the year round; at least this is much more rational than any diffe¦rent
Hypothesis. If the Water distills down faster in Winter-time and wet Weather, than it doth in Summer (which I forgot to ask) the experiment would infallibly prove our Asser∣tion. In confirmation of this Argument, Albertus Magnus (as I find him quoted in Dr. Wittie's Scarborough Spaw) tells us, That at the bottom of a solid Rock One Hundred and Thirty Fathoms deep he saw drops of Wa∣ter distilling from it in a rainy season. Secondly, It is well known, and attested to me by the people at Buxton when I was there, that out of the Mouth of the same Poole-hole, after great and long continuing Rains, a great Stream of Water did usually issue forth. And I am sure it must make its way through a good thickness of Earth or Rocks, before it could come in there. Thirdly, What becomes of all the Water that falls on Newmarket Heath and Gogmagog Hills, I presume also Salisbury-Plain, and the like Spungy Grounds all Winter long, where we see very little run off any way? It must needs sink into the Ground more than Ten Foot deep. Fourthly, Many, Wells, whose Springs lye at least Twenty Foot deep, we find by experience, do often fail in great Droughts in Summer time.
Fifthly, In Coal Delfs and other Mines, in wet Weather the Miners are many times drown'd out (as they phrase it) though no Water runs down into the Mouths of their Pits or Shafts. Nay, Dr. Wittie tells us in his Description of the Vertues of the Scarborough Spaw, pag. 105. That after great Inundations of Rain, the Miners find the Water frequently distilling through the solid Earth upon their Heads; whereas i Summer or dry Seasons, they find no inter∣ruption from thence at all. Further, to confirm this Particular, wrote to my Honoured Friend Sr. Thom Willughby Baronet, desiring him to examin his Colliers concerning it, and send me wo what report they make; and from him re¦ceived this account. If there be Springs ly before you come at the Coal, they carry the Water away; but if there be none, it falls into the Works in greater or less quantity ac∣cording as the Rains fall. Which answer is so much the more considerable, in that it gives me a further clear proof, that Springs are fed by Rain water, and not by any com∣munications from the Sea; their original be∣ing above the Beds of Coal, they receiving the Rain-water into their Veins, and deri∣ving it all along to their Fountains or Erupti∣ons, above the Coals.
I might add out of him, Fifthly, pag. 85. That the Scarborough Spaw, notwithstand∣ing it breaks out of Ground within Three or Four Yards off the Foot of the Cliff, which is near Forty Yards high, and within a quarter of a Mile there is another Hill, that is more, than as high again as the Cliff, and a descent all the way to the Cliff, so as the Rain-water cannot lye long upon the Ground, yet it is observable, that after a long Rain, the Water of the Spaw is alte∣red in its taste, and lessened in its opera∣tion whereas a rainy day or two will not sensibly hurt it. And now I am transcri∣bing out of this Author, give me leave to add an Observation or two in confirmation of Rains being the Original of Springs. The first is (pag. 97.) this; In England, in the years 1654, 55, and 56. when our Climate was dryer than ever it had been mentioned to be in any Stories, so as we had very little Rain in Summer, or Snow in Winter, most of our Springs were dried up, such as in the Memory of the eldest men living had never wanted Water, but were of those Springs we call fontes pe∣rennes, or at least were esteemed so. He instances also out of a parallel Story out of Heylin's Geography, in the Description of Cyprus, where the Author relates; That in
the days of Constantine the Great, there was an exceeding long drought there, so as in Thirty Six Years they had no Rain, in so much as all the Springs and Torrents, or Rivers, were dried up; so that the Inhabi∣tants were forced to forsake the Island, and to seek for new Habitations for want of fresh Water. The Second is, pag. 84. That in the Wolds or Downs of Yorkshire they have ma∣ny Springs break out after great Rains which they call Gypsies. Neither is this Eruption of Springs after long Rains, proper and peculiar only to the Wolds of Yorkshire, but common to othe Countreys also, as Dr Childrey witnesset in these words: Sometimes there breaks out Water in the manner of a sudden Land-flood, out of certain Stones, that are like Rocks standing aloft in open Fields, near the rising of the River Kynet [in Kent] which is reputed by the Common people a fore-runner of Dearth. That the sudde eruption of Springs in places where they use not always to run, should be a sign o Dearth is no wonder. For these unusua Eruptions, (which in Kent we call Nail¦bourns) are caused by extreme gluts o Rain, or lasting wet weather, and never happen, but in wet years; witness the year
1648. when there were many of them: —and to our purpose very remarkable it was, that in the 1654. several Springs and Rivulets were quite dryed up, by reason of the precedent Drought, which raged most in 1651, 1652, and 1653. As the Head of the Stour, that rises near El∣ham in Kent, and runs through Canterbury, was dry for some Miles space: and the like happened to the Stream that crosseth the Road-way between Sittingburn and Canter∣bury at Ospring near Feversham, which at other times ran with a plentiful current, but then wholly failed: So we see that it is not infrequent for new Springs to break out in wet years; and for old ones to fail in great Droughts. I cannot also here forbear to add, the probable account he gives of the Supply of the Spring-well on the Castle-hill at Scarbo∣rough; at which, I confess, I was somewhat puzzled. This Well, saith he, though it be upon the top of the Rock, not many Yards deep, and also upon the edge of the Cliff, is doubtless supplied by secret Chan∣nels within the ground, that convey the Rain and Showers into it, being placed on a dependent part of the Rock, near unto which there are also Cellars under an old ruinated Chappel, which after a great Rain
are full of Water, but are dryed up in a long Drought. As for what is said concerning the River Volgas pouring out so much Water into the Caspian Sea, as in a years time would make up a mass of Water equal to the Globe of the Earth; and of the hourly effusions of the River Po in Italy, which Ricciolus hath computed to amount to 18000000. Cubical Paces of Water. Whence a late Learned Writer hath probably inferred, that all the Rivers in the World together, do daily dis∣charge half an Ocean of Waters into the Sea, I must confess my self to be unsatisfied there∣with. I will not question their Calculations, but I suspect they are out in their Hypotheses. The Opinion of Mr. Edmund Halley, that Springs and Rivers owe their Original to Vapours condensed on the sides of Moun∣tains, rather than unto Rains, I acknowledge to be very ingenious, grounded upon good Observations, and worthy of its Author; and I will not deny it to be in part true in those hot Countreys in the Torrid Zone, and near it; where, by reason of the great heats, the Vapours are more copiously exhaled out of the Earth, and its likely carryed up high in the form of Vapours. The inferiour Air at least is so charged with them, and by that means so very moist, that in some places
their Knives rust even in their Pockets; and in the Night, so very fresh and cold, partly also by reason of the length of the Nights; that exposing the Body to it, causes Colds and Catarrhs, and is very dangerous: Whence also their Dews are so great, as in good mea∣sure to recompence the want of Rain, and serve for the nourishment of Plants; as they do even in Spain it self. I shall first of all propose this Opinion in the Words of the Author, and then discourse a little upon it. After he had enumerated many of the high Ridges and Tracts of Mountains in the four Quarters of the World, he thus proceeds: Each of which far surpass the usual height to which the Aque∣ous Vapours of themselves ascend, and on the tops of which the Air is so cold and rari∣fied, as to retain but a small part of those Vapours that shall be brought thither by the Winds. Those Vapours therefore that are raised copiously in the Sea, and by the Winds are carried over the Low Lands to those Ridges of Mountains, are there compelled by the Stream of the Air, to mount up with it to the tops of the Mountains, where the Wa∣ter presently precipitates, gleeting down by the Crannies of the Stone; and part of the Vapour entring into the Cavities of the Hills, the Water thereof gathers, as in an
Alembick, into the Basons of Stone it finds  which being once filled, all the overplus o Water that comes thither, runs over by the lowest place, and breaking out by the side of the Hills forms single Springs. Many o these running down by the Valleys or Guts between the Ridges of the Hills, and coming to unite, form little Rivulets or Brooks. Ma∣ny of these again meeting in one commo Valley, and gaining the plain ground, being grown less rapid, become a River: and ma∣ny of these being united in one common Channel, make such Streams, as the Rhe the Rhosne, and the Danube, which latter on would hardly think the Collection of Wate condensed out of Vapour, unless we conside how vast a Tract of ground that River drains and that it is the summ of all those Springs which break out on the South side of the Carpathian Mountains, and on the North¦side of the immense Ridge of the Alps, which is one continued Chain of Mountains from Switzerland to the Black Sea. And it may almost pass for a Rule, that the magnitude o a River, or the quantity of Water it evacu∣ates, is proportionable to the length and height of the Ridges, from whence its Foun∣tains arise. Now this Theory of Springs, i not a bare Hypothesis, but founded on Ex∣perience, which it was my luck to gain in my
abode at St. Helena; where, in the night time on the tops of the Hills, about Eight Hun∣dred Yards above the Sea, there was so strange a condensation, or rather precipita∣tion of the Vapours, that it was a great im∣pediment to my Celestial Observations; for in the clear Sky the Dew would fall so fast, as to cover each half quarter of an hour my Glasses with little drops, so that I was ne∣cessitated to wipe them off of so often; and my Paper, on which I wrote my Observations, would immediately be so wet with the Dew, that it would not bear Ink: by which it may be supposed, how fast the Water gathers in those mighty high Ridges I but now named.—At last he concludes: And I doubt not but this Hypothesis is more reasonable, than that of those who derive all Springs from the Rain-waters, which yet are perpetual, and without diminution, even when no Rain falls for a long space of time. This may, for ought I as yet see or know, be a good account of the Original of Springs in those fervid Regions, though even there, I doubt, but partial; but in Europe, and the more temperate Countries, I believe the Vapours in this manner conden∣sed, have but little interest in the production of them, though I will not wholly exclude them. For,
First, The Tops of the Alps above the Fountains of four of the greatest Rivers i Europe, the Rhine, the Rhosne, the Dano, and the Po, are for about Six Months in the Year constantly covered with Snow, to a great thickness; so that there are no Va¦pours all that while that can touch thoe Mountains, and be by them condensed into Water; there falls nothing there but Snow, and that continuing all that while on the ground without Dissolution, hinders all ac¦cess of Vapours to the Earth; if any rose, o were by Winds carried so high in that form as I am confident there are not. And yet for all that, do not those Springs fail, but con∣tinue to run all Winter; and it is likely too▪ without diminution; which is a longer time than Droughts usually last; especially if we consider, that this want of supply, is con∣stant and annual; whereas Droughts are but rare and accidental. So that we need not wonder any more, that Springs should con∣tinue to run, and without diminution too, in times of Drought. True it is, that those Rivers run low all Winter, so far as the Snow extends, and to a good distance from their Heads; but that is for want of their acci∣dental Supplies from Showers. Nay, I believe, that even in Summer, the Vapours are but rarely raised so high in a liquid form in the
free Air, remote from the Mountains, but e frozen into Snow, before they arrive at at height. For the Middle Region of the ir, where the Walk of the Clouds is, at ast the superior part of it, is so cold as to eez the Vapours that ascend so high, ven in Summer time. For we see that in e height and heat of Summer in great hunder-Storms for the most part it hails: ay, in such Tempests I have seen mighty howers of great Hail-stones fall, some as g as Nutmegs or Pigeons Egs; and in some, laces such heaps of them, as would load Dung Carts, and have not been dissolved in day or two. At the same seasons I have bserved, in some Showers Hail-stones fall f irregular Figures, and throughout pellu∣id, like great pieces of Ice, with several nags or Fangs issuing out of them: which ow they could be supported in the Air till hey amounted to that bulk and weight, is a hing worthy to be more curiously consi∣ered. For either they must fall from an ncredible height, the Vapours, they encoun∣red by the way, condensing and as it were rystallizing upon them into Ice, and in time ugmenting them to that bulk; or else there must be some strange and unknown faculty n the Air to sustain them. But to leave hem, it is certain, that the Vapours after
they are mounted up to a considerable height in the Air, are congealed and turne into the immediate component Principles  Snow, in which form I conceive they acqui a lightness, and are apt to ascend high than they could do, should they retain t form of a humid Vapour; as, we see, Ice i lighter than Water, out of which it is froz But whether this be the reason of th ascent or not, I am sure of the matter of fa that these Snow-Clouds do ascend far abo the highest Tops of the Alps, in the Gris Countrey, in the beginning of the Sprin it snowed very fast during my whole passa for six hours; and yet the Clouds seemed  be as far above my head, as they do here i England; and a great height they must b for the Snow to gather into so great flake and to continue so long falling; nay, it ma be three times so long. Moreover, we s that the highest Pikes and Summits of the Mountains are covered with Snow. 2. In the Spring-time, when the Snow di¦solves, some of these Rivers that flow do from the Alpine Mountains, run with a f Stream, and overflow their Banks, in cle Sun-shine Weather, though no Rain falls,  I my self can witness; and therefore I pr¦sume, that all the rest do so too, as the I¦habitants affirmed. But in the Summer tim
after the Snow hath been some time melted, their Streams decay again, notwithstanding any Vapours condensed upon them, propor∣tionably to the Droughts; neither are there any Floods, but upon falls of Rain. 3. That the Snow dissolved and soaking into the Earth, is the Original of the Alpine Springs; a probable Argument may be ta∣ken from the colour of the Water of those Rivers which descend from the Alps, at least on this Northern side, which I observed to be of a Sea-green, even to a great distance from their Heads; which whence can it pro∣ceed, unless from the Nitrous Particles of the Snow-water, of which they consist? Another also from the Bronchocele, or Swoln Throats. gut∣turine tumour, an Endemial Disease of the Natives of those parts, which Physicians and Naturalists atrribute to the Water they drink, not without good reason; because, say they, it consists of melted Snow, which gives it that malignant quality, De Sub∣tilit. Ex∣erc. 60. Sect. 2. Scaliger speaking of this Disease, saith, Id ab aqua fit è nivibus liquefactis, quae multum terrestris & crudi continet. But because Julius Palmarius may possibly be in the right, who imputes this Disease to the Steams of the Minerals, especially Mercurial, wherewith these Moun∣tains abound, which infect the Waters, and
render them noxious to the nervous part I shall not insist upon this particular. What Mr. Halley saith of Springs, th they are perpetual and without dimi¦tion, even when no Rain falls for a lon space of time. If he understands it genera¦ly of all Springs, I add, that are accounte quick ones too, I deny his assertion: th some there may be of that nature, I gran a reason whereof may be given, viz. th the out-let is too small to empty the Wa of all the Veins and Earth that lye above in a long time. In our Native Countr of England there are living and lasti Springs rising at the feet of our small H and Hillocks, to which I am sure the V¦pours contribute very little; which is so o¦vious to every man, that I think I need  spend time to prove it. Yet must I not dissemble or deny, that the Summer-time the Vapours do ascen or are carried up in that form by the sid of the Mountains to their highest tops, a above them; for there falls no Snow the in the heat of Summer; and that which lye there, is for the most part dissolved. B that Rain falls plentifully there, I my s can witness; having been on the two highe Tops of the Mount Jura, (which keeps th
Snow all Winter) on the one called Thuiri n a Thunder Shower; and on the other cal∣ed la Dolaz, in a smart and continuing Rain. So that I will not deny, but in Summer-ime the Vapours may contribute somewhat o the Springs; as I have elsewhere inti∣mated. And now that I am discoursing of these hings, give me leave to set down an Obser∣vation I made in the last Great Frost, the biggest that was ever known in the memory of Man, which I had before met with in Books, but did not give firm credit to, that s, that notwithstanding the violence of the Frost, all the Springs about us, brake out nd ran more plentifully, than usually they did at any other time: which I knew not what to impute to, unless perchance the close topping the Pores of the Earth, and keep∣ng in that part, which at other times was ont to vapour away; which Account, I neither then could, nor can yet fully ac∣uiesce in. To this I will here add an Abstract of  Letter written by my Honoured Friend, Dr. Tancred Robinson.
YOƲ may peradventure meet with som opposition against your Hypothesis  Fountains, tho indeed I am more and more co¦firm'd in your Opinion of them, and the  of the Mountains. Father Tachart in his Se¦cond Voyage to Siam, says, when he went up the Top of the Table Mountain at the Cap of Good Hope, the Rocks and Shrubs we perpetually dropping and feeding the Spri and Rills below, there being generally Clo hanging on the sides near the Top. The s observation hath been frequently made by  English Merchants in the Madera and Can Islands, especially in their Journies up to  Pike of Teneriff, in which, at such and s heights, they were always wet to the skin, the droppings of the great Stones, yet no R over head; the same I have felt in pa over some of the Alps. The Trees, which the Islands of Ferro and St. Thomas, are s to furnish the Inhabitants with most of t Water, stand on the sides of vast Mountai Vossius in his Notes on Pomponius Mela, firms them to be Arborescent Ferula's; I ¦lieve there is something in the many Relati of Travellers and Voyagers concerning th Trees; but then I fancy they are all mistak when they say, the Water issues out of
Trees: The Vapors stop't by the Mountains con∣dense and distil down by the Boughs. There being no Mountains in Aegypt, may be one rea∣son, why there is little or no Rain in that Countrey, and consequently no fresh Springs; therefore in their Caravans they carry all their Water with them in great Borracio's. This may be the cause that the vast Ridge and Chain of Mountains in Peru, are continually water'd, when the great Plains in that Coun∣trey are all dry'd up and parch't. This Hypo∣thesis concerning the Original of Springs from Vapours, may hold better in those hot Regi∣ons within and near the Tropicks (where the Exhalations from the Sea are most plentiful, most rarify'd, and Rain scarce) than in the Temperate and Frigid ones (where it rains and snows generally on the Vertices of the Mountains) yet even in our European Climates I have often observ'd the Firs, Pines, and other Vegetables near the Summits of the Alps and Appennines, to drop and run with Water, when it did not rain above; some Trees more than others, according to the density and smoothness of their Leaves and Superficies, whereby they stop and condense the Vapours more or less. The Beams of the Sun having little force on the high parts of Mountains, the interrupted Vapours must continually moisten them, and (as in the head of an Alembick)
condense and trickle down; so that we owe part of our Rain, Springs, Rivers, and conveniencies of Life, to the operation of distillation and Circula∣tion by the Sun, the Sea, and the Hills, without even the last of which, the Earth would scarce be habitable. This present year in Kent they have had no Rain since March last; therefore most of their Springs are dry at this very day, a I am assur'd from good hands. The high spouting of Water even to three Fathoms perpendicul out of innumerable holes on the Lake Zirkni in Carniola after Rains on the adjacent Hills, exceeds the spirting Gips or natural Jet d'ea we have in England. Novemb. 12. 1691. Tancred Robinson I have read of some Philosophers, wh imagined the Earth to be a great Animal, an that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, w the respiration of it: and now methinks, i this Doctrine be true, we have found on the Circulation of its Blood, or somethin like it. For the Water must upon this sup¦position▪ move, in proportion to its bul faster through the Veins of this round An¦mal, than the blood doth through those  other living Creatures. But let us suppose, that the Rivers  daily carry down to the Sea half an Ocea of Water, and that the Rain supplies all tha as our Opinion is, and see what we can i¦fer
from thence: I think it will be granted that ordinarily (communibus annis) the Rain that falls in a whole year amounts not to above one quarters continual Rain. Now if this suffices for a daily effusion of half an Ocean, it is clear, that if it should rain with∣out any intermission all the year round, the Rivers would pour out two Oceans into the Sea daily. And so in forty days con∣tinual Rain there would distil down upon the Earth eighty Oceans of Water. A pro∣digious quantity indeed and scarce credible, which if the Water be carried off as fast as it comes on, infers a Circulation of a quan∣tity of Water equal to the whole Ocean twice in twenty four hours. Supposing then thar so much Water daily descends upon the Earth, I argue thus, The Water falling upon the Earth must have some time to run down to the Sea, and according to the small de∣clivity of the Continent, (suppose the Moun∣tains pared off and the Land levelled) a con∣siderable one too: and we see it actually hath, so that the Floods in great Rivers follow some days after the falls of Rain upon the higher grounds. And so tho at the time of the general Deluge the Waters hastned down to the Sea as fast as the declivity of the Earth would permit, yet they breaking out of the Fountains of the Abyss, and falling down
from the Clouds abundantly faster than they could run down the gentle declivity of the Earth, it deserves to be considered whether by the end of forty days there might not have been water enough amassed to cover the Mountains fifteen Cubits high. And yet rhe Scripture doth not in plain terms say, that ever the waters of the Flood arose fifteen C∣bits above the tops of the highest Mountains, as Mr. Warren well observes. Moreover, to me it doth not seem clearly to limit the time of the Rains descent to forty days: but it may import that the Rain had continued so long before the Ark was lifted up above the Earth; and that it ceased not till one hundred and fifty days were over: for so long the Wa∣ters are said to have prevailed upon the Earth, Gen. 7.24. that is continued and in∣creased; whereas had the Rain ceased, and the Fountains been stopped at forty day end, the declivity of the Land would in a likelihood have sunk the Waters much by the end of one hundred and fifty days: which it was so far from doing, that not∣withstanding the help of the Wind, the top of the Mountains were not seen till the be∣ginning of the tenth Month, that is till tw hundred and seventy days were past. Nei∣ther yet did the Mountains help but rathe hinder the descent of the Waters down to
the Sea, straitning it into Channels, obstruct∣ing its passage, and forcing it to take Cir∣cuits, till it got above the Ridges and tops of them. As to this Argumentation and Inference the case is the same, if we hold that the Wa∣ter circulates through the Veins of the Earth. For supposing the Rivers pour forth half an Ocean daily, and granting that in times of Floods their Streams are but double of their usual Currents (though I verily believe they are more than quadruple) and that the ef∣fusions of the Fountains be in like measure augmented, it will follow that the daily discharge of the Rivers will amount to two Oceans. Now at the time of the general Deluge both these Causes concurred. For there being a constant Rain of forty eight days, there must on that account be a con∣tinual Flood, and the Fountains of the great Deep being broken up, they must in all like∣lihood afford as much Water as the Rain: which whither it would not suffice in forty natural days to produce a Flood as big as that of Noah, notwithstanding the continual descent and going off of the Waters, I propose to the consideration of the Ingenious. E∣specially if we allow, as is not unreasonable to suppose, that the Divine Providence
might not first cause a contrary Wind to stop and inhibit the descent of the Waters, as af∣terwards he raised an assisting one to carry them off. I have but one thing more to add upon this Subject, that is, that I do not see how their Opinion can be true, who hold that some Seas are lower than others, as for Ex∣ample, the Red Sea than the Mediterranean. For it being true that the Water keeps its level, that is, holds its superfices every where equidistant from the Center of Gravity; or if by accident one part be lower, the rest by reason of their fluidity will speedily reduce the superficies again to an equality. The waters of all Seas communicating either a∣bove, or under ground, or both ways, one Sea cannot be higher or lower than ano∣ther: but supposing any accident should e∣levate or depress any, by reason of this con∣fluence or communication it would soon be reduced to a level again, as might demon∣stratively be proved. But I return, to tell the Reader what I think the most probable of all the Causes I have heard assigned of the Deluge, which is, the Center of the Earth being at that time changed, and set nearer to the Cente or middle of our Continent, whereupon the
Atlantick & Pacifick Oceans must needs press upon the Subterraneous Abyss, and so, by mediation thereof, force the Water upward, and at last compell it to run out at those wide mouths and apertures made by the Divine Power breaking up the Fountains of the great Deep. And we may suppose this to have been only a gentle and gradual Emotion, no faster than that the Waters run∣ning out at the bottom of the Sea, might ac∣cordingly lowre the Superficies thereof suffici∣ently, so that none needed run over the Shores. These Waters thus powred out from the Ori∣fices of the Fountains upon the Earth, the de∣clivity being changed by the removal of the Center, could not flow down to the Sea again, but must needs stagnate upon the Earth, and overflow it; and afterwards the Earth re∣turning to its old Center, return also to their former Receptacles. If any shall object against this Hypothesis, because by it the Flood will be rendr'd To∣pical, and restrained only to the Continent we live in: though I might plead the Unne∣cessariness of drowning America, it being in all probability unpeopled at that time; yet because the Scripture useth general ex∣pressions concerning the extent of the Flood, saying, Gen. 1.19. And all the high hills that were under the whole heaven were covered;
and again, Ver. 22. All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land dyed. And because the Americans also are said to have some ancient Memorial Tra∣dition of a Deluge; and the Ingenious Au∣thor of the Theory of the Earth hath by a moderate Computation, demonstrated, tha there must be then more people upon the Earth, than now: I will propose anothe way of solving this Phaenomenon, and that is, by supposing that the Divine Power might at that time, by the instrumentality of some natural Agent, to us at present unknown, so depress the Surface of the Ocean, as to force the Waters of the Abyss through the fore∣mentioned Channels and Apertures, and so make them a partial and concurrent Cause of the Deluge. That there are at some times in the course of Nature extraordinary pressures upon the Surface of the Sea, which force the Water outwards upon the Shores to a great height is evident. We had upon our Coasts the last year an extraordinary Tide, wherein the Water rose so high, as to overflow all the Sea-banks, drown multitudes of Cattel, and fill the lower Rooms of the Houses of many Villages that stood near the Sea, so that the Inhabitants, to save themselves, were forced to get up into the upper Rooms and Garrets
of their Houses. Now how this could be effected, but by an unusual pressure upon the Superficies of the Ocean, I cannot well conceive. In like manner that the Divine Providence might at the time of the Deluge so order and dispose second Causes, as to make so strong a pressure upon the face of the Waters, as to force them up to a height sufficient to overflow the Earth, is no way unreasonable to believe. These Hypotheses I propose, as seeming to me at present most facile and consonant to Scripture, without any concern for either of them; and therefore am not folicitous to gather together, and heap up Arguments to confirm them, or to answer Objections that may be made against them, being as ready to relinquish them upon better information, as I was to admit and entertain them.
Of the Effects of the Deluge. I Come now to the Third Particular pro∣posed, that is, To enquire concerning the Consequents of the Deluge, What conside∣rable effects it had upon the Earth and its Inhabitants. It had doubtless very great, in▪ changing the Superficies of the dry Land: In some places adding to the Sea; in some taking from it; making Islands of Peninsulae, and joining others to the Continent; altering the Beds of Rivers, throwing up lesser Hills, and washing away others, &c. The most re¦markable effects it's likely were in the skirts of the Continents; because the Motion of the Water was there most violent. Athanasius Kircher De Arca Noae, p. 192 gives us a Map and Description of the World after the Flood, shewing what Changes were made therein by it, or upon occasion of it afterward, as he fansies or con∣jectures. But because I do not love to trouble the Reader with uncertain Conje∣ctures, I shall content my self to have said
in general, that it may rationally be suppo∣ed, there were then great Mutations and Alterations made in the superficial part of the Earth: but what they were, though we may guess, yet can we have no certain knowledge of: and for particulars, refer the curious to him. One malignant effect it had upon Man∣kind, and probably upon other Animals too, in shortning their Age, or the duration of their lives; which I have touched before, and shewn, that this diminution of Age, is to be attributed either to the change of the Temperature of the Air, as to Salubrity, or Equality, (sudden and frequent changes of Weather having a very bad influence upon the Age of Man in abbreviating of it, as I could easily prove) or else to the deteri∣ority of the Diet; or to both these Causes. But how the Flood should induce or occa∣sion such a change in the Air and producti∣ons of the Earth, I do not comprehend.
Of formed Stones, Sea-shells, and oth Marine-like Bodies found at great d∣stances from the Shores: ANother supposed Effect of the Floo was a bringing up out of the Sea, a scattering all the Earth over an innumerabl multitude of Shells and Shell-fish; there b¦ing of these shell-like Bodies, not only o lower Grounds and Hillocks, but upon t highest Mountains, the Appeunine and Alp themselves. A supposed Effect, I say, because it is not yet agreed among the Learned, wh¦ther these Bodies, formerly called petrif Shells, but now a-days passing by the nam of formed Stones, be original Productions of Nature, formed in imitation of the Shells of Fishes; or the real Shells themselves, either remaining still entire and uncorrupt, or pe∣trified and turned into Stone, or at least, Stones cast in some Animal Mold. Both parts have strong Arguments and Patrons. I shall not ballance Authorities, but only con∣sider and weigh Arguments.
Those for the latter Part, wherewith I shall begin, are, First, Because it seems contrary to that great Wisdom of Nature, which is observable in all its Works and Productions, to design every thing to a determinate end, and for the attaining that end, make use of such ways, as are most agreeable to mans reason, that these prettily shaped Bodies, should have all those curious Figures and Contrivances (which many of them are formed and a∣dorned with) generated or wrought by a Plastic Vertue, for no higher end, than only to exhibit such a form. This is Mr. Hook's Argumentation. To which Dr. Plot an∣swers, That the end of such Productions, is to beautifie the World with those Varieties; and that this is no more repugnant to the Prudence of Nature, than is the production of most Flowers, Tulips, Anemones, &c. of which we know as little use of, as of formed Stones. But hereto we may reply, That Flowers are for the ornament of a Body, that hath some degree of life in it: a Vegetative Soul, whereby it performs the actions of Nutriti∣on, Auction and Generation; which it is reasonable should be so beautified: And, Secondly, Flowers serve to embrace and che∣rish the Fruit, while it is yet tender; and to defend it from the injuries of Sun and Wea∣ther;
especially for the Protection and Secu¦rity of the Apices, which are no idle or use¦less part, but contain the Masculine Sperm and serve to give fecundity to the Seed Thirdly, Though formed Stones may be use¦ful to Man in Medicine, yet Flowers afford us abundantly more uses, both in Meat and Medicine. Yet I must not dissemble, that there is a Phaenomenon in Nature, which doth some what puzzle me to reconcile, with the pru¦dence observable in all its works; and seem strongly to prove, that Nature doth some∣times ludere, and delineate Figures, for  other end, but for the ornament of some Stones, and to entertain and gratifie our Cu¦riosity, or exercise our Wits. That is, tho elegant impressions of the Leaves of Plan upon Cole slate, the knowledge whereof,  must confess my self to owe to my Learned and Ingenious Friend, Mr. Edward Lloyd o Oxford, who observed of it in some Cole pits in the way from Wychester in Glocester∣shire to Bristoll; and afterwards communi∣cated to me a Sample of it. That which  found, was marked with the Leaves of two o three kinds of Ferns and of Harts-tongue. He told me also, that Mr. Woodward, a Londoner shewed him very good Draughts of th common female Fern, naturally ormed i
Cole, which himself found in Mendip Hills, and added, that he had found in the same Pits, Draughts of the common Cinquefoil, Clover-grass and Strawberries. But these Figures are more diligently to be observed and considered. Secondly, There are found in the Earth at great distance from the Sea, real Shells unpe∣trified and uncorrupted, of the exact Figure and Consistency of the present natural Sea-shells, and in all their parts like them, and that not only in the lower Grounds and Hillocks near the Sea, but in Mountains of a consi∣derable height, and distant from the Sea. Chri∣stianus Mentzelius in his Discourse concerning the Bononian Phosphorus, gives us a relation of many Beds of them found mingled with Sand in the upper part of a high Mountain not far from Bologna in Italy. His words are these, Non procul monte Paterno dicto, lapidis Bononiensis patria, unico forte milliari Italico distanti (loci nomen excidit memoriâ) ingens mons imminet praeruptus à violentia torrenti∣um aquarum, quas imbres frequentes ex vici∣nis montibus confluentes efficiunt, atque in∣signes terrarum moles ab isto monte proster∣nunt ac dejiciunt. In hac montis ruina, su∣periore in parte visuntur multae strages seri∣esve, ex testis conchyliorum omnis generis, plurimâ arenâ interjectâ, instar strati super
stratum (ut chymicorum vulgus loquitur.) Est enim inter hasce testarum conchylior strages seriésve arena ad crassitiem uln ultra interposita. Erant autem testae va¦rum conchyliorum, omnes ab invicem distine nec cuiquam lapidi impactae, adeò ut sep¦tim omnia manibus tractari & dignosci p¦rint. Effecerat hoc arena pura, nullo l lutove intermixta, quae conchyliorum test s  fervaverat per multa secula integras. I∣rea verò diuturnitate temporis omnes istae  erant in albissimam calcem facilè resolubila Fabius Columna also observes, that in t tophaceous Hills and Cliffs about Andr in Apulia, there are found various sorts  Sea Shells, both broken and whole, unco¦rupt, and that have undergone no change. A Ovid in Metam. lib. 15. Et procul à pelago Conchae jacuere marine. I am also informed by my Learned and W thy Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson, That S¦nior Settali shewed him in his Museum  Milan, many Turbens, Echini, Pearl-she (one with a Pearl in it) Pectunculi, and s¦veral other perfect Shells, which he himse found in the Mountains near Genoa, and a¦terwards my said Friend took notice al of several Beds of them himself, as he passe
over Mount Cenis, above fifty Leagues di∣stant from the Sea. Moreover, my fore∣mentioned Friend Mr. Lloyd sent me perfect Escallop and Sea-Urchin Shells, exactly resem∣bling the like Sea-Shells, both for figure, co∣lour, weight and consistency: which he himself gathered up near Oxford. Now that Nature should form real shells, without any design of covering an Animal, is indeed so contrary to that innate Prolepsis we have of the Pru∣dence of Nature, (that is the Author of Nature) that without doing some Violence to our Faculties, we can hardly prevail with our selves to believe it: and gives great countenance to the Atheists assertion, that things were made or did exist by chance, without counsel or direction to any end. Add hereto Thirdly, That there are other Bodies besides Shells found in the Earth, re∣sembling the Teeth and Bones of some Fishes, which are so manifestly the very things they are thought only to resemble, that it might be esteemed obstinacy in any man that hath viewed and considered them to deny it. Such are the Glossopetrae dug up in Malta in such abundance, that you may buy them by measure, and not by tale: and also the Ver∣tebres of Thornbacks and other Cartilagine∣ous Fishes there found, and sold for Stones mong the Glossopetrae, which have no grea∣ter
dissimilitude to the Teeth of a living Shark, and Vertebres of a Thornback, then lying so long in the Earth, as they must needs have done, will necessarily induce. And if the very inspection of these Bodies, is not enough to convince any man, that they are no Stones, but real Teeth and Bones, Fa∣bius Columna proves it by several strong Argu∣ments. 1. Those things which have a woody, bony or fleshy nature, by burning are changed first into a Coal, before they go into a Calx or Ashes: but those which are of a tophaceous or stony substance, go not first into a Coal, but burn immediately into a Calx or Lime, unless by some vitreous or metallick mixture they be melted. Now these Teeth being burnt, pass presently in∣to a Coal, but the tophous substance adhe∣ring to them, doth not so; whence it is clear, that they are of an osseous, and no stony nature. Next he shews, that they do not shoot into this form after the manner o Salts or Crystal, which I shall have occasio further to treat of by and by. Then h proves it from that Axiom, Natura nihil f¦cit frustra; Nature makes nothing in vai But these Teeth, were they thus formed i the Earth, would be in vain; for they coul not have any use of Teeth; as neither th
Bones of supporting any Animal. Nature never made Teeth without a Jaw, nor Shells without an Animal Inhabitant, nor single Bones, no not in their own proper Element, much less in a strange one. Further he ar∣gues, from the difficulty or impossibility of the Generation of Glossopetrae in such places; because, among Tophi and Stones in those dry places, there could not be found matter fit for to make them of. But granting that, he queries whether they were generated at first all of a sudden, or grew by little and ittle from small to great, as Animals Teeth, whose form they imitate, do. If the first be aid, He demands, Whether the Tophus, out of which they were extracted, were gene∣ated before or after the Teeth were perfe∣cted? If it be said before, he asks, Whether here were a place in it of the figure and magnitude of the Tooth, or did the Tooth make it self a place? If the Tophus were oncrete before, and without a cavity, the egetative power of the Stone now in birth, ould not by force make it self a place in he hard and solid Tophus; or if it could and id, the Tophus must needs be rent. If there were a place before ready made in the To∣hus, then was not that figure excavated in he Tophus by the vegetative nature of the Tooth it self; but the Tophus by its own na∣ture
and precedent cavity, gave the form to the Tooth. If the latter part be chosen, and it be said, that the Stone by its vegetative power grew by degrees; it may be answered as before, that could not be; because the hardness of the Tophus could not have yielded to the vegetative force of the Tooth, but would rather have been rent or divi∣ded by it; or rather the Tophus it self must have vegetated, containing a cavity or uterus of the shape of the Tooth, into which a osseous humor, penetrating through the Pores, and filling the cavity of the Ʋterus, must there have coagulated, and taken the form thereof, as is observed in Stones that have their original from a Fluor. That both Tooth and Case might vegetate together he denies, because in all the Teeth which he had seen, the Basis or Root was found bro∣ken, and that not with an uniform fracture but different in every one. Which Argu∣ment is not to be slighted, for that it shew or proves, that there was no vegetation i the case; because in all other figured Fos¦sils it is observed, that they are never foun mutilous, broken or imperfect. Neithe can it reasonably be said or believed, tha these Roots or Teeth were by some chanc broken within the Tophi, but rather, tha when they were casually overwhelmed an
buried in that tophous Earth, they were bro∣ken off from the Jaws of the Animal in those volutations, and so in that manner mu∣tilated. Another Argument to prove them to be true Teeth and no Stones, he brings from their various parts and figures, which must else have been so wrought and formed in vain. The Tooth being not one homo∣geneous Body, but compounded of parts of a different constitution, there must in the formation of it be made a various election of humors, one for the Root, one for the Inner Part, one for the Superficies of it. Then for the Figures, Magnitude, Situation or Posture, and fitting of them; some are great, and broad, and almost triangular; others narrower and smaller, others very small and narrow, of a pyramidal figure, some streight, some crooked, bending down∣wards, or toward the nether side, some in∣clining toward the left, others toward the right side: some serrate with small Teeth, others with great Indentures (which is ob∣served in the lesser triangular ones) some smooth without any Teeth, as the narrow pyramidal ones. All which things are ob∣served in Shark's Teeth, not only by the Learned Naturalists, but also by Fisher-men and Mariners. The first row of Teeth in these Animals hanging out of the mouth,
bend forward and downward; the second row are streight, especially toward the sides of the mouth, where they are triangular and broad, the other rows bend downward toward the inner part of the mouth. Thus far Dissert. De Glosso∣petra. Columna. Fourthly, If these formed Stones be in∣deed original Productions of Nature, in imi∣tation of Shells and Bones, how comes it to pass, that there should be none found, that resemble any other natural Body, but the Shells and Bones of Fishes only? Why should not Nature as well imitate the Horns, Hoofs, Teeth, or Bones of Land Animals, or the Fruits, Nuts, and Seed of Plants? Now my learned Friend Mr. Edward Lloyd above men∣tioned, who hath been most diligent in col∣lecting, and curious in observing these Bo∣dies of any man I know, or ever heard of, tells me, that he never found himself, or had seen in any Cabinet, or Collection, any one Stone that he could compare to any part of a Land Animal. As for such that do not resemble any part of a Fish, they are either Rock Plants, as the Astroites, Asteriae tro∣chites, &c. or do shoot into that form, after the manner of Salts and Fluors, as the Be∣lemnites and Selenites. Fifthly, Those that deny these Bodies to have been the Shells and Bones of Fishes,
have given us no satisfactory account of the manner of their Production. For that they do not shoot into that form after the manner of Salts, may be proved by many Arguments. First, All Salts that shoot their Crystals or Concretions, are of one uniform substance, and their Figures are more simple, and may be owing to the Figure of the Prin∣ciples whereof they are compounded: in other Bodies that shoot, as the Pyrites and Belemnites, one may observe streight Radii or Fibres proceeding from one Center. Se∣condly, Did those Bodies shoot into these Figures after the manner of Salts, it seems strange to me, that two Shells should be so adapted together at the heel, as to shoot out to the same extension round, and the upper and nether Valve be of different Fi∣gure, as in natural Shells. Thirdly, Were these Bodies produced in the manner of sa∣line Concretions, it's strange there should be such varieties of them, and their Shapes so regular, and exactly circumscribed: so great a diversity of Figures, arguing a greater va∣riety of Salts, or of their modifications and mixtures, than are likely to be found in Na∣ture; and the Curvilineous Concretions of Salts never, that I have yet seen, appearing in that regularity of Figure and due Cir∣cumscription, as in these Bodies: which is
an Argument of the Government of some Principle, superior to Matter figured and moved, in their Formations. 4ly, Were these Bodies nothing but Concre∣tions of Salts or saline mixtures, it seems no less strange, that so many Liquors impregnated with all sorts of Salts and Mineral Juices, in all proportions, having been at one time or other industriously or accidentally exposed to crystallize, and let stand long in Vessels, there should never have been found in them any such Concretions. For if any had hap∣pened, we should doubtless have heard of them, and the Observers would have im∣proved such an Experiment to the Production of the like Bodies at their pleasure. So I have finished what I have to alledge in de∣fence of the latter part, That these formed Stones, were sometimes the real Shells or Bones of Fishes, I mean the figured part of them. I proceed now to set down, what may be objected against this Opinion, or offered in assertion of the contrary, viz. That these Bodies are primitive Productions of Na∣ture, in imitation of the Shells and Bones of Fishes. Against the former Opinion we have been pleading for, it may be objected, That there follow such strange and seemingly absurd
Consequences from it, as are hardly recon∣cileable to Scripture, or indeed to sober Rea∣son: as, First, That the Waters must have cove∣red the whole Earth, even the highest Mountains, and that for a long time, there being found of these Shells, not only in the most mountainous parts of our Countrey, but in the highest Mountains in Europe, the Appennine and Alps themselves, and that not only scattered, but amassed in great lumps, and lying thick in Beds of Sand, as we have before shewn. Now this could hardly be the effect of a short Deluge, which if it had carried any Shell fish so high, would in all likelihood have scattered them very thin. These Beds and Lumps of them necessarily inferring, that they must have bred there, which is a work of time. Now the general Deluge lasted in the whole, but ten Months; and it's not likely the Tops of the Mountains were covered half that time. Neither is it less repugnant to Reason than Scripture; for if the Waters stood so high above the Earth, for so long a time, they must by reason of their Conflu∣ence, be raised as high above the Sea too. But what is now become of this huge Mass of Waters, equal to six or seven Oceans? May not the Stoicks here set in, and help us
out at a dead lift? The Sun and Moon, say they, might possibly sup it all up. Yea, but we cannot allow time enough for that; for according to the moderate Draughts they take now a-days, one Ocean would suffice to water them many Ages, unless perchance when they were young and hot, they might need more drink. But to be serious, I have no way to answer this Objection, but by de∣nying, that there are any Beds or great Lumps and Masses of these formed Stones to be found near the Tops of the Alps, or other high Mountains; but yet there might be some particular Shells scattered there by the general Deluge. Another thing there is as difficult to give an account off, as of the Shells getting up to the Tops of Mountains: that is, of those several Beds or Floors of Earth and Sand, &c. one above another, which are ob∣served in broken Mountains. For one can∣not easily imagine, whence these Floors o Beds in the manner of Strata super strata (as the Chymists speak) should come, but from the Sediments of great Floods, which how or whence, they could bring so great a quantity of Earth down, when there was but little Land above the Sea, I cannot see. And one would likewise be apt to think, that such a Bed of Sands, with plenty of Cockle-shells intermixt, as we mentioned be∣fore
in the Mountain near Bononia in Italy, must have been sometimes the Bottom of the Sea. But before one can give a right judgment of these things, one must view the Mountains where such Layers and Beds of Earth and Shells are found: for perchance they may not be elevated so high above the present Surface of the Sea, as one would judge by the descriptions of them. Secondly, It would hence follow, that ma∣ny Species of Shell-fish are lost out of the World, which Philosophers hitherto have been unwilling to admit, esteeming the de∣struction of any one Species a dismembring of the Universe, and rendring it imperfect: whereas they think the Divine Providence is especially concerned to secure and preserve the Works of the Creation: and that it is so, appears, in that it was so careful to lodge all Land-Animals in the Ark at the time of the general Deluge. The Conse∣quence is proved in that, Among these pe∣trified Shells, there are many sorts observed, which are not at this day, that we know of, any where to be found. Such are a whole genus of Cornua Ammonis, which some have supposed to be Nautili, though to me they do not seem so to be, but a different Genus by themselves, of which there have not any been seen either cast a shore, or raked
out of the Sea, at any time, that ever I heard of. Nay, my very Learned and Ho∣noured Friend Dr. Lister proceeds further, and saith, That when he particularly exa∣mined some of our English Shores for Shells, as also the Fresh Waters and the Fields, that he did never meet with any one of those Species of Shells found at- Adderton in York∣shire, Wansford bridge in Northamptonshire, and about Gunthorp and Beauvoir-Castle, &c. any where else, but in their respective Quar∣ries. What can we say to this? Why it is possible that many sorts of Shell-Fish may be lodged so deep in the Seas, or on Rocks so remote from the Shores, that they may ne∣ver come to our sight. Thirdly, It follows also, that there have been Shell fish in these cold Northern Seas of greater bulk and dimensions, than any now living; I do not say in these, but in the most Southernly and Indian; viz. Cornua Ammonis of two foot diameter, and of thick∣ness answerable. To this I answer, That there are no pe∣trified Shells that do in bigness much ex∣ceed those of the natural Shell fish found in our Seas, save the Cornua Ammonis only, which I suspect to have never been, nor had any relation to any Shells of Fishes: or to imitate or resemble them, at least some of
them. As for the Nautili, they are much different from them. For the Nautili, at least all the Species of them known to us, are (as Dr. Plot well observes) extrava∣gantly broad at the mouth, and have not more than two other small turns at the most, whereas the turns of the Ophiomor∣phites are proportionable one to another; and in number many times four or five, and sometimes six, if we may believe Aldrovand. And there are Nautili lapidei, which do as nearly resemble the Nautilus Shells as any other Cochlites do their respective proto∣types, As Mr. Lloyd assures me he had ob∣served many in Museums. And the Learned and Ingenious Mr. Richard Waller then Se∣cretary to the Royal Society in a Letter to me dated Feb. 4.—87. writes, That he had been lately at Keinsham in Sommersetshire, and making a search after the Cornua Ammonis, found one of the true Nautilus shape, cove∣red in some places with a shelly Incrustation with the Diaphragms to be seen to the Cen∣ter of the Volutae, and in each Diaphragm, the hole by which they communicate one with another, by a string or gut in the Fish. This was of a very hard Stone and large size, weighing at least twenty eight pound, though some part was broken off. Another Argu∣ment that they have no relation to the com∣mon
Nautili, is, that they break into pieces somewhat resembling Vertebres, as I was first advised by the fore remembred Mr. Lloyd, and have since noted my self. I also re∣ceived from that very Ingenious and Inquisi∣tive Gentleman, happy in making natural Discoveries, Mr. William Cole of Bristoll such an Account of a sort or two of these Ophi∣omorphus Bodies, as is enough to stagger any mans belief, if not utterly to overthrow his Opinion of their owning their original to any Sea-shell; which take in his words. A∣mong others of this kind of Bodies which I have observed, I shall instance in one, which can be reduced to none but the Ophiomor∣phites, which I found growing between the thin Plates of a kind of brittle blew Slate in large Rocks, some a furlong within the Full-Sea Mark, and in some where the Water comes not at highest Tides, only in great Storms, when the Waves break, it is dasht sometimes against them, being forced up by the Winds; which being broken with a convenient Tool, will shiver all into very thin Plates; be∣tween which I have found in abundance of those Stones, but as brittle as the Slate in which they grew, and of the same consistence; but so thin, that the broadest, being about four Inches, are not so thick as a Half-Crown Piece, some not half an Inch broad, were as
thin as a Groat, and so proportionably up to the largest, covered with a Superficies as thin, and exactly of the colour of Silver foil: and where the Sea water washeth them, and they are exposed to the Sun and Wind when the Tide is gone, they are tarnished, and appear of a Gold, Purple, Blew and Red; as any thing on which Silver foil is laid, being exposed a considerable time to the Sun, Wind and Wea∣ther, will do. These have the same Spiral Figures, and as regular as the other Serpent-Stones, and being taken off with a Knife, leave the same impressions on both sides of the Slate. In some such Rocks of Slate, but much harder, I found some of those Stones of ano∣ther kind, thick in proportion to their breadth, from an Inch to twenty eight Inches broad; in the broadest one was at the great end (on which some Authors have fabulously reported the head to grow) six Inches thick: all of them cove∣red over with a white Scale, which will be taken off, one coat under another, as Pearls or the Shells of some Fishes. I saw some im∣pressions as big as the Fore-wheel of a Cha∣riot, &c. What shall we say to this? Were there ever any Shell-fish in ours or other Seas, as broad as a Coach-wheel? others as thin as a Groat? What is become of all this kind of Ophiomorphite Shell-fish? And yet
(which is strange) both these kinds by Mr. Cole's description, seem to have been co∣vered with Shells. By what I have said concerning these Ophi∣omorphous Stones not to have been Nautili, I would not be thought to reflect upon, or detract from the Veracity or Exactness of the Observations of Mr. Robert Hook, whom, for his Learning and deep Insight into the Mysteries of Nature, I deservedly honour. I question not, but he found in the Keinsham Ophiomorphites perfect Diaphragms of a very distinct substance from that which fil∣led the Cavities, and exactly of that kind which covered the out-side, being for the most part Whitish, or Mother of Pearl co∣loured. Mr. Waller fore-mentioned attests the same, writing in his Letter to me of Feb. 4. 1687. that in the ordinary Snake-stones there, the shelly Diaphragms were very visible. In this respect they do re∣semble Nautili; though for their Figure they are much different, and of a distinct Genus. I never broke any of the Keinsham Stones; but of those found about Whitby in Yorkshire many; but could not observe in them any shell-like Diaphragms, only they broke into such pieces as I mentioned before. And my Dear and much Honoured Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson writes me, That he had
broken several Cornua Ammonis, but could never find any Diaphragms or Valves in them, though he confesseth Mr. Woodward shew'd him one with such in his curious Collection of Petrifactions. So that these Diaphragms are not to be found in all the sorts of them. But if they be found in some, it is a strong presumption, that they were at first in all, however they come to dis∣appear. In fine, these Ophiomorphous Stones do more puzzle and confound me, than any other of the formed Stones whatsoever, be∣cause by Mr. Hook's Description of these of Keinsham, they seem to have been, or to owe their Original to Shells; and yet there is nothing like them appears at this day in out or any other Seas, as far as I have heard or read. Thirdly, A Second Argument to prove these formed Stones never to have been Shells▪ Dr. Plot affords us,Hist. nat. Oxf. p. 117. Because that even those Shells, which so exactly represent some sorts of Shell-fish, that there can be no ex∣ception upon the account of Figure, but that they might formerly have been Shells in∣deed, at some places are found only with one Shell, and not the other. Thus in Cow∣ley Common [in Oxfordshire] we meet only with the gibbous, not the flat Shell of the
petrified Oyster, and so of the Escallop-Stones in the Quarries near Shotover: which if they had once been the Shells of Oysters and Es∣callops, had scarce been thus parted. To this I answer, That this Argument is not necessarily conclusive; because there may possibly be some reason of it, though we know it not, nor can easily imagine any. The like Answer may be returned to his next Argument. Thirdly, Because (saith the Doctor) I can by no means satisfie my self, how it should come to pass, that in case these Bodies had once been moulded in Shells, some of the same kind should be found in Beds, as the Con∣chites at Langley, Charlton, Adderbury; An others scattered as at Glympton, and Teynton,  so the Ostracites at Shotover and Cowley. N how it should fall out▪ that some of thes Bivalves should always be found with thei Shells separate, as the Ostracites and Pectines and others always closed together, as th Conchites in all places I have yet seen. Fourthly, Because many of these forme Stones seem now to be in fieri, (which is th Doctor's next Argument) as the Selenites a Shotover and Hampton-gay, the Conchytes  Glympton and Cornwell, many of which we of a perfect Clay and others of Stone, & As for the Selenites, I grant them to hav
been in fieri, because they are formed after the manner of Salts by shooting or crystalli∣zation; but concerning the Clay Cockles I say with the Civilians, ampliandum. But to give these Arguments their due, though they be not demonstrative proofs, yet they infer a great degree of probability, and shrewdly urge and shake the contrary Opi∣nion. The other Arguments, the Doctor alledges, admit a plausible solution, excepting such as we have already touched, and given as good an answer to, as either the matter will ad∣mit, or we were able to give. To the First, That there are found Stones resembling Shell-fish that stick to Rocks: I answer, That many of them might by acci∣dent be rub'd off the Rocks they stick to, or thrust off by Birds insinuating their Bills be∣tween the Shell and Rock, to feed upon their meat; but by what means soever it be, that they are sometimes broken off, the matter of fact is certain; for we find many patelloe cast upon the Shores by the working of the Sea, Why then might they not be brought up by the Flood? To the Second, Why might not the Bones of Whales, Sea-horses, all squamose Fishes, the great Shells of the Buccina, Murices, Con∣che Veneris, & Solenes, and almost all the
crustaceous kind, as Crabs and Lobsters, &c. as well have been brought up and left be∣hind by the Flood, and afterward petrified, as any of the testaceous kind? I answer, Of the great Buccina, Murices and Conchae Vene∣ris, there are very few or none found in our Seas: it may be there are of them in the Mountains and Quarries of the Indies, were any man so curious as to search them out: Though it's likely but few, because being great things, easie to be seen, and that part of the World having been fully peopled soon after the Flood, their beauty might invite the Inhabitants to search them out, and ga∣ther them up. But Secondly, Those other kinds may possibly be less durable, and more apt to be wrought upon, to moulder, decay and be dissolved in time by the Weather Rains and Moisture of the Earth, or were not so susceptive of petrifying Juices. The Third Argument is already answered in the precedent Discourse. To the Fourth Argument as to what con∣cerns the Selenites, Astroites and Belemnites we have answered already. That the Spe¦cies of Brontiae cannot be the petrified Shell of Echini Spatagi, the Arguments the Docto alledges out of Aristotle and Rondeletius d not evince. For though in some Seas the may be , yet in other
are they plentiful enough. In our own Seas at Llandwyn in the Isle of Anglesey we may reasonably conjecture, they are more plentiful than the common Echini any where with us; because we found more of their Shells cast up there on the Shore, than of the Echini in any Shore about England: nay, so common are they there, that even the Vulgar have taken notice of them, and im∣posed a Name upon them, calling them Mer∣mayds Heads. And though their Bristles or Prickles were but small, yet were they not few or thin set, as Rondeletius saith. How the Snake-stones about Huntly-nab and Whitby in Yorkshire came to be included in Globular or Centricular Stones, is not difficult to make out: for the Cliffs there∣about being Allume-stone or Mine, wherein these Snake-stones lye; the Sea in Spring∣tides and tempestuous weather undermines and throws down part of the Shore or Cliffs, which by the fall break in pieces, and the Ophiomorphus Stone being harder than the rest of the Cliff, is broken off from it by the fall, or its volutation in the Sea afterward, with some part of the Cliff or Allume-stone sticking to each side of it where it is concave, and by reason of its Figure and Striae, cannot easily part from it.
Lastly, To dissemble nothing, I have my self observed some Cockle-stones to have seemingly different impressions or Striae up∣on the same Superficies; which Phaenomenon it is very hard to give an account of. I have also observed a large Stone almost as hard as Marble, that was so marked every where throughout with the impressions of Cockles and their Striae, so crossing one another in every part of it, that if it were nothing but Shells amassed together by a stony Cement; those Shells must have before their Concre∣tion been broken into infinite small pieces or fragments, scarce any remaining entire; which I do not see how any Floods or work∣ing of the Sea, could possibly effect. So I have finished what I had to say con∣cerning this supposed Effect of the Deluge, the bringing in of Shells, and scattering them all over the dry Land. But yet I must not dismiss this particular, till I have said some∣thing to an Objection that presently occurrs to any one who considers this matter. The Waters of the Flood having been supplied partly by Rains, partly by the breaking up of the Fountains of the great Deep, and not by any Irruption or Inundation of the Sea, how could any Sea-shells at all be brought in by it?
To this I answer, That the great Deep communicates with the Sea; and the Wa∣ters rising up out of the subterraneous A∣byss, the Sea must needs succeed, else would there have been an empty space left in the middle of the Earth; so that the Shell-fish might as well come in this way from the bottom of the Sea, as by an Inundation: in like manner as the Fish in the Lake of Carniola, called the Zirchnitzer See do descend annually under grond through many great holes in the bottom, and return again by the same holes. To all this I might add, that into the Lands near the skirts of the Sea, and lower Hills, these Shells might in part be brought by particular Floods, of which many we read of, & more pos∣sibly than are recorded in any History may have happened since the general Deluge. Hence the chief Champions of the Opinion of Mock-shells are not difficult to grant, that in some Countries, and particularly along the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea, there may all manner of Shells be found promiscuously included in the Rocks or Earth, and at good di∣stances too from the Sea. Which are the words of Dr. Lister, repeated and approved by Dr. Plot. But this will not serve their turn; for we have before proved, that in the middle part, and near the Center of our own
Countrey, at a great distance from the Sea, viz. in Oxfordshire, there are found not only shell-like Stones, but real Shells, or Mock-shells (as some esteem them) for Figure, Colour, Weight, Consistency, or any other Accident not to be distinguished from true Shells; and that not such as have been acci∣dentally scattered there, but dig'd out of the ground in plenty, and of Fishes that are rarely found in our Seas: Patterns whereof were sent e by my Ingenious Friend, Mr. Lloyd. Who, I hope will ere long gra∣tifie the Curious, by publishing a gene∣ral Catalogue of all the formed Stones found in England, and his Remarks upon them. And I have likewise proved by good Au∣thority, that beyond the Seas, in high Moun∣tains, and many Leagues distant from the Sea too, there have been Beds of real Shells. I might have added Sharks-teeth or Glosse∣petrae, as both Goropius Becanus and Georgius Agricola testifie; if not in Beds, yet plentifully disperst in the Earth. There are several Me∣dical Histories extant (as Dr. Tancred Ro∣binson informs me) of perfect Shells found in Animal Bodies, in whose Glands they were originally formed, which is a conside∣rable Objection, not easily to be removed.
SECT. 2. The Second possible Cause of the Worlds De∣struction in a Natural Way, the Extinction of the Sun. 2. The possibility of the Suns extinction. Of which Accident I shall give an Account in Dr. More's words, in the last Chapter of his Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul. This (saith he) though it may seem a Panick fear at first sight; yet if the matter be through∣ly examined, there will appear no contemp∣tible Reasons that may induce men to sus∣pect, that it may at last fall out, there ha∣ving been at certain times such near offers in Nature towards this sad Accident already. Pliny speaks of it as a thing not unfrequent, that there should be Prodigiosi & longiores Solis defectus, qualis occiso Dictatore Caesare & Antoniano bello, totius anni pallore con∣tinuo, Hist. Nat. lib. 2. cap. 30. The like happened in Justinian's time, as Cedrenus writes; when for a whole year together the the Sun was of a very dim and duskish Hue, as if he had been in a perpetual Eclipse: And in the time of Irene the Empress, it was so dark for seventeen days together, that the Ships lost their way in the Sea, and were
ready to run one against another, as Theo∣phanes reports. But the late accurate Dis∣covery of the Spots of the Sun by Scheiner, and the appearing and disappearing of Fixt Stars and Comets, and the excursions of these last, do argue it more than possible, that after some vast Periods of Time the Sun may be so inextricably inveloped by the macule, that he may quite lose his light; and then you may easily guess what would become of the Inhabitants of the Earth. For with∣out his vivifick heat, neither could the Earth put forth any Vegetables for their sustenance; neither if it could, would they be able to bear the extremity of the Cold, which must needs be more rigorous, and that perpetually, than it is now under the Poles in Winter time▪ But this Accident, though it would indeed ex∣tinguish all life, yet being quite contrary to a Dissolution by Fire, of which the Apostle speaks, I shall pass it over without further consideration, and proceed to a Third.
SECT. 3. The Third possible Cause of the Worlds De∣struction, The Eruption of the Central Fire. 3. The Possibility of the Eruption of the Central Fire, if any such there be, inclosed in the Earth. It is the Hypothesis of Mon∣sieur des Cartes, that the Earth was origi∣nally a Star, or great Globe of Fire, like the Sun, or one of the fixt Stars, situate in the Center of a Vortex continually whirling round with it. That by degrees it was co∣vered over or incrustated with maculae, ari∣sing on its Surface, like the scumm on a boil∣ing Pot, which still increasing and growing thicker and thicker, the Star losing its light and activity, and consequently the motion of the Celestial Vortex about it growing more weak, languid, and unable to resist the vigorous incroachments of the neigh∣bouring Vortex of the Sun; it was at last drawn in, and wholly absorpt by it, and for∣ced to comply with its motion, and make one in the Quire of the Suns Satellites. This whole Hypothesis I do utterly disallow and reject. Neither did the Author himself (if we may believe him) think it true, that the Earth was thus generated. For he saith,
Quinimo ad res natural es meliùs explicandas, earum causas altiùs hic repetam quàm ipsas un∣quam extitisse existimem. Non enim dubium est, quin mundus ab initio fuerit creatus cu omni sua perfectione, ità ut in eo & Sol, & Terra, & Luna, & Stellae extiterint...... Hoc fides Christiana nos docet; hócque etiam ratio naturalis planè persuadet. Attendend enim ad immensam Dei potentiam, non poss∣mus existimare illum unquam quidquam fecisse, quod non omnibus suis numeris fuerit absolutum. That is, Moreover, for the better explicating of Natural Things, I shall bring them from higher or more remote Causes than I think they ever had. For there is no doubt, but the World was originally created in its full per∣fection, so that in it were conteined both Sun and Moon and Earth and Stars, &c. For this the Christian Faith teacheth us, and this also Natural Reason doth plainly persuade; for at∣tending to the immense power of God, we can∣not think that he ever made any thing that was not complete in all points. But tho he did not believe that the Earth was generated or formed according to his Hypothesis, yet surely he was of opinion, that it is at pre∣sent such a Body as he represented it after its perfect Formation, viz. with a Fire in the middle, and so many several Crusts or Coats inclosing it: else would he have given us a
mere Figment or Romance instead of a Body of Philosophy. But tho I do reject the Hypothesis; yet the being of a Central Fire in the Earth is not, so far as I understand, any way repugnant to Reason or Scripture. For first of all, the Scripture represents Hell as a Lake of Fire, Mark 9.43, 44, &c. Revel. 20.10, 14, 15. and likewise as a low place beneath the Earth. So Psalm 86.13. and Deut. 32.22. it is call∣ed the nethermost hell. Prov. 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath. 2. Many of the Ancients understand that Article of the Creed, He de∣scended into Hell, of our Saviours Descent into that local Hell beneath the Earth, where he triumphed over the Devil and all the Powers of Darkness. And particularly Ire∣naeus interprets that Saying of our Saviour, that the son of man should be three days in the heart of the earth, of his being three days in the middle of the Earth, which could not be meant (saith he) of the Se∣pulchre, because that was hewen out of a Rock in its Superficies, 3. It is a received Opinion among the Divines of the Church of Rome, that Hell is about the Center of the Earth: insomuch as some of them have been solicitous to demonstrate that there is room enough to receive all the Damned, by giving us the Dimensions thereof.
Neither is it repugnant to the History  the Creation in Genesis. For tho indeed Mo∣ses doth mention only Water and Earth, a the component parts of this Body; yet doth he not assert that the Earth is a simple, uni∣form, homogeneous Body; as neither do we, when we say, upon the face of the earth, or the like. For the Earth, we see, is a Mass made up of a multitude of different Species of Bodies, Mettals, Minerals, Stones and other Fossils, Sand, Clay, Marle, Chalk, &c. which do all agree in that they are consistent and solid more or less, and are in that respect contradistinguished to Water; and together compound one Mass, which we call Earth▪ Whether the interior parts of the Earth be made up of so great a variety of differen Bodies is to us altogether unknown. For tho it be observed by Colliers, that the Beds of Coals lie one way, and do always dip towards the East, let them go never so deep; so that, would it quit cost, and were it no for the Water, they say, they might pursue the Bed of Coals to the very Center of the Earth, the Coals never failing or coming to an end that way; yet that is but a rash and ungrounded Conjecture. For what is the depth of the profoundest Mines, were they a Mile deep, to the Semidiameter of the Earth? not as one to four thousand. Com∣paring
this Observation of Dipping with my Notes about other Mines, I find that the Veins or Beds of all generally run East and West, and dip towards the East. Of which what Account or Reason can we give, but the motion of the Earth from West to East? I know some say, that the Veins, for Exam∣ple, of Tin and Silver dip to the North, tho they confess they run East and West, which is, I confess, a thing I cannot under∣stand, the Veins of those Metals being nar∣row things. Sr▪ Tho. Willoughby in his foremen∣tioned Letter writes thus, —I have talked with some of my Colliers about the lying of the Coal, and find, that generally the Basset end (as they call it) lyes West, and runs deeper toward the East, allowing about twenty yards in length to gain one in depth; but sometimes they decline a little from this Posture; for mine lie almost South-West and North-East. They always sink to the East more or less. There may therefore, for for ought we know, be Fire about the Cen∣ter of the Earth as well as any other Body, if it can find a Pabulum or Fewel there to maintain it. And why may it not? since the Fires in those subterraneous Caverns of Aetna, Vesuvius, Stromboli, Hecla and other burning Mountains or Vulcano's, have found wherewith to feed them for thousands of
years, And as there are at some, tho un∣certain periods of time, violent Eruptions of Fire from the Craters of those Mountains, and mighty Streams of melted Materials poured forth from thence: so why may not this Central Fire in the Earth, (if any such there be) receiving accidentally extraordi∣nary Supplies of convenient Fewel either from some inflammable Matter within, or from without, rend the thick exterior Cortex which imprisons it, or finding some Vents and Issues break forth and overflow the whole Superficies of the Earth, and burn up all things. This is not impossible, and we have seen some Phaenomena in nature which bid fair towards a Probability of it. For what should be the reason of new Stars ap∣pearing and disappearing again; as that noted one in Cassiopeia, which at first shone with as great a lustre as Venus, and then by degrees diminishing, after some two years vanish'd quite away? but that by great Supplies of combustible matter the internal Fire suddenly increasing in quantity and force, either found or made its way through the Cracks or Vents of the maculae which inclosed it; and in an instant as it were overflowed the whole Surface of the Star, whence pro∣ceeded that illustrious Light; which after∣wards again gradually decayed, its Supply
failing. Whereas other newly appearing Stars, which either have a constant Supply of Matter, or where the Fire hath quite dis∣solved the Maculae, and made them comply with its motion, have endured for a long time, as that which now shines in the Neck of Cygnus, which appears and disappears at cer∣tain Intervals. But because it is not demonstrable that there is any such Central Fire in the Earth, I propose the eruption thereof rather as a possible than probable means of a Con∣flagration: and proceed to the last means whereby it may naturally be effected, and that is: SECT. 4. The Fourth Natural Cause of the World's Dissolution, the Earth's Dryness and In∣flammability. 4. The Dryness and Inflammability of the Earth under the Torrid Zone, with the Eruption of the Vulcano's to set it on fire. Those that hold the Inclination of the Equa∣tor to the Ecliptick daily to diminish, so that after the Revolutions of some Ages they will ump and consent, tell us, that the Sun-beams lying perpendicularly and constantly on the
parts under the Equator, the Ground there∣about must needs be extremely parch'd and rendred apt for Inflammation. But for my part I own no such Decrement of Inclina∣tion. And the best Mathematicians of our Age deny that there hath been any since the eldest Observations that are come down to us. For tho indeed Ptolomy and Hipparchus do make it more than we find it by above twenty minutes, yet that Difference is not so considerable but that it may well be im∣puted to the Difference of Instruments or Observations in point of Exactness. So that not having decreased for eighteen hundred years past, there is not the least ground for Conjecture, that it will alter in eighteen hundred years to come, should the World last so long. And yet if there were such a Diminution, it would not conduce much (so far as I can see) to the bringing on of a Con∣flagration. For tho the Earth would be ex∣tremely dried, and perchance thereby ren∣dred more inflammable; yet the Air being by the same Heat as much rarified, would contain but few nitrous Particles, and so be inept to maintain the Fire, which, we see, cannot live without them. It being much deaded by the Sun shining upon it; and burn∣ing very remisly in Summer time and hot Weather: For thi eason in Southern Coun∣tries,
in extraordinary hot Seasons, the Air scarce sufficeth for Respiration. To the clear∣ing up of this, let us a little consider what Fire is. It seems to consist of three diffe∣rent sorts of parts. 1. An extremely thin and subtil Body, whose Particles are in a ve∣ry vehement and rapid motion, 2. (A sup∣posed) nitrous Pabulum or Fewel, which it receives from the Air. 3. A Sulphureous or unctuous Pabulum, which it acts and preys upon, passing generally by the Name of Fewel. This forementioned subtil Body agitating the (supposed) nitrous Particles it receives from the Air, doth by their help, as by Wedges, to use that rude similitude, penetrate the unctuous Bodies, upon which it acts, and divide them into heir immediate component Particles, and at length perchance into their first Principles: which Operation is called the Chymical Anatomy of mix'd Bodies. So we see Wood, for Example, di∣vided by Fire into Spirit, Oil, Water, Salt, and Earth. That Fire cannot live without those Par∣ticles it receives from the Air is manifest, in that if you preclude the Access of all Air, it is extinguished immediately: and in that, where and when the Air is more charged with them, as in cold Countries, and cold Weather, the Fire rages most: That likewise
it cannot be continued without an un∣ctuous Pabulum or Fewel, I appeal to the ex∣perience of all Men. Now then in the rarified Air in the Tor∣rid Zone the nitrous Particles being propor∣tionably scattered and thin set, the Fire that might be kindled there would burn but very languidly and remissly, as we said just now: and so the Eruptions of Vulcano's, if any such happened, would not be like to do half the Execution there that they would do in cold Countries. And yet I never read of any spreading Conflagration caused by the Eruptions of any Vulcano's, either in hot Countries, or in cold. They usually cast out abundance of thick Smoak like Clouds darkening the Air: and likewise Ashes and Stones, sometimes of a vast Bigness; and some of them, as Vesuvius, Floods of Water, others, (as Aetna) Rivers of melted Ma∣terials, running down many Miles: as for the Flames that issue out of their Mouths at such times, they are but transient, and mount∣ing upwards, seldom set any thing on Fire. But not to insist upon this, I do affirm, that there hath not as yet been, nor for the future can be any such drying or parching of the Earth under the Torrid Zone, as some may imagine. That there hath not yet been I appeal to Experience, the Countries lying
under the Course of the Sun, being at this day as fertile as ever they were, and wanting no more Moisture now than of old they did; having as constant and plentiful Rains in their Seasons as they then had. That they shall for the future suffer any more Drought than they have heretofore done, there is no rea∣son to believe or imagine, the Face of the Earth being not altered, nor naturally alter∣able, as to the main, more at present than it was heretofore. I shall now add the Rea∣son, why I think there can be no such Ex∣siccation of the Earth in those parts. It's true indeed, were there nothing to hinder them, the Vapours exhaled by the Sun-beams in those hot Regions, would be cast off to the North and to the South a great way, and not fall down in Rain there, but toward the Poles: But the long and con∣tinued Ridges or Chains of exceeding high Mountains are so disposed by the great and wise Creator of the World, as, at least in our Continent, to run East and West, as Gassen∣dus in the life of Peireskius well observes, such are Atlas, Taurus, and the Alps, to name no more: They are, I say, thus disposed as if it were on purpose to obviate and stop the Evagation of the Vapours Northward, and reflect them back again, so that they must needs be condensed, and fall upon the Coun∣tries
out of which they were elevated. And on the South Side, being near the Sea, it is likely that the Wind, blowing for the most part from thence, hinders their excursion that way. This I speak by presumption, be∣cause in our Countrey for at least three quar∣ters of the year the Wind blows from the great Atlantick Ocean: which was taken notice of by Julius Caesar in the fifth of his Commentaries, De Bello Gallico. Corus ve∣tus, qui magnam partem omnis temporis in his locis flare consuevit. As for any Desiccation of the Sea, I hold that by mere natural Causes to be impossible, unless we could suppose a Transmutation of Principles or simple Bodies, which for Rea∣sons alledged in a former Discourse I cannot allow. I was then and am still of opinion, that God Almighty did at first create a cer∣tain and determinate number of Principles, or variously figured Corpuscles, intransmu∣table by the force of any natural Agent, even Fire it self, (which can only separate the parts of heterogeneous Bodies) yet not an equal number of each kind of these Prin∣ciples, but of some abundantly more, as of Water, Earth, Air, Ether; and of others fewer, as of Oil, Salt, Metals, Minerals, &c. Now that there may be some Bodies indivisible by Fire is, I think, demonstrable.
For how doth or can Fire be conceived to di∣vide, one can hardly imagine any other way than by its small parts, by reason of their violent Agitation insinuating themselves in∣to compound Bodies, and separating their parts; which allowing, yet still there is a term of Magnitude, below which it cannot divide, viz. it cannot divide a Body into smaller parts than those whereof it self is compounded. For taking, suppose, one least Part of Fire, 'tis clear that it cannot insinu∣ate it self into a Body as little or less than it self: and what is true of one is true of all: I say we can imagine no other way than this, unless perchance by a violent Stroke or Shock, the parts of the Body to be divided may be put into so impetuous a motion as to fall in sunder of themselves into lesser Particles than those of the impellent Body are, which I will not suppose at present. Now it is possible, that the Principles of some other simple Bodies may be as small as the Particles of Fire. But however that be, it is enough, if the Principles of simple Bodies be by reason of their perfect Solidity naturally indivisible, Such a simple Body, I suppose, Water separated from all Heterogeneous Mixtures to be: and consequently the same quantity thereof that was at first created doth
still remain, and will continue always, in de∣spight of all natural Agents, unless it pleases the Omnipotent Creator to dissolve it. And therefore there can be no Desiccation of the Seas, unless by turning all its Water into Va∣pour, and suspending it in the Air, which to do what an immense and long-continuing Fire would be requisite? to the maintenance whereof all the inflammable Materials near the Superficies of the Earth would not af∣ford Fewel enough. The Sun, we see, is so far from doing it, that it hath not made one step towards it these four thousand years, there being in all likelyhood as great a quantity of Water in the Ocean now as was immediately after the Flood: and conse∣quently there would probably remain as much in it, should the World last four thou∣sand years longer. This Fixedness and Intransmutability of Principles secures the Universe from Dissolu∣tion by the prevailing of one Element over another, and turning it into its own Nature; which otherwise it would be in continual danger of. It secures likewise the perpe∣tuity of all the Species in the World, many of which, if their Principles were transmu∣table, might by such a change be quite lost: And lastly bars the Production or Creation
of any new Species; as in the foremention∣ed Treatise I have shewn. The Mention of these Principles or Pri∣mitive Simple Bodies gives me a fair oppor∣tunity of making a second Digression, to Discourse a little concerning the Primaeve Chaos, and Creation of the World.
A Digression concerning the Pri∣mitive Chaos and Creation of the World. WHich yet I should not have done, had I not been there∣to requested. The men∣tion of these Principles, I say, gives me an oppor∣tunity of making such a Digression, because I take them to have been the Effects of the first Creation, spoken of in the first and se∣cond Verses of Genesis. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form and void: and comprehended in the word Earth. By the word Chaos the Ancients understood a huge Mass of Heterogeneous Bodies, or the Prin∣ciples and Seeds of natural Bodies confusedly and disorderly mingled together in one lump: for so Ovid describes it in the begin∣ning of the first of his Metamorphosis:
Quem dixere Chaos, rudis indigestáque moles, Nec quicquam nisi pondus inors, congestáque côdem Non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum. I suppose therefore, that God Almighty did at first create this terrestrial Globe (con∣taining the Seeds and Principles of all natural, visible, sublunary Bodies, variously and con∣fusedly commixt together, which the An∣cients called by the name of Chaos) part∣ly of solid and more ponderous, partly of fluid and lighter parts; the solid and more ponderous naturally subsided, the fluid and watry, as being more light, got above them. That the Waters did at first cover the Earth seems to me clear from the testimo∣ny of the Scripture. For in the History of the Creation in the first Chapter of Genesis, Vers. 2. It is said, Darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, intimating that the Waters were uppermost. And in Ver. 9. And God said, Let the waters under the hea∣ven be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear. Whence, I think, it is manifest, that be∣fore that time the Land was covered with
Water. And that this gathering together of Waters was not into any subterraneous A∣byss, is likewise clear from the Text: For it is said, that God called this Collection of Waters Seas, as if it had been on purpose to prevent such a Mistake. So Psalm 104.6. It is said of the Earth at the Creation, Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment; the waters stood above the mountains. And again Ver. 9. That they turn not again to cover the earth. The more solid and ponderous parts, tho they were of various Figures, and perhaps Magnitudes, were all called by the common name of Earth, and the fluid by the name of Water. This solid part of the Earth was made up of the Principles of many simple Bodies, variously commix'd, and irregularly disperst one among another; yet tho they seem to be thus disorderly mingled, as tho they had been carelesly shaken and shuffled together, yet I do believe there was some Order ob∣served by the most wise Creator in the Di∣sposition of them. The fluid part of this Globe (as we said, and as of its own nature it must needs do) covered the solid, till it pleased God to sepa∣rate them, and by providing great Recepta∣cles for the Waters, to gather them together
into one place. Whether this were done by the immediate Application and Agency of his Almighty Power, or by the Intervention and Instrumentality of second Causes I can∣not determine. It might possibly be effect∣ed by the same Causes that Earthquakes are, viz. Subterraneous Fires and Flatuses. We e what incredible effects the Accension of Gunpowder hath: It rends Rocks, and blows up the most ponderous and solid Walls, Towers, and Edifices, so that its force is almost irresistible. Why then might not such a proportionable quantity of such Ma∣terials set on fire together raise up the Moun∣tains themselves, how great and ponderous soever they be, yea the whole Superficies of the dry Land (for it must all be elevated) above the Waters? And truly to me the Psalmist seems to intimate this Cause, Psalm 104.7. For after he had said, The waters stood above the mountains, he adds, At thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. Now we know that an Earthquake is but a subterraneous Thun∣der, and then immediately follows, The mountains ascend, the valleys descend, &c. If there might be a high Hill raised up near the City Troezen, out of a plain Field, by the force of a subterraneous Fire or Flatus, as Ovid tells us.
Ovid. Me∣tamorph. lib. 15.Est prope Pitthaeam tumulus Troezena sine ullis Arduus arboribus, quondam planissima campi Area, nunc tumulus: nam (res horrenda relatu) Vis fera ventorum, coecis inclusa caverni▪ Expirare aliqua cupiens, luctatáque frustra Liberiore frui coelo, cum carcere rima Nulla fuit toto, nec pervia flatibus esset, Extentam tumescit humum, ceu spiritus oris Tendere vesicam solet, aut derepta bicor Terga capri; tumor ille loci permansit & alti Collis habet speciem, longóque induruit a. A Hill by Pitthaean Traezen mounts un∣crown'd With Sylvan Shades, which once was level ground, For furious Winds (a story to admire) Pent in blind Caverns, strugling to expire; And vainly seeking to enjoy th' Extent Of freer Air, the Prison wanting vent, Puffs up the hollow Earth extended so, As when with swelling Breath we Bladders blow.
The humour of the place remained still. In time grown solid, like a lofty Hill. A parallel Instance hereto we have of later date, of a Hill not far from Puzzuolo [Puteoli] beside the Gulph of Baiae, which I my self have view'd and been upon. It is by the Natives called Monte di cenere, and was raised by an Earthquake Sept. 29. 1538. of about one hundred foot perpendicular altitude; though some make it much higher: according to Ste∣phanus Pighius it is a Mile Ascent to the top, and four Miles round at the foot: We indeed judged it not near so great. The People say it bears nothing; nothing of any use or profit I suppose they mean: else I am sure there grows Heath, Myrtle, Mastick tree, and other Shrubs upon it. It is a spungy kind of Earth, and makes a great sound under a Mans feet that stamps upon it. The same Earthquake threw up so much Earth, Stones and Ashes as quite filled up the lacus Lucrinus, so that there is nothing left of it now, but a fenny Meadow. If such Hills, I say, as these may be, and have been elevated by subterraneous Wild-fire; flatus or Earthquakes: Si parvis liceat componere magna, if we may compare great things with small, why might not the greatest and highest Mountains in the World be raised up in like manner by a subterrane∣ous
Flatus or Wild-fire, of quantity and force sufficient to work such an effect, that is, that bears as great a proportion to the su∣perincumbent weight and bulk to be eleva∣ted, as those under these smaller Hills did to theirs? But we cannot doubt this my be done, when we are well assured that the like hath been done. For the greatest and high∣est Ridge of Mountains in the World, the Andes of Peru, have been for some hundreds of Leagues in length violently shaken, and many alterations made therein by an Earth∣quake that happened in the year 1646. men∣tioned by Kircher in his Arca Noae, from the Letters of the Jesuits. You will say, If the Mountains be thus heaved up by subterraneous Fires, the Earth must needs be hollow all underneath them, and there must be vast Dens and Caverns disperst throughout them. I answer, 'Tis true indeed, so there are; as may undeniably be proved by instances. For the new Mountain we mentioned at Puteli, that was thus raised, being of a Mile steep ascent, and four Miles round at the foot, a proportionable Cavity must be left in the Earth underneath: And the Mountain Aetna at the last Eructation alone having disgor∣ged out of its bowels so great a flood of
melted Materials, as if spread at the depth and breadth of three foot, might reach four times round the whole Circuit of the Terra∣queous Globe, there must likewise an answe∣rable Vault be left within. You will de∣mand, How then comes it pass, that they stand so firm, and do not founder and fall in after so many Ages? I answer, that they may stand, appears by the foresaid new-raised Mountain. For notwithstanding the Cavity in and under it, it hath stood firm and staunch, without the least sinking or subsi∣dency, for above an hundred and fifty years: neither is there any great sinking or falling in at Aetna it self; at least in no degree answe∣rable to its ejected matter. The reason is the strength and firmness of their Vaulture and Pillars, sufficient to support the superin∣cumbent weight. And yet in some places there are sinkings and fallings in▪ which have afterwards become Valleys or Pools of Wa∣ter. But as for the Cavities that are lower than the Superficies of the Ocean, the Wa∣ter, where it could insinuate and make its way, hath filled them up to that height. I say where it could make its way, for that there are many empty Cavities even under the Sea it self, appears by the shaking and heating too of the very Water of the Sea in some places in Earthquakes, and raising up the borders or skirts of it, so as to drive the
Water a great way back; and the raising up new Islands in the middle of the Sea; as Delos of old, and Therasia in the Aegean in Seneca's time, which was heaved up in the sight of many Mariners then present and look∣ing on. Howbeit, I cannot positively assert the Mountains thus to have been raised. But yet whether without means, or by whatso∣ever means it were, a Receptacle for the Wa∣ters was prepared, and the dry Land and Mountains elevated, so as to cast off the Waters, on the third day, and which is wonderful, the Cavities made to receive the Waters, and the whole terra firma, or dry Land with its Mountains were so proportio∣ned one to the other, as that the one was as much depressed below the Shores, as the other was elevated above them. And, as if the one had been taken out of the other, The Sea with all its Creeks, and Bays, and In-lets, and other Appendants was made, and is very near equal to the whole dry Land with its Promontories and Mountains, if not in Superficies, yet in bulk or dimensions, though some think in both. Which equali∣ty is still constantly maintained, notwith∣standing all Inundations of Land, and Atte∣rations of Sea; because one of these doth al∣ways nearly ballance the other, according to the Vulgar Proverb we have before men∣tion'd,
What the Sea loses in one place, it gains in another. If any shall demand, How the Sea comes to be gradually depressed, and deepest about the middle part; whereas the bottom of it was in all likelihood equal while the Waters covered the whole Earth? I answer, the same Cause that raised up the Earth, whether a subterraneous Fire or fla∣tus, raised up also the skirts of the Sea, the ascent gradually decreasing to the middle part, where, by reason of the solidity of the Earth, or gravity of the incumbent Water, the bottom was not elevated at all. For the enclosed Fire in those parts where its first accension or greatest strength was, raised up the Earth first, and cast off the Waters, and thence spreading by degrees, still elevated the Land, and drove the Waters further and further; till at length the weight of them was too great to be raised, and then the Fire brake forth at the tops of the Mountains, where it found least resistance, and disperst it self in the open Air. The Waters also, where they found the bottom sandy or yiel∣ding, made their way into all those Cavities the Fire had made and left, filling them up as high as the level of the Ocean. Neither let any man imagine, that the Earth under the Water, was too soft and muddy to be in this manner raised by subterraneous Fire; for I have shewn before, that the bottom of the
Sea is so saddened and hardened by the weight of the incumbent Water, that the High-ways, beaten continually by Horses and Carriages, are not more firm and solid. But omitting this (which is only a conjecture) I shall discourse a little more concerning the Equality of Sea and Land. It hath been observed by some, That where there are high Cliffs or Downs along the Shore, there the Sea adjoining is deep; and where there are low and level Grounds, it is shallow: the depth of the Sea answering to the Elevation of the Earth above it: and as the Earth from the Shores is gradually higher and higher, to the middle and parts most re∣mote from the Sea, as is evident by the de∣scents of the Rivers, they requiring a con∣stant declivity to carry them down; so the Sea likewise is proportionably deeper and deeper from the Shores to the Middle. So that the rising of the Earth from the Shores to the Mid-land is answerable to the descent or de∣clivity of the bottom of the Sea from the same Shores to the Mid-Sea. This rising of the Earth from the Shores gradually to the Midland, is so considerable, that it is very likely the Altitude of the Earth in those Mid land parts above the Superficies of the Sea, is greater than that of the Mountains above the level of the adjacent Lands. To the height of the Hills above the common
Superficies of the Earth do answer in Brere∣wood's Opinion the extraordinary Depths or Whirl-pools that are found in the Sea, de∣scending beneath the ordinary bottom of the Sea, as the Hills ascend above the ordinary face of the Land. But this is but a conje∣cture of his, and to me it seems not very probable, because it is not likely, there should be in the Sea extraordinary Depths of that vast length and extension, as those huge Ridges of Mountains that run almost quite through the Continents. And because I have observed the Waters of Rivers that flow gently, but especially of the Sea to level the bottoms of their Channels and Receptacles, as may be seen in those parts of the Sea whose bottoms are uncovered at Low-wa∣ter; and in Dry-lands that have been de∣serted by the Sea, as the Fens in the Isle of Ely, and the Craux in Provence in France, &c. which appear to be a perfect Level, as far as one can ken. Though possibly the mo∣tion of the Sea may not descend down so low as those Depths, and so may not level the bottoms of them. Again, It is consonant to the best Obser∣vations of the height of the Earth and its Mountains above the Superficies of the Sea; and of the depth of the Sea, that the one is answerable to the other. So Varenius in his
Geogr. p. 152. Caeterùm ex observata hacte∣nus in plerísque locis profunditate Oceani ma∣nifestum est, eam fere aequalem altitudini sive elevationi montium & locorum Mediterraneo∣rum supra littora, nimirum quantum haec ele∣vantur & extant supra littorum horizontem, tantum alvei maris infra eum deprimuntur; sive quantum assurgit terra à littoribus versùs mediterranea loca, tantundem paulatim magis magísque deprimitur usque ad medii Oceani lo∣ca, ubi plerùmque maxima est profunditas. That is, From the depth of the Ocean, as far as hath been hitherto observed in most places, it is manifest, that that [profundity] is near equal to the altitude or elevation of the Medi∣terraneous places above the Shores; that is to say, as much as these are elevated, and stand up above the Horizon of the Shores; so much are the Channels of the Seas depressed below it: or, as much as the Earth riseth from the Shores towards the Mediterraneous places; so much is it by little and little more and more depressed to the middle parts of the Ocean, where the greatest depth for the most part is. And Brerewood in his Enquiries perti∣nently to our purpose, supposeth the depth of the Sea, to be a great deal more than the height of the Hills above the common sur∣face of the Earth. —For that in making estimation of the depth of the Sea, we are
not to reckon and consider only the height of the Hills above the common Superficies of the Earth, but the advantage or height of all the dry Land above the Superficies of the Sea: Because the whole Mass of the Earth, that now appeareth above the Waters, being taken, as it were, out of the place which the Waters now possess, must be equal to the place out of which it was taken; and consequently it seemeth, that the height or elevation of the one should answer to the depth or descending of the other. And therefore, as I said, in estimating the deep∣ness of the Sea, we are not to consider only the erection of the Hills above the ordinary Land, but the advantage of all the dry Land above the Sea. Which latter, I mean the height of the ordinary Main land, is in my opinion more in large Continents above the Sea, than that of the Hills is above the Land. For that the plain and common face of the dry Land, is not level or equally distant from the Center, but hath great declivity and descent towards the Sea, and acclivity or rising toward the Mid-land part, al∣though it appear not so to the common view of the Eye, is to reason notwitstanding ma∣nifest. Because, as it is found in that part of the Earth which the Sea covereth, that it descendeth lower and lower toward the
midst of the Sea; for the Sea which touching the upper face of it is known to be level by nature, and evenly distant from the Center, is withal observed to wax deeper and deeper the further one saileth from the Shore to∣wards the Main) Even so in that part which is uncovered the coursings and stream∣ings of Rivers on all sides from the Mid-land parts towards the Sea (whose property we know is to slide from the higher to the lower) evidently declare so much. De fide Orthod. l. 2. c. 10. This Au∣thor with Damascen supposes, that the un∣evenness and irregularity, which is now seen in the Superficies of the Earth, was caused either by taking some parts out of the upper face of the Earth in sundry places to make it more hollow, & laying them in other places to make it more convex: or else (which in effect is equivalent to that) by raising up some, and depressing others to make room and receipt for the Sea: that Mutation being wrought by the Power of that Word, Let the Waters be gathered into one place that the dry land may appear. This proportioning of the Ca∣vities appointed to receive the Seas, to the protuberancy of the dry Land above the common Superficies of the Ocean, is to me a sufficient Argument, to prove, that the ga∣thering together of the Waters into one place, was a work of counsel and design;
and if not effected by the immediate Finger of God, yet at least governed and directed by him. So the Scripture affirms the place to receive the Sea, to have been prepared by God, Psalm 104.8. Now in things of this nature, to the giving an account whereof whatever Hypothesis we can possibly invent, can be but merely conjectural, those are to be most approved that come nearest to the Letter of Scripture, and those that clash with it to be rejected, how trim or consistent so∣ever with themselves they may seem to be: this being as much, as when God tells how he did make the World, for us to tell him how he should have made it. But here it may be objected, That the present Earth looks like a heap of Rubbish and Ruines; And that there are no greater examples of confusion in Nature than Moun∣tains singly or jointly considered; and that there appear not the least footsteps of any Art or Counsel either in the Figure and Shape, or Order and Disposition of Moun∣tains and Rocks. Wherefore it is not likely they came so out of Gods hands; who by the Ancient Philosophers is said , and to make all things in number, weight and measure. To which I answer, That the present face of the Earth with all its Mountains and
Hills, its Promontories and Rocks, as rude and deformed as they appear, seems to me a very beautiful and pleasant object, and with all that variety of Hills, and Valleys, and Inequalities far more grateful to behold, than a perfectly level Countrey without any rising or protuberancy, to terminate the sight: As any one that hath but seen the Isle of Ely, or any the like Countrey must needs acknowledge. Neither is it only more pleasant to behold, but more commo∣dious for habitation, which is so plain, that I need not spend time to prove it. 2. A Land so distinguished into Mountains, Valleys and Plains is also most convenient for the entertainment of the various sorts of Animals, which God hath created, some whereof delight in cold, some in hot, some moist and watery, some in dry and upland places, and some of them could neither find nor gather their proper food in diffe∣rent Regions. Some Beasts and Birds we find live upon the highest tops of the Alps, and that all the Winter too, while they are constantly covered with Snow, as the Ibex, and Rupicapra or Chamois among Quadru∣peds, and Lagopus among Birds. 3. The Mountains are most proper for the putting forth of Plants; yielding the greatest variety, and the most luxuriant sort of Ve∣getables,
for the maintenance of the Ani∣mals proper to those places, and for Medi∣cinal Uses, partly also for the Exercise and delight of such ingenious persons as are addicted to search out and collect those Ra∣rities, to contemplate and consider their Forms and Natures, and to admire and cele∣brate the Wisdom of their Creator. 4. All manner of Metals, Minerals and Fossils if they could be generated in a level Earth, of which there is some question, yet should they be dug or mined for, the Delfs must necessarily be so flown with Water, (which to drive and rid away no Adits or Soughs could be made, and I much doubt whether Gins would suffice) that it would e extremely difficult and chargeable, if pos∣ible to work them at all. 5. Neither are the very tops of the high∣st Mountains barren of Grass for the feed∣ng and fattening of Beasts. For on the idges of the high Mountains of Jura and aleve near Geneva, and those of Rhoetia or he Grisons Countrey, which are the highest f all the Alps, excepting the Vallesian and baudian, there are Multitudes of Kine fed  Summer time, as I my self can witness, aving in my Simpling Voyages on those of ra and Saleve observed Herds of Cattel here, and many Dairy Houses built, where
I have been more than once refreshed by their Milk and Milk-Meats. Nay there are but very few, and those of the highest Sum∣mits of the Alps that keep Snow all Sum∣mer: and I was told by the Inhabitants, that one time or other, in seven or eight years space, for the most part there came a Sum∣mer that melted all the Snow that lay on them too. 6. Anorher great use and necessity of Mountains and Hills is for the Generation and Maintenance of Rivers and Fountains, which (in our Hypothesis, that all proceed from Rain-Water) could not be without them, or but rarely. So we should have only Torrents, which would fail in Summer-time, or any dry Season, and nothing to trust to, but stagnating Water reserved in Pools and Cisterns. Which how great an Inconvenience it would be, I need not take pains to shew. I say that Fountains and Rivers would be but rare were there no Mountains. For upon serious consideration I find that I was too hasty in Observat. Physical, &c. concluding, because I had observed no Fountains spring¦ing up in Plains, therefore there were, o could be absolutely none; and do now gran that there is reason to believe the Relations made of such. For the whole dry Land be¦ing but one continued Mountain, and ascend¦ing
all along from the Sea to the Midland, as is undeniably proved by the Descent of Ri∣vers even in plain Countries; the Water sinking into the Earth, may run under ground, and according as the Vein leads it, break out in the side of this Mountain, tho the place as to outward appearance be a Plain. But some may say, Granting there be some use and benefit of moderate Hills and Ri∣sings; what necessity is there of such ex∣tended Ridges of vast and towring Moun∣tains, hiding their Heads among the Clouds, and seeming for Altitude to contend with the Skies? I answer there is very great use of them for repelling the Vapours exhaled by the Sun-beams in the hot Regions, and hin∣dring their Evagations Northward, as we have already shewn, and shall not repeat. I might add hereto, 7. Those long Series and Chains of Mountains are of great use for Boundaries and Limits to the Territories of Princes or Commonwealths, to secure them on those parts from sudden Incursions of Enemies. As for the rudeness and confusion of Moun∣tains, their cragged and broken Rocks and Cliffs, and whatever other Disorder there may be among them, it may be accounted for, from the manner of their first Genera∣tion,
and those other mutations they have been since obnoxious to, by Earth-quakes, Eruptions of Vulcano's, foundering and fall∣ing in of their Props and Foundations, and by time and weather too, by which not on∣ly the Earth is washed away, or blown off from the Stones, but the very Stones and Rocks themselves corroded and dissolved, as might easily be proved by Instances, could I spare time to do it. I should proceed now to say something concerning the rest of the Works of the Creation, but that would be too great a Task, and swell this Digression into a Vo∣lume. I shall only add, that to me it seems, That the Almighty Creator did not only at first make the various Principles of all simple inanimate Bodies, and scattered them throughout the upper Region of the Earth; but also the Seminal Principles of Animate Ones too, and disperst them also all over the Earth and Water, and of these were the first Plants and Animals created by the Vir∣tue of his Omnipotent Word; and after all these were spent, there remained no more Ability in those Elements to produce any Individuals, but all since them owe their their Original to Generation, God having given each Species power to procreate their like.
CHAP. VI. Containing an Answer to the Second Question, Whether shall this Dissolution be effected by natural or by extraordinary means, and what they shall be? 2. AS to the Second Question, Whether shall this Dissolution be brought a∣bout and effected by natural or by extraor∣dinary means and Instruments, and what those Means and Instruments shall be? I answer in brief, that the Instrumental Ef∣ficient of this Dissolution shall be natural. For it is clear both by Scripture and Tradi∣ion, and agreed on all Hands. that it shall be that Catholick Dissolvent, Fire. Now to the being and maintenance of Fire there are four things requisite. 1. The active Prin∣iple or Aether. 2. Air, or a nitrous Pa∣ulum received from it: These two being ommixt together, are every where at hand. . Fewel, which considering the abundance of combustible Materials, which are to be ound in all places upon or under the Surface
of the Earth, can no where be wanting. 4. The Accension and the sudden and equal Diffusion of this Fire all the World over. And this must be the Work of God, extraor∣dinary and miraculous. Such a Dissolution of the World might indeed be effected by that natural Accident mentioned in the Answer to the precedent Question, viz. The Eruption of the Central Fire. But because it is doubtful, whether there be any such Fire in the middle of the Earth or no: and if there ever were, it is hard to give an account, how it could be maintained in that infernal Dungeon for want of Air and Fewel. And because, if it should break forth in the Consistency of a thin Flame, it would in all likelyhood speedily like Lightening mount up to Heaven, and quite vanish away; unless we could suppose Floods, nay Seas of melted Materials, or liquid Fire, enough to overflow the whole Earth, to be poured forth of those Caverns. For these Reasons I reject that Opinion, and do rather think that the Conflagration shall be effected by a Superficial Fire. Tho I must confess we read in Tacitus, Annal. 13. at the end, of a sort of Fire that was not so apt to disperse and vanish. — The City of the Inhonians in Germany (saith he) confe∣derate with us was afflicted with a sudden
Disaster: for Fires issueing out of the Earth, burned Towns, Fields, Villages every where, and spread even to the Walls of a Colony newly built, and could not be extinguished neither by Rain, nor River-Water, nor any other Liquor that could be employed, until for want of Remedy, or anger of such a Distraction, certain Pesants cast Stones afar off into it; then the Flame somewhat slacking, drawing near, they put it out with Blows of Clubs, and other like, as if it had been a wild Beast; last of all, they threw in Cloaths from their Backs, which the more worn and fouler they were, the better they quenched the Fire. I use Dr. Hakewil's Translation.
CHAP. VII. The Third Question Answered. Whether shall this Dissolution be Gradual and Successive, or Momentaneous and Sudden? 3. THE Third Question is, Whether shall this Dissolution be gradual and successive, or momentaneous and sudden? I answer, The Scripture resolves for the latter, The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night: a Similitude we have often repeated in Scripture, as in the tenth Verse of this Chapter, in 1 Thessal. 15.2. Revel. 3, 3. and 16.15. And the Resur∣rection and Change of Things, it is said shall be in a moment, in the twinkling of a eye: 1 Cor. 15.52. Consonant whereto both the Epicureans and Stoicks held thei Dissolutions of the World should be sudde and brief, as Lucretius and Seneca in th places forementioned tell us. And it i suitable to the nature of Fire to make a quic dispatch of things, suddenly to consume an destroy.
And as it shall be sudden, so also shall it be unexpected, being compared to the com∣ing of the Flood in the days of Noah, Matth. 24.37, 38, 39. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entred into the ark: And knew not until the flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. And the raining of Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, Luke 17. Thessal. 5.3. For when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman with child. Now if it shall be thus sudden and unexpected, it is not likely there should be in nature any manifest Tendency to it, or remarkable Signs and Forerunners of it: for such must needs startle and awaken the World into an expectation and dread of it. That there is at present no such Tendency to Corruption, but that the World conti∣nues still in as good state and condition as it was two thousand years ago, without the least impairment or decay, hath been, as we before noted, without any possibility of contradiction clearly made out and de∣monstrated by Dr. Hakewill in his Apolo∣gy: and therefore, arguing from the past
to the future, it will in all likelyhood so continue two thousand years more, if it be so long to the Day of Doom; and conse∣quently that day (as the Scripture predicts) will suddenly and unexpectedly come upon the World. But if all these Prophecies (as Dr. Hammond affirms) be to be restrained only to the Destruction of Jerusalem, and Jewish Polity, without any further re∣spect to the end of the World; then indeed from thence we can make no Inferences or Deductions in reference to that final Period.
CHAP. VIII. The Fourth Question Resolved, Whether shall there be any Signs or Forerunners of the Dissolution of the World? 4. THE Fourth Question is, Whether shall there be any Signs or Fore∣runners of the Dissolution of the World? In order to the Answering of this Que∣stion we shall distinguish Signs into natural and arbitrarious, 1. natural Signs, so the Au∣rora, or Dawning of the Day, is a Sign of the Sun-rising. Now if the Dissolution be effected in the course of Nature, and by na∣tural Means, there will be some previous natural Signs of it. An old House will threaten Ruin before it falls. The natural Death of Men and all Animals hath its Har∣bingers, and old Men before their Dissolu∣tion feel the Impression of Age; and pro∣claim to the World their approaching Fate by Wrinkles, Gray Hairs, and Dimness of Sight. But we have formerly shewn, that there is no Consenescency or Declension in
Nature: but that the World continues still as firm and staunch as it was three thousand years ago; and why hereafter it should founder and decay more than it hath done for so many Ages heretofore, what reason can be given? It is not therefore likely there should be any natural Signs of the Dissolution of the World; and consequently that it shall be effected by natural Means. 2. There are arbitrary Signs, as a Garland hung out is a Sign of Wine to be sold. Now if the Dissolution of the World be effected by supernatural and extraordinary means. (as is most likely) the Signs of it must be arbi∣trarious. For tho they may be natural Ef∣fects and Productions, yet would they not signifie the Destruction of the World, if they were not ordered by providence to happen at that time, and predicted as Forerunners of it; with which otherwise they have no na∣tural Connexion. Such Signs are Matth. 24. The Sun being darkened, and the Moon not giving her Light, and the Stars falling from Heaven, and the Shaking of the Powers of Heaven. These and many other Signs of his coming we find mentioned in Scripture: but what the meaning of these Expressions may be, is not so clear: For tho some of them may be taken in a Literal Sense, yet it is manifest that others cannot. The Sun may
indeed be so covered with a Macula, as to be quite obscured; and thereupon the Moon ne∣cessarily lose her Light, which she borrows only from the Sun-beams: But how the Stars should in a literal Sense fall down from Hea∣ven is inconceivable; it being almost demon∣stratively certain, that most of them are bigger than the whole Earth. We may therefore, keeping as near as we can to the Letter, thus interpret them. There shall be great Signs in Heaven, dismal Eclipses and Obscurations of the Sun and Moon; new Stars and Comets shall appear, and others disappear, and many fiery Meteors be su∣spended in the Air. The very Foundations of the Earth shall be shaken, and the Sea shall roar and make a noise. But I must not here dissemble a great Difficulty: How can such illustrious Signs and Forerunners be re∣conciled to the suddenness and unexpected∣ness of Christ's coming, and the end of the World? Luke 21.25. After the Evangelist had told us, That there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon; and in the stars — the sea and the waves roaring, he adds, as a Con∣sequent thereof, Vers. 26. Mens hearts fail∣ing them for fear, and for looking after those things that are coming on the earth. And indeed how could any Man possibly be buried in so profound a Lethargy of Senselessness
and Security, as by such stupendious Pro∣digies not to be rowsed and awakened to an expectation of some dismal and tremen∣dous Event? How could he sing a Requiem to his Soul, and say Peace and Safety, when the World so manifestly threatens Ruin a∣bout his Ears? For the reconciling of these Expressions to this sudden coming of our Saviour to Judgment, it were most conve∣nient to accept them in the Figurative and Metaphorical Sense. For if we understand them of the Ruins and Devastations of Ci∣ties and Countries, the Changes of Govern∣ments, the Subversions of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, the Falls and Deposings of Princes, Nobles and Great Men; these happening more or less in every Age, tho the serious and inquisitive Christian, who searches and understands the Scriptures, may discern them to be the Signs of the World's Catastrophe; yet the careless and inconside∣rate, the vicious and voluptuous are not like to be at all startled or moved at them, but may notwithstanding, looking upon them as ordinary and insignificant Accidents, Dormire in utramque aurem, sleep securely till the last Trump awaken them. Or it may be an∣swered, that these Prophecies do belong to the Destruction of Jerusalem only, and so we are not concerned to answer this Objection.
CHAP. IX. The fifth Question answered; At what Period of Time shall the World be dissolved? 5. THE Fifth Question is, At what Period of Time shall the World be dissolved? I answer, This is absolutely uncertain and indeterminable. For since this Dissolution shall be effected by the ex∣traordinary Interposition of Providence; it cannot be to any man known, unless extra∣ordinarily revealed. And our Saviour tells us, that of that Day and Hour knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, &c. Matth. 24.36. And again, Acts 1.17. It is not for us to know the times and the sea∣sons, which the Father hath placed in his own power. And this Dr. Hakewyll brings as an Argument, that the World decays not, neither tends to corruption; because if it did, the time of its actual Dissolution might be collected and foretold; which, saith he, the Scripure denies. We may in∣vert this Argumentation, and infer; Because
the World doth not decay, therefore the time of its Dissolution cannot be known. But yet notwithstanding this, many have ventured to fore-tell the time of the end of the World, of whom some are already con∣futed, the term prefixt being past, and the World still standing. Lactantius in his time said, Institut. lib. 7. c. 15. Omnis expectatio non amplius quàm ducentorum videtur annorum, The longest expectation extends not further than two hundred years. The continuance of the World more than a thousand years since con∣vinces him of a gross Mistake. Paulus Greb∣nerus a high Pretender to a Spirit of Pro∣phesie, sets it in the year 1613. induced thereto by a fond conceit of the Numeral Letters in the Latin Word Judicium. Other Enthusiastical persons of our own Countrey have placed it in the years 1646. and 1656. The event shews how ungroundedly and er∣roneously. Others there are, whose term is not yet expired, and so they remain still to be confuted.Du Mou∣lin. As those who conceit that the end of the World shall be when the Pole-Star shall come to touch the Pole of the Equator, which (say they) ever since the time of Hipparchus hath approached nearer and nearer to it. That it doth so I am not satisfied; but if it doth, it is merely acci∣dental, and hath no connexion with the end
of the World. But the most famous Opi∣nion, and which hath found most Patrons and Followers even amongst the Learned and Pious, is that of the Worlds duration for six thousand years. For the strengthe∣ning of which Conceit they tell us, that as the World was created in six days, and then followed the Sabbath, so shall it remain six thousand years, and then shall succeed the Eternal Sabbath. Heb. 4.9. , &c. There remains therefore a rest or Sabbath to the people of God. Here we see that the Apostle institutes a compa∣rison between the heavenly rest and the Sabbath. Therefore as God rested upon the seventh day, so shall all the World of the Godly rest after the six thousandth year. For he that hath entred into his rest ceaseth from all his works as God did from his. Of this Opinion were many of the Ancient Fathers, as I shewed before, grounding themselves up∣on this Analogy between the six days of the Creation and the Sabbath; and the six thou∣sand years of the Worlds duration, and the eternal rest; For saith Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. ult. Hoc autem (that is, the History of the six days Creation and succeeding Sabbath) est & praeteritorum narratio, & futurorum pro∣phetia. Dies enim unus mille annos significat, sicut Scriptura testatur: 2 Pet. 3.8. Psal. 90.4.
the Scriptures reckoning days of one thou∣sand years long, as in verse 8. of this Chap∣ter, and in Psal. 90.4. This is likewise a re∣ceived Tradition of the Jewish Rabbins, re∣gistred in the Talmud, in the Treatise Sanhe∣drim, delivered (as they pretend) by the Prophet Elias the Tishbite to the Son of the Woman of Sarepta, whom he raised from the dead, and by him handed down to Posterity. I rather think with Reuterus, that the Author of it was some Rabbi of that name. The Tradition is, Sex millia annorum erit mundus: & uno millenaria va∣statio i. e. Sabbathum Dei: Duo millia inane: Duo millia Lex: Duo millia dies Messiae. Two thousand years vacuity: Two thousand years of the Law: Two thousand years the days of the Messiah. But they shoot far wide: For according to the least account, there passed a far greater number of years before the Law was given, 2513. saith Reuterus, and on the contrary less time from the Law▪ to the Exhibition of the Messiah. All these Proofs laid together do scarce suffice to make up a probability. Neither do those Rabbinical Collections from the six Letters in  the first word of Genesis, or from the six Alephs in the first Verse of that Book, each signifying a thousand years; or from the six first Patriarchs in the order of the Genea∣logy
to Enoch, who was caught up to Hea∣ven and found no more, add much weight to this Opinion. S. Austin very modestly con∣cludes after a discussion of this Point con∣cerning the time of the Worlds duration, Ego tempora dinumerare non audeo: nec ali∣quem prophetam de hac re numerum annorum existimo praefinivisse. Nos ergo quod scire nos Dominus noluit libentèr nesciamus. But though none but presumptuous per∣sons have undertaken peremptorily to de∣termine that time, yet was it the common and received Opinion and Perswasion of the Ancient Christians, that that day was not far off: and had they been to limit it, they would hardly have been induced to set the term so forward, and remote from their own Age, as by experience we find it proves to to be in their own times, or shortly after; and many places of Scripture seem to favour that Opinion, so that some have presumed to say, that the Apostles themselves were at first mistaken in this particular, till after fur∣ther illumination they were better informed. But though this be too bold a Conceit, yet that the Churches, at least some of them, did at first mistake the Apostles meaning in their Sermons and Epistles concerning this Point, and so understand them, as to think that the end of the World and final Judg∣ment
was at hand, appears from 2 Thess. 2.2. I beseech you, Brethren, that ye be not soo shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by Spi∣rit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Wee see the Apostle labours to rectifie, and for the fu∣ture to prevent this Mistake: so likewise the Apostle Peter in the 8th and 9th Verses of this Chapter. And yet this Opinion had taken such deep root in them, that it wa not easie to be extirpated, but continued for some Ages in the Church. Indeed there are so many places in the New Testament which speak of the coming of Christ as very near that if we should have lived in their time and understood them all as they did, of hi coming to judge the World, we could hard∣ly have avoided being of the same Opinion. But if we apply them (as Dr. Hammo doth) to his coming to take vengeance on hi enemies, then they do not hinder, but tha the Day of Judgment, I mean the genera Judgment, may be far enough off. So  leave this Question unresolved, concluding that when that day will come God only knows.
CHAP. X. How far this Conflagration shll extend. 6. A Sixth Question is, How far shall this Conflagration extend? Whe∣ther to the Ethereal Heavens, and all the Host of them, Sun, Moon and Stars, or to the Aereal only? I answer, If we follow Ancient Tradition not only the Earth, but also the Heavens and heavenly Bodies will be involved in one common fate, as appears by those Verses quo∣ted out of Lucretius, Ovid, Lucan, &c. Of Christians some exempt the Ethereal Region from this Destruction: for the two following Reasons, which I shall set down in Reuterus's words. 1. Because in this Chap∣ter the Conflagration is compared to the De∣luge in the time of Noah. But the Deluge extended not to the upper Regions of the Air, much less to the Heavens, the Waters arising only fifteen Cubits above the tops of the Mountains, if so much. Therefore nei∣ther shall the Conflagration transcend that
term. So Beza upon 2 Pet. 3.6. Tantum ascendet ille ignis quantum aqua altior supra omnes montes. That fire shall ascend as high as the Waters stood above the Mountains. This passage I do not find in the last Edition of his Notes. The ordinary Gloss also upon these words, 2 Thess. 1.2. In flaming fire rendring vengeance, saith, Christum venturum praecedet ignis in mundo, qui tantum ascendet quantum aqua in diluvio. There shall a fire go before Christ when he comes, which shall reach as high as did the Water in the Deluge. And S. Augustine De Civit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 18. Petrus etiam commemorans factum ante dilu∣vium, videtur admonuisse quodammodo, qua∣tenus in fine hujus seculi istum mundum peri∣turum esse credamus. Peter also mentioning the Ancient Deluge, seems in a manner to have advised us how far at the consummation of time, we are to believe this World shall perish. But this Argument is of no force, because it is not the Apostles design in that place to describe the limits of the Conflagration, but only against Scoffers, to shew, that the World should one day perish by Fire, as it had of old been destroyed by Water. 2. The second reason is, because the Hea∣venly Bodies are not subject to passion, al∣teration or corruption. They can con∣tract
no filth, and so need no expurgation by Fire. To this we answer, not in the words of Reuter, but our own, That it is an idle and ill grounded conceit of the Peripateticks, That the Heavens are of their own nature in∣corruptible and unalterable: for on the con∣trary it is demonstrable, that many of them are of the same nature with the Earth we live upon, and the most pure, as the Sun, and probably too the Fixt Stars, suffer Alte∣rations; maculae or opaque Concretions being commonly generated and dissolved in them. And Comets frequently, and sometimes New Stars appear in the Etherial Regions. So that these Arguments are insufficient to ex∣empt the Heavens from Dissolution; and on the other side many places there are in Scri∣pture which seem to subject them thereto: As Psal. 102.25, 26. recited Heb. 1.10. which hath already often been quoted, The heavens are the works of thy hands, They shall perish. Mat. 24.35. Heaven and Earth shall pass away. Isa. 65.17. & 51.6. The Hea∣vens shall vanish away like smoke. Yet am I not of opinion, that the last Fire shall reach the Heavens; They are too far distant from us to suffer by it: nor indeed doth the Scri∣pture affirm it: but where it mentions the Dissolution of the Heavens, it expresses it by
such Phrases as seem rather to intimate, that it shall come to pass by a consenescency and decay, than be effected by any sudden and violent means. Psal. 102.25, 26. They all shall wax old as doth a garment, &c. Though I confess nothing of Certainty can be gathe∣red from such expressions; for we find the same used concerning the Earth. Isa. 51.6. The Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old as doth a garment. The heavenly Bodies are none of them un∣corruptible and eternal; but may in like man∣ner as the Earth be consumed and destroyed, at what times and by what means, whether Fire or some other Element, the Amighty hath decreed, and ordered.
CHAP. XI. Whether shall the Whole World be consumed and annihilated, or only refined and pu∣rified? THere remains now only the Seventh Question to be resolved, Whether shall the World be wholly consumed, burnt up and destroyed, or annihilated; or only re∣fined, purified or renewed? To this I an∣swer, That the latter part seems to me more probable, viz. That it shall not be destroyed and annihilated, but only refined and puri∣fied. I know what potent Adversaries I have in this case. I need name no more than Gerard in his Common Places, and Dr. Hake∣wil in his Apology and the Defence of it, who contend earnestly for the Abolition or Annihilation. But yet upon the whole matter, the Renovation or Restitution seems to me most probable, as being most conso∣nant to Scripture, Reason and Antiquity. The Scripture speaks of an  or Resti∣tution, Acts 3.21. Whom the Heavens must
contain until the time of the restitution of all things. Speaking of our Saviour: and  or Regeneration of the World, the very Word the Stoicks and Pythagoreans use in this case, Matth. 19.28, 29. Verily, I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, &c. Psal. 102.26. As a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed. Which words are again taken up and repeated, Heb. 1.12. Now it is one thing to be changed, another to be annihilated and destroyed. 1 Cor. 7.31. . The fashion of this World passeth away. As if he had said, It shall be transfigured, or its outward form changed, not its matter or substance destroyed. Isa. 65.17. Behold I create new Heavens and a new Earth, and the former shall not be remembred, nor come into mind. Isa. 66.22. As the new Heavens and new Earth, which I shall make, shall remain be∣fore me. To which places the Apostle Peter seems to refer in those words, 2 Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. This new Heaven and new Earth we have also mentioned, Rev. 21.1. And I saw a new Heaven and a ne
Earth: for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. These places, I confess, may admit of an Answer or Solution by those who are of a contrary Opinion, and are answered by Doctor Hakewil: yet all together, especially being back'd by ancient Tradition, amount to a high degree of probability. I omit that place, Rom. 8.21, 22. The creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: tho it be accounted the strongest proof of our Opinion, because of the obscu∣rity and ambiguity thereof. 2. For Antiquity, I have already given many Testimonies of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, and could, if need were, produce many more, the whole stream of them running this way. And tho Dr. Hakewill saith, that if we look back to higher times before S. Hierome, we shall not easily find any one who maintained the World's Renovation: yet hath he but two Testimonies to alledge for its Abolition; the one out of Hilary upon the Psalms, and the other out of Clemens his Recognitions. To this Restitution of the World after the Con∣flagration many also of the Heathen Phi∣losophers bear witness; whose Testimonies Mr. Burnet hath exhibited in his Theory of
the Earth, lib. 4. cap. 5. Of the Stoicks, Chrysippus de Providentia,Apud Lactant. l. 7. c. 23. speaking of the Renovation of the World, saith, . We after death, certain Periods of time be∣ing come about, shall be restored to the form we now have. To Chrysippus Stobaeus adds Zeno and Cleanthes, and comprehends toge∣ther with Men all natural things, . Zeno and Clean∣thes and Chrysippus were of opinion, That the Nature or Substance of things changes in∣to Fire, as it were into a Seed; and out of this again, such a World or Frame of Things is effected as was before. This Revolution of na∣ture Antoninus in his Meditations often calls , The Peri∣odical Regeneration of all things. And Lib. 5. Origen against Celsus saith of the Stoicks in general, . The Stoicks say, That at certain Periods of time there is a Conflagration of the Ʋniverse; and after that a Restitution thereof having exactly the same
Disposition and Furniture the former World had. More to the like purpose concerning the Stoicks, we have in Praep. Evang. l. 15. Eusebius out of Numenius. Nature, saith he, returns  to the Resurrection which makes the Great Year, wherein there is again a restitution made from it self alone to it self. For returning according to the order wherein it began first to frame and dispose things, (as reason would) it again observes the same Oeconomy or Administration; the like Periods returning eternally without ceasing. He that desires more Authorities of the Heathen Philosophers and Poets in confir∣mation of the World's Restitution after the Conflagration, may consult the same Mr. Burnet in the place forequoted; where he also shews, that this Doctrine of the Mun∣dane Periods was received by the Grecians from the Nations they call barbarous. Py∣thagoras, saith Porphyry, brought it first in∣to Grece: and Origen witnesseth of the E∣gyptians Wise Men that it was delivered by them. Laertius out of Theopompus relates,
That the Persian Magi had the same Tra∣dition: and Berosus saith that the Chaldeans also. In fine, among all the Barbarous Na∣tions, who had among them any Person or Sect, and Order of Men, noted for Wis∣dom or Philosophy this Tradition was cur∣rent. The Reader may consult the Book we refer to, where is a notable Passage taken out of Plutarch's Tractate, De Iside & Osiride, concerning a War between Oromazes and Arimanius, somewhat parallel to that men∣tioned in the Revelation between Michael and the Dragn. 3. The Restitution of the World seems more consonant to Reason than its Aboli∣tion. For if the World were to be annihi∣lated, what needed a Conflagration? Fire doth not destroy or bring things to nothing, but only separate their parts. The World cannot be abolished by it, and therefore had better been annihilated without it. Where∣fore the Scripture mentioning no other Dis∣solution than is to be effected by the Instru∣mentality of Fire, its clear, we are not to understand any utter Abolition or Annihila∣tion of the World, but only a Mutation and Renovation, by those Phrases of perishing, passing away, dissolving, being no more, &c. They are to be no more in that state and condition they are now in.
2. There must be a material Heaven, and a material Hell left. A place for the glori∣fied Bodies of the Blessed to inhabit and converse in; and a place for the Bodies of the Damned, a  or Prison for them to be shut up in. Now if the place of the Blessed be an Empyreal Heaven far above these visible Heavens, as Divines generally hold; and the place of the Damned be be∣neath, about the middle of the Earth; as is the Opinion of the Schoolmen, and the Church of Rome, and as the name Inferi im∣ports, and as the ancient Heathen described their Tartarus, Hom. II.— , . Then when all the intermediate Bodies shall be annihilated, what a strange Universe shall we have? Consisting of an immense Ring of Matter, having in the middle, a vast vacuity, or space void of all Body, save only one small point for an infernal Dungeon. Those that are of this Opinion have too narrow and mean thoughts of the Greatness, I had almost said Immensity of the Universe, the
glorious and magnifick Products of the Creator's Almighty Power: and are too par∣tial to themselves, to think the whole World was created for no other end but to be service∣able to Mankind: but of this I have said some∣what in a former Discourse, and therefore shall not at present enlarge upon it. But let us hear what they have to say for the Abolition. Hakewil's Apol. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 5.Their first and most weighty Argument is taken from the End of the World's Creation, which was partly and chiefly the Glory of the Creator, and partly the use of Man, the Lord Deputy, as it were, or Viceroy thereof. Now for the Glory of the Creator, it being by the admirable Frame of the World manifest∣ed unto Man, Man being removed out of the World, and no Creature being capable of such a Manifestation besides him, we cannot imagine to what purpose the Frame it self should be left, and restored to a more per∣fect Estate. The other End, being for Man's Ʋse, either to supply his Necessity in matter of Diet, of Physick, of Building, of Ap∣parrel; or for his Instruction, Direction, Re∣creation, Comfort and Delight; or lastly, that therein, as in a Looking-Glass he might contemplate the Wisdom, the Goodness and Power of God: when he shall attain that Blessed Estate, as he shall have no further
use of any of these, enjoying perfect Hap∣piness and seeing God as he is, face to face, the second or subordinate End of the World's Being must needs be likewise frustrate. And what other End can be given or conceived for the remaining or restoring thereof? &c. To this I answer, there may be an end of the restoring of the VVorld, tho we are not able to find out or determine what. VVe are too short sighted to penetrate the Ends of God. There may be a new Race of ratio∣nal Animals brought forth to act their parts upon this Stage, which may give the Crea∣tor as much Glory as Man ever did or could. And yet if there should be no Material nd visible rational Creature made to inha∣bit the Earth, there are spiritual and intel∣ectual Beings, which may be as busie, and s much delighted in searching out and con∣emplating the VVorks of God in this new Earth, and rendring him the Praise of his VVisdom and Power as Man could be. These things we may conjecture; but we must eave it to the only wise God to determine what use shall be made of it. It seems to me o be too great presumption, and over-valuing our selves to think that all this VVorld was o made for us, as to have no other end of its Creation; or that God could not be glorified ut by us.
This first and principal Argument being answered, the second admits of an easie So∣lution. They enquire whether the Vege∣tables and Creatures endued with Sense shall all be restored, or some only? namely such as shall be found in being at the Day of Judgment. If all, where shall we find Stowage for them? Surely we may in this case properly apply that which the Evangelist in another useth figuratively, if they should all be restored, even the VVorld it self could not contain the things which should be re∣stored. If some only, then would I gladly know, why those some should be vouchsafed this great Honour, and not all, or how those Creatures without a Miracle shall be re∣strain'd from propagating and multiplying, and that infinitely in their kinds by a perpe∣tual Generation. Or lastly, How the seve∣ral Individuals of these kinds, shall contrary to their primitive natures, live and dure Immortality? To all this I answer, That not only all Animals, but all Vegetables too, yea and their Seeds also, will doubtless be morti∣fied and destroyed by the violence of the Conflagration; but that the same should be restored, and endued with eternal life, I know no reason we have to believe; but ra∣ther that there shall be new ones produced▪
either of the same with the former, or of different kinds, at the will, and by the power of the Almighty Creator, and for those Ends and Uses for which he shall design them. This Question being answered in this man∣ner, all that follows concerning the Earth remaining without any Furniture or Inha∣bitants, &c. falls to the Ground. So I have dispatch'd these seven Questions concerning the Dissolution of the World, there remains now only the Inference or Use of the pre∣cedent Doctrine.
CHAP. XII. The Apostles Inference from the precedent Doctrine. I Come now to the Inference the Apostle makes from the precedent Doctrine▪ What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? One word here needs a little explication, and that is holy; What is meant by a holy conversation. Holiness is an Equivocal Term. It is at∣tributed either to God, or to the Creature. When it is attributed to God, it signifies either, 1. The unspotted Purity of his Nature, and the constant and immutable rectitude of his Will. So it is taken 1 John 3.3. A every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure: and 1 Pet. 1.15. As he which called you is holy, so be ye holy i all manner of conversation: Because it is writ∣ten, be ye holy for I am holy. Psal. 145.17▪ The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
2. His Sovereign Majesty and Greatness, appearing in his transcendent Wisdom and Power, in his Supreme and Absolute Domi∣nion over all things: in respect whereof, he is called the Holy One of Israel, and his Name is said to be Holy: that is, to be invoked with the greatest reverence. Holy and reve∣rend is his name. Because of this his Great∣ness and Excellency he is to be worshipped and adored with the most submissive humi∣lity and veneration, with a transcendent and incommunicable Worship and Devotion. When Holiness is attributed to Creatures, it signifies either an Inherent and Inward or a Relative or Outward, Holiness. 1. Inherent or Inward Holiness is a Con∣formity of Heart and Life to the Will of God: or as Bishop Wilkin's Ʋnivers. Charact. others define it, An habitual frame of mind, whereby we are fitted for vertuous Actions, but more especi∣ally for the Duties of Religion: Indeed Ho∣liness doth always include a reference to God. 2. Relative or Outward Holiness results from a Separation and setting a part any thing from a prophane and common, and applying it to a Sacred or Religious use. For the Majesty of God, who at first created, and continually sustains and governs all things, being so great and inviolable, all persons,
things, and times, and places, and Ceremo∣nies separated and appropriated to his Ser∣vice and Worship, are by all Nations esteem∣ed Sacred, and to have a Character of Holi∣ness imprinted on them. By Holiness in this place, is to be under∣stood an inherent Holiness, which is well de∣fined by Dr. Outram,De Sacrif. l. 1. c. 1. A Conformity of heart and life to the Will of God. I shall not dis∣course at large concerning a holy Conversa∣tion, nor instance particulars wherein it con∣sists. That would be to write a Body of Practical Divinity: I shall therefore at pre∣sent suppose the Reader sufficiently instru∣cted in that. My business shall be to shew the strength of the Apostles Inference. It may be said, How doth this Dissolu∣tion concern us, who may perchance be dead and rotten a thousand years before i comes? What have we to do with it? I answer, It concerns us, 1. Because it possible it may happen in our times; it ma surprise us before we are aware. The pre¦cise time thereof is uncertain. And it sha be sudden and unexpected, coming as Thief in the night, as we have befo shewn; therefore we ought always to  upon our guard, to have our loins girt ab and our lights burning. This use the Sc¦pture in many places makes of the unc¦tainty
of the time of Christs coming. Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready: for the Son of Man cometh at an hour when ye think not. Luke 21.34, 35. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the whole Earth. Parallel whereto are Matth. 24.42. and Mark 13.33, 35. That it shall come is certain, when it shall come is uncertain, and it every day draws nearer and nearer, therefore it is not wisdom to remove the evil day far from us: and as in reference to the day of death, it is an usual and prudent advice, so to live every day, as if it were our last day; or at least, as we would not be afraid to do should it be so: because we are sure, that one day will be our last, and for ought we know the present may be it: so likewise is it rational counsel in respect of the End of the World, so to prepare our selves for it by a holy conversation, that we may get above the terror and dread which will otherwise at∣tend the apprehension of the approach of t: and that we may be provided against the worst that may follow; and be secure come what can come.
Secondly, It concerns us, should it be a thousand years to come, Because then is the general Resurrection both of the just and un∣just, Acts 24.15. and the general Judgment, When we must all appear before the dreadful tribunal of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10. which, Rom. 2.5. is called the revelation of the righteous judgment of God Who will render to every man according to his deeds, &c. Upon this account, I say, it concerns us much how we have our conver∣sation here. I.First, As we hope to be acquitted at that day, and to enter into those new Heavens, in which dwells righteousness. Holiness is a necessary condition and antecedent to happiness. Necessary I say, 1. By Gods appointment, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, with out which no man shall see the Lord. Rom. 6.22. Have your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life. Psal. 50. ult. To him that ordereth his conversation aright, will I shew the salvation of God. Eternal life is the gif of God. He is not obliged to bestow i upon any man. He may make what condi¦tions he pleases for the obtaining of it. N
man hath any right to it; No man can lay any claim to it, but from this donation, and from the performance of these conditions. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. For without are dogs and whoremongers and sorcerers, &c. All the right they have depends upon Gods pro∣mise, which is conditionate, and accrues to them by the performance of the condition, which is the doing of his Command∣ments. 2. Necessary not only by Gods appoint∣ment, but in the very nature of the thing. Holiness is the very quality and complexion of Heaven. No man without it is qualified to be a subject of that Kingdom: For there∣into nothing that is impure or unclean can enter. Revel. 21.27. And there shall in no wise enter into it [the new Jerusalem] any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever work∣eth abomination. In this new Heaven dwel∣leth righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.15. Therefore 1 John 3.3. Every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure. Hea∣ven would naturally spue out and eject a wicked person, as one heterogeneous to it. Heaven and Hell are not more distant in place, than they are in nature. There is
not more antipathy between fire and water, between light and darkness, between streight and crooked, neither are they more incom∣patible, or do more naturally resist and ex∣pel one another, than holiness which is the quality of Heaven, and wickedness which is the disposition and temper of Hell. Some do think Heaven to be rather a state, than a place; and that he that is partaker of the Di∣vine Nature hath Heaven within him: This is true, but this is not all. The whole notion of Heaven comprehends both a state and a place. A man must be in a heavenly state, before the local Heaven can receive him, or he brook it. Heaven without him would be no Heaven to the man who hath not Hea∣ven within him. A wicked person could find no business or employment in Heaven; nothing to satisfie his corrupt and depraved affections, inclinations, and appetites. He would there meet with no suitable company; no persons whose conversation he could take any delight and complacency in, but rather hate and abhor. For what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? or what communion hath light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. Like naturally loves like, and unites with it, and doth refuse, resist, and hate that which is unlike it. For every thing is made to love it self; and consequently every
thing that resembles and comes near it, and is as it were a replication of it; and to hate the contrary. As therefore we would be glad to be Partakers of the blessedness of the local Heaven, so let us endeavour to get into our Minds and Spirits the qualities and conditions of Heaven; that so we may be fit Subjects for that Kingdom, fit companions for that Society. This is the time allotted us to purifie our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God. There is no invention in the grave whither we are going, Eccles. 9.10. Ʋpon this moment depends eternity. As the tree falls so it lies; and as Death leaves, so will Judgment find us. Quando isthinc ex∣cessum fuerit, nullus jam locus poenitentiae est. Hîc vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur: Hîc sa∣luti aeternae cultu Dei & fructu fidei provi∣detur. Cyprian. Serm. de Immortal. After we shall depart hence there remains no more place for repentance. Eternal life is here, either lost or won. Here provision is made for everlasting salvation by the worship of God, and fruit of faith. We must work while it is day, the night [of death] cometh wherein no man can work. John 9.4. And therefore the time our bodies shall rest in the grave, should it be a thousand years, will little avail us: for if the soul be mean while awake,
the certain and dreadful expectation of the Sentence of Condemnation to an eternal Hell at the Day of Judgment, will be little less afflictive than the Torments thereof themselves. I might add by way of Di∣gression that Sin and Wickedness is natu∣rally productive of. Hell in the Soul. A wicked Man carries Hell in his Breast. Sin necessarily infers Misery: It is contrary to the nature of the Soul, and whatsoever is so must needs be grievous. Diversion and Non-Attention to his Condition is the wick∣ed Man's only Security: I have heard it often from a Doctor Witchcot. great Divine in his Sermons, That there is but a Thoughts Distance between a wicked Man and Hell. For do but fix and bind his Thoughts to the Consideration of his Life and Actions, and he will antici∣cipate Hell himself, he shall need no infer∣nal Furies to lash him, he will be his own Tormentor: such a Man's Pressures will be heavy enough, should the Divine Nemesis superadd no more. The Reason of this I have given in a former Discourse, and therefore shall now omit what else might have been added on this particular. II.Secondly, It much concerns us, upon ac∣count of the future Judgment which shall be at the Dissolution of the World, to have our
Conversation in all Holiness, as we desire to avoid that Shame and Misery which will then otherwise certainly befall us. 1. As we desire to avoid that shame which will cover our Faces at that day. If here Shame and Disgrace be more grievous and insupportable than Death it self, what will it be then, when the Soul shall be ren∣dred more quick and apprehensive and sen∣sible of such Impressions? There is nothing shameful but sin, nothing else hath any na∣tural Turpitude in it. Shame follows Sin as the Shadow doth the Body: He that will commit the one cannot avoid the other. Therefore such wicked persons as have not quite re∣nounced Modesty, and lost all Sense of Shame, especially if guilty of secret Crimes, the Consideration of a future. Judgment would be a powerful Curb to restrain them from Sin for the future: because then God will produce and bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and disclose and make ma∣nifest the counsels of all hearts: 1 Cor. 4.5. Then he will judge the secrets of men by Je∣sus Christ. Rom. 2.16. Then will he bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, Eccles. 12.14. For would they but consider and ponder what Confusion will overwhelm them when this shall be done in the face of the whole World, and before all
that knew them, and they not able to make any denyal, or excuse. This, I say, if any thing, would be a powerful Curb to with∣hold them from those Enormities to which this shame is appendant. It may be thou madest a great Figure in the World for Piety and Religion, wouldst seem to be some Body in the Eyes of Men, when thou wert false and unsound, didst harbour and nourish some Viper in thy Bosom, Introrsum turpis, speciosa pelle decorus: When thy secret Faults shall be exposed be∣fore thy Neighbours, and Friends, and Children, And the shame of thy nakedness shall be made to appear, Revel, 3.18. How wilt thou then be confounded, and astonish∣ed, and unable to lift up thy Head? What horrour will then seize thee, When thy con∣fusion shall be continually before thee, and the shame of thy face shall cover thee? Psalm 44.15. It concerns thee therefore to look about thee in time, and search thy Consci∣ence to the Bottom, to remove whatever grates, to cast out whatever offends, tho never so customary, never so pleasing to Flesh and Blood: to apply thy self to the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ Jesus for the Expiation of what is past; and for the
future to resolve and endeavour the amend∣ment of whatsoever hath heretofore been a∣miss in thee; and to beg the assistance of the Divine Grace to strengthen in thee every good purpose and resolution of heart, and to enable thee to bring it to issue and effect. And for thy security, I think it good advice, to resolve so to behave thy self in thy retire∣ments, so to live in the secret of thy Cham∣ber and Closet, as though the doors were thrown open upon thee, and all the eyes of the World beheld thee; as though thou were't in the Arena of a publick Theatre ex∣posed to the view of Men and Angels. I remember the Ingenious Writer of Politick Discourses Boccalini, doth often divert him∣self and his Reader with facetious Reflecti∣ons upon the contrivance of a Window into the Breast; which, if I mistake not, he fa∣thers upon Lipsius. However he may deride it, I think it would be prudent counsel to give and take, for every Christian. So to live and carry it in the secret of his heart, as if there were a Window into his Breast, that every one that passed by, might look in thereat, and see all the thoughts and imagi∣nations that passed there, that found any en∣ertainment or acceptance with him. For though indeed God searches the hearts and eins, and understandeth our thoughts afar
off, Psal. 139.2. Yet such is the hypocrisie of mankind, that they do for the most part more reverence the eyes of men, than of God: and will venture to do that in his presence, which they would be ashamed the eyes of man should see them doing. You will say, Is it not better to be modest, than to be im∣pudent? Is it not better to conceal, than to publish ones shame? Is it not better to re∣verence man, than neither God nor man? Doth not the Scripture condemn a Whores fore-head? Is it not a true Proverb, Past Shame, past Grace? Was it not good advice of a Cardinal (as I remember) Si non castè tamen cautè? He that hath devoured shame, what bridle is there left to restrain him from the worst of evils? I answer, That it seems indeed to me, that publick sins of the same nature, are more heinous than secret; and that impudence in sinning, is an aggravation of the sin. For open sins dare God, and bid defiance to Heaven, and leave the sinner un∣reclaimable, and are of more pernicious influ∣ence. I do not now speak of the hypocrisie of feigning holiness to serve our own ends, which is rightly esteemed duplex iniquitas, but that of concealing and hiding vicious actions, to avoid the shame of men. And yet there is a great obliquity in this too. Be∣cause even this is a slighting and undervalu∣ing
of God, a preferring of man before him, setting a greater price and esteem upon the praise and commendation of men, than the praise and approbation of God. John 12.43. God sees the secretest actions, yea, the most retired thoughts. They that believe this, and yet make bold to do in his presence, what the fear of man's eye would restrain them from, it is clear that they reverence man more than God, a poor, frail, impotent Creature like themselves▪ more than the most pure and ever blessed Creator. Nay, let the temptation to any sin be never so strong, and the natural inclination never so vehement, if the knowledge and conscience of men be a motive and consideration pow∣erful enough to enable us to resist and repel them, had we but as firm a belief of the presence and inspection of God, and as great a reverence and dread of him, Why should not these have the same influence and effect upon us? Let us then avoid the hypocrisie of desiring to be thought better than we are, by endeavouring to our utmost to be as good as we would be thought to be, and if pos∣sible, better. So shall we satisfie our selves that we seek the praise of God, more than the praise of men. But to return from whence we digressed, though Daniel 12.2. shame and everlasting contempt shall
at the general Resurrection be the portion of them who persist and die in their sins; yet a serious and unfeigned Repentance, attested by a holy Conversation for the future, is an effectual means to deliver us from this shame, whatever our forepast sins have been. For they shall not be produced against us, they shall not be objected to us at that day; they shall be buried in eternal silence and oblivion, and be as tho they had not been. And this O∣pinion I hold 1. More agreeable to the Scri∣pture, which in this matter makes use of the Terms of hiding, and covering, and blotting out, Psalm 32.1. Blessed is the man whose trangression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Esay 43.25. I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, and will not remember thy sins. So Psalm 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Jerem. 48.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more. Ezek. 28.22. All his transgressions that he hath committed they shall not be men∣tioned unto him. Mich. 7.19. Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. And as it is more consonant to the Scripture, so is it 2. More grateful and consolatory to the Penitents. For the mere mentioning and re∣citing of their sins before such an Assembly
must needs refresh their shame and sorrow, and so diminish their happiness and joy. To which I might add, that it is written that our▪ Saviour at the last judgment in pronoun∣cing the Sentence shall enumerate the good works of the Godly to their praise; but not a word said of producing their sins. I say I hold this Opinion more probable upon these accounts, than theirs who affirm they shall then be published, for the magnifying and advancing, the declaring and illustrating the Mercy and Grace of God in pardoning so great and heinous Offences. It concerns us much to live in all holy Conversation in this World, as we desire to avoid that pain and misery, which we shall otherwise most certainly be adjudged to at that day: that indignation and wrath, tribu∣lation and anguish, which God shall render to them that do not obey the truth, but obey un∣righteousness: Rom. 2.8. That worm that dieth not, and that fire that is not quenched, Mark 9.44. and 46. and 48. that outer darkness, where is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, Matth. 8.12. and 22.13. and 25.30. That furnace of fire, Matth. 13.42.50. That lake of fire and brimstone, Re∣vel. 20.10. or of fire burning with brimstone, Revel. 19.20. Which places, tho they be not literally to be expounded, yet do they
import at least a very sad and deplorable estate, a high degree of torment and anguish: and all this eternal and without intermission night and day. These shall go into everlast∣ing punishment, Mat. 25.46. The State of the Damned is supposed to be a state of absolute and complete Misery, made up of the loss of the greatest good and a constant, fresh and lively apprehension of it; which Divines call Poena Damni. And 2. Excess of bodily pain and sufferings, and sad distress of trouble and mind occasioned by all manner of frightful Apprehensions, and vexatious Perturbati∣ons and Reflections, which they call Poena Sensus; and this without any intermission or or hope of deliverance eternally. Jude 7. it is called the vengeance of eternal fire. Re∣vel. 14.11. The smoke of their torment is said to ascend up for ever and ever. And Revel. 20.10. it is said of the Beast and false Pro∣phet, that they shall be tormented night and day for ever and ever. If this be so, is't not our greatest Wisdom to use our utmost diligence and endeavour to avoid so deplo∣rable a condition, and to secure our selves an interest in a future estate of everlasting Bliss and Happiness when this Life shall be ended? But here the Epicureans and sensual per∣sons will be ready to object and argue,
Here are pleasures and delights in this World, which are very inviting and taking, and do highly gratifie my senses and appetites. I hear likewise of future rewards and pu∣nishments for those that deny or fulfil their carnal lusts and desires. These sensual plea∣sures I see, and taste, and feel, and am sure of, the other I do but only hear of, and there∣fore they do not, they cannot so strongly affect me: Were Heaven and the happiness thereof set before my eyes, and did I see it as plainly and clearly as I do these things below, then indeed I should not need many motives to provoke me to endeavour the obtaining of it. But alas, that is far above out of our sight, the joys of Heaven are by the Apostle termed things not seen. Again, these outward and temporal enjoyments are present and easily obtainable; the other at a great distance, future, and besides very hard to come by; d I love my ease, ut est ingenium hominum à labore proclive ad libi∣dinem. Should I deny my self good in this life, and then perchance cease to be, and so have no reward for my pains; nay, on the contrary expose my self to the hazard of many afflictions and sufferings, which are the portion of the godly in this life, how unnecessarily shall I make my self misera∣ble? Miserable I say, because by the Apostles
own confession Christians, if in this life only they had hope, would be of all men the most miserable, 1 Cor, 15.19. Had I not better make sure of what is before me? Why have I these appetites within me, and such objects about me, the one being so suitable to the other, is it not more natural and reasonable to fulfil, than deny them? Surely it cannot be wisdom to lose a certain good for an un∣certain hope; and for an ungrounded fear of Hell hereafter, to undergo a Purgatory here. To this argumentation upon the false foundation of the uncertainty of a future estate of endless happiness or misery, accor∣dingly as we have behaved our selves in this life, I answer, That for the futurity of such an estate, we have the best Authority in the World, to wit, the holy Scriptures and universal Tra∣dition. 1. The Holy Scriptures, whose Authority to be more than humane, hath been by ma∣ny so clearly and convincingly demonstrated, that I shall take it for granted, and not waste time to prove it. The Testimonies herein contained concerning eternal happiness and misery are so clear and full, that it seems to me impossible without manifest distortion to elude or evade the force of them. Some we
have already recited, and might produce many more, Isa. 33.14. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to ever∣lasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. 2 Thess. 1.9. Who shall be punish∣ed with everlasting destruction from the pre∣sence of the Lord, &c. speaking of them who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Isa. 66.24. For their worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched. What more common Notion among the Grecians and Romans, than of Elisium and Tartarus, the one to reward good men, the other to punish wicked? which, as ap∣pears by what we have quoted out of Lu∣cretius, were esteemed to be eternal states. The Origenists and others, that cannot be reconciled to the Catholick Doctrine of the eternity of the punishments of the Damned, make the word , from which the Latin aevum is derived, to signifie sometimes a de∣terminate time, as might easily be proved by many examples, and so  or , which we translate for ever, signifies when applied to this matter, a long indeed, but
yet a finite time; and , which we render for ever and ever, may likewise signifie not an eternal duration, but a time to which some term may be set by God, though to us unknown. In the same sense they accept the Adjective  for a long, but finite time. But I am of S. Augustine's opinion, that  doth in the New Testament signifie the same with aeternus in Latin, and is appropriated to things that have no end: and that , for ever and ever, doth in like man∣ner always denote eternal or endless dura∣tion. That the word  when applied to the state of the Damned, doth signifie eternal, S. Augustine well demonstrates from the Antithesis in that place of Matth. 25.46. And these shall go away into everlasting pu∣nishment, but the righteous into life eternal. Where it is in the same sense attributed to that life which is the reward of the righte∣ous, and that fire which is the punishment of the Damned; there being no reason to be∣lieve that the same word in the same Verse, when applied to opposites, should be taken in a different sense. But by the consent of all Christians it is granted, that the life of the blessed shall be eternal, therefore so must the punishment of the Damned be too.
This acception of the word  for eternal or endless, when it refers to the state of those miserable persons, receives a further and strong confirmation from the Second Particular we proposed, that is, Ʋniversal Tradition: It being a received Opi∣nion among the Heathen, which must needs descend down to them by Tradition from the Ancients, that eternal punishments a∣waited the wicked after Death. Of this the Epicurean Poet Lucretius is a sufficient and unexceptionable Witness, for he living be∣fore our Saviours time, could not derive it from any other source. He makes the fear of these punishments to be the cause of all the miseries of humane life, and the foun∣dation of all Religion, Aeternas quoniam poenas in morte timendum. And because it may be objected, that Aeter∣nas may signifie only of long continuance, to put the matter out of all doubt, in ano∣ther place he saith, —Nam si nullum finem esse putarent, Aerumnarum homines, nulla ratione valerent Relligionibus atque minis obsistere vatum.
—But if it once appear That after Death there's neither hope nor fear, Then Men might freely triumph, then dis∣dain The Poet's Tales, and scorn their fancy'd pain. But now we must submit, since pains we fear Eternal after Death, we know not where. And that this Opinion and Belief general∣ly prevailed among the people before Epi∣curus his time, the same Lucretius testifies in the beginning of his first Book, Humana ante oculos foedè cum vita jaceret In terris oppressa gravi sub Relligione, &c. Primùm Graius homo, &c. Long time men lay opprest with slavish fear, Religion's Tyranny did domineer, Which being plac'd in Heaven, look'd proudly down, And frighted abject Spirits at her frown. At last a Mighty one of Greece began T'assert the Natural Liberty of Man,
By senseless terrors and vain fancy led To Slavery, streight the conquer'd Fan∣toms fled. for he makes (as we saw before) the fear of eternal pain and misery, to be the foundation of all Religion. 1. Now because these Objectors do repre∣sent Religion to themselves and others as a melancholick and disconsolate thing: and think and say, that those that enter into this state must bid adieu to all the pleasures of sence, and taste no sweetness in any worldly object. I shall endeavour to remove this prejudice. I say therefore, That our graci∣ous God doth not envy us any real good that the Creatures can afford us, and there∣fore hath not denied us a moderate use and fruition of any of them. And seeing he hath annexed pleasure to those actions that are necessary for the support of life, and continu∣ation of kind, as a bait to invite us to the performance of them, it seems to me highly absurd and contradictious to affirm, that he hath forbidden us to partake or taste those enjoyments which himself had appointed as effectual means for the security of those great ends; and which are so necessary consequents of those actions, that we cannot but partake
them. Where the Appetite is eager, God hath indulged, I might say commanded, a moderate and regular satisfaction. And we know, nay, the blindness of Atheism cannot deny, that the greatest pleasure results from a moderate and well circumstantiated use of pleasures. Voluptates commendat rarior usus: Now a religious man enjoys all the pleasures of these worldly and sensible goods, without any of the pain, which is annexed to the ex∣cessive and irregular use, or indeed abuse of them: and besides, his pleasure is enhansed, in that he beholds and receives them as bles∣sings of God, and tokens of his favour and affection; and is without all fear of a future sad reckoning for his participation of them. Howbeit a denial of our selves for Gods sake and cause in any thing which we might other∣wise lawfully enjoy, though it be not com∣manded, yet is accepted, and shall be re∣warded by him. Others there are who grant, That these words grammatically signifie as we contend, and that eternal punishments are indeed threatned to the wicked; but say they, these threatnings are intended only, as terricula∣menta, or Bug-bears to Children, to terrifie and keep people in awe, and to preserve the World in some tolerable condition of
quietness. And Origen himself, though he be of opinion, that these threatnings sig∣nifie only temporary pains; yet he saith, that such mysteries are to be sealed up and con∣cealed from the vulgar, lest wicked men should rush into sin with all fury and licen∣tiousness, if this bridle were taken off, who by the opinion and fear of eternal and end∣less punishments can scarce be deterred and restrained from it. To this I answer, 1. That it seems to me indecorous and unsuitable to the Person and Majesty of God, to make use of such sorry and weak means to bring about his ends, as grave men can hardly condescend to. 2. I do not see how it can consist with his Vera∣city, in plain terms, absolutely to threaten and affirm what he never intends to do. Indeed it is questionable, Whether it be allowable in man: it being at best but an officious Lye: for it is a speaking what we do not think, and that with an intention to deceive. Secondly, I proceed now to a second Ob∣jection against the eternity of the pains and sufferings of the Damned, and that is, it's in∣consistency with the Justice of God. What proportion can there be between a transient and temporary act, and an eternal punish∣ment? The most rigid Justice can exact no
more than a talio, to suffer as I have done. . if I have hurt, or grieved, or injured any man, to be punished with the same, or an equivalent suffering: if I have taken any unreasonable pleasure, to compensate it with an answerable pain. Indeed the enormities of my life cannot well deserve so much, if it be considered, that I have been strongly in∣stigated and inclined, and as it were fatally driven upon all the evils which I have com∣mitted, by those affections and appetites, which I made not for my self, but found in my self; and have been exposed to strong and almost inexpugnable temptations from without; beset with snares, encompassed about with innumerable evils. To this I answer First, That every sin, in∣jury, or offence is aggravated and enhansed by the dignity or merit of the person against whom it is committed. So Parricide is esteemed a greater Crime than ordinary Murther, and by the Laws of all Nations avenged with a sorer punishment. The like may be said of laesa Majestas or Treason. Now God is an infinite person, and Sin being an injury and affront to him, as being a vio∣lation of his Law, an infinite punishment must be due to it.
This answer Dr. Hammond in his Practical Catechism, lib. 5. sect. 4. accounts a nicety and unsatisfactory, as also that other common answer, That if we should live infinitely, we would si infinitely; and therefore gives us another, which in his Discourse of the Reasonableness of Christian Religion, he thus briefly summs up. 2. That the choice being referred to us to take of the two which we best like, eternal Death set before on the one hand, to make eternal life the more infinitely reasonable for us to chuse on the other hand, and the eter∣nal Hell (whensoever we fall into it) being perfectly our own Act, neither forced on us by any absolute Decree of God, nor irresistible temptation of the Devil or our own flesh; but as truly our wish and choice and mad pur∣chase, nay, much more truly and properly, than eternal Heaven is (when our obedience is first wrought by Gods grace, and yet after that so abundantly rewarded by the Doner) it is cer∣tain, if there be any thing irrational, it is in us unkind and perverse creatures (so obstinate to chuse what God so passionately warns us to take heed of; so wilfully to dye, when God swears he wills not our death) and not in him, who hath done all that is imaginable to be done to reasonable creatures (here in their way or course) to the rescuing or saving of us.
But to this may be replied, If the thing it self be unjust, how can our chusing of it make it just? How can it be just to annex such a penalty as eternal Hell to a short and transient offence? Suppose a Prince should make a Law, that whosoever did not rise up and bow himself before an old man, should be put to Death with torments; and one of his Subjects knowingly should trans∣gress this Law upon some great temptation; would it not be accounted Cruelty in the Prince to execute this Law upon him? Laws may be unjust upon account of disproportio∣nate penalties. Neither doth our choice much help the matter, for that is but an ef∣fect of our error or folly, or, if you will, madness, which doth as little deserve eternal death as the sin committed doth. If any man be dissatisfied with the prece∣dent answers, all that I have to add further, is, that before this sentence adjudging to e∣ternal death be pronounced against him, and executed upon him, there shall be such a re∣velation made, as shall convince and satisfie him of the righteousness thereof. And this the Apostle seems to intimate Rom. 2.5. when he calls the great day of Doom, the day of the Revelation of the righteous judg∣ment of God. Then shall be made appear
what now to our dimsighted reason is not penetrable; How the Justice of God can con∣sist with the eternal damnation of the wicked. As for mans being as it were fatally de∣termined to evil by the strength of tempta∣tion, and the violence of unruly and head∣strong passions and appetites: I answer, That there are motives and considerations sufficient to enable a man to resist and repel, to con∣quer and overcome the most alluring and fascinating temptations, the most urging and importunate appetites or affections; such are certain shame and disgrace, and that not long to come, eternal infamy and dishonour; present death, strong fear and dread of ap∣proaching death, or sad and intolerable pains or calamities. Now the Divine threatnings are of the greatest and most formidable evils and miseries that Humane Nature is capable of suffering; and therefore were they but firmly believed and apprehended, they would be of force sufficient to stir up in us such strong passions of fear and terror, as would easily chase away all temptations, and em∣bitter all the baits of sensual pleasure. 3. There remains yet a third Objection against an eternal Hell, and that is, that it is inconsistent with the Divine Goodness. For
the Unbeliever will say, It's contrary to all the Notions and Ideas I have of God, to conceive him to be so angry and furious a Being. How can it stand with Infinite Goodness to make a Creature that he fore-knew would be eter∣nally miserable? We men account it a piece of goodness to pardon offences: And all pu∣nishments are intended either for the refor∣mation and amendment of the Offender, or if he be unreclaimable to prevent the mis∣chief which he might otherwise do, or for an example to others to deter them from the like enormities: but I do not see for what such end any man can be eternally tormented. So that of such inflictions one may rationally demand, cui bono? What good comes of them? How then can they come from God, who by all mens confession is infinitely Good? To which I answer: First, That God is just as well as good. You will say, what is Justice? It is an equal weighing of Actions, and rendring to every one his Right or Due. A setting streight again what was perverted by the sins and extravagancies of Men. Now that the breaking of order and equality in the world, this usurping and encroaching upon others Rights is a great Evil and ought to be rectified, some may take an Argument
from the strong inclination and desire to re∣venge Injuries, that is implanted in the nature of Man, and of all Creatures. You'll say, all desire of revenge is absolutely sinful and un∣lawful. I answer, I am no patron of Revenge. I know the very Heathen by the light of na∣ture condemned it. —Infirmi est animi exiguíque voluptas Ʋltio— Revenge is the pleasure of a weak and poor spirit. Yet let us hear what they have to say. 1. It is hard to affirm, that any innate appetite or desire is in it self simply and ab∣solutely, and in all Circumstances whatso∣ever unlawful, for this seems to reflect upon the Author of Nature. To which may be answered, that a well circumstantiated desire of revenge may not be in it self unlawful, yet for the evil Con∣sequents of it, it may be, and is prohibited by a positive Law. 2. Divine persons have prayed to God to avenge them, as David and the Prophets. And S. Paul himself, 2 Tim. 4.14. prays God to reward Alexander the Coppersmith according to his works. To which may be answered, that those Expressions are rather Predictions of what should befal their
Enemies, than desires that they might. A∣gain, whereas it is said▪ Revel. 6.9, 10. That the Souls of them under the altar that were slain for the word of God and the testi∣mony which they held, cryed with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the earth: Doctor Hammond saith, it signifies no more, than that their Blood cries to God for Vengeance, as Abel's is said to do. The Nature of Forgiveness seems to imply the Lawfulness of some desire of Revenge. For what is Forgiveness but a parting with, and a renouncing the Right I have to be avenged, and therefore before I forgive I do retain at least some will to be revenged. And I am not obliged by our Saviour to forgive absolutely, but upon con∣dition of Repentance. Luke 17.3, 4. If thy brother sin against thee rebuke him, and if he repent forgive him, &c. And in the Lord's Prayer one Petition is, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. But God forgives not without Repentance. To which may be answered, That before Repentance, I may retain a will of punishing an Offender for his own Good and Reformation, but with no respect of a∣venging what is past. And if his Repen∣tance
prevents his punishment, then I am to forgive him, that is, cease to desire his pu∣nishment. But all allow Vengeance to be just in God, whose Actions are not to be scanned by our Measures. 2. If it be just with God to propose to us such a choice as Heaven upon condition of our Obedience to his Law, or Hell in case of Disobedience; as we see some wise Men make no scruple to grant; then it cannot be injustice in him to inflict the punishments of Hell upon them that make it their choice. Nay I cannot see how it can consist with his Veracity not to do it; why then should any Argument from his Goodness move us to distrust his Veracity? To which I shall add, That the very being of Sin and Mi∣sery in the World is as great an Argument against the Goodness of God, as the eternal punishment of it: Sith we must needs grant, that God Almighty Blessed for ever, could, if he had pleased, have prevented it. If any Man shall say, This was not possible with∣out changing the very Nature of Man, and taking away the Liberty of his Will. To him I reply, How then can he confirm the Blessed, reserving their Liberty? Or must we say with Origen, That they are in a mutable state too and that Heaven will
have an end as well as Hell? If any Man re∣main still unsatisfied with what hath been said, I must refer him for full satisfaction to the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God at that great day, of which mention hath been already made. I am as unwilling as any Man to limit the Mercies of God: but yet I must refer it to him, whether he will be more favourable than he hath threatened or no, whether he will remit something of the Severity of his Comminations. I am also willing to re∣strain and confine the sense of these words , and  as far as the Con∣text will permit. But let our Opinions and Hopes of the Mercies of God and a tem∣porary Hell be what they will; a temporary Hell, I say, or rather a Purgatory instead of Hell: For the word Hell, according to the usual acception of it, includes Eternity. I shall propose two things to be considered. 1. That Origen the first Broacher of this Opinion of the Determination of the Pu∣nishments of the Damned, doth acknow∣ledge that the contrary Doctrine is very use∣ful to restrain the common People from Sin: and that this is to be held as a great Secret, and studiously concealed from them. Now if it be of such eminent use to them, why
may it not also be to the Learned and No∣ble; who, I fear me, may want such a Bridle as well as they? 2. Since God hath threatned eternal pu∣nishments, whether he intends to execute them upon us or no, it is clear, I think, he would have them be believed by us, else they cannot have that end and effect he designed them to; and therefore it must be unbelief and presumption in us to deny or distrust them, tho upon supposition, that they are irreconcileable with his Goodness; with which yet perhaps they may accord well enough, tho we cannot at present discern it. All Divine Revelations are to be believed and accepted by us, as well Threatnings as Promises; and if we may distrust the Vera∣city of God in them, I know not but we may as well do it in these: if we deny the Eternity of the Torments of Hell, I do not see but that we may upon as good grounds with Origen deny the Eternity of the Joys of Heaven. Let not then the presumption of a tem∣porary Hell encourage thee to go on in sin: for, I fear, such a Persuasion may have an ill influence on the manners of Men. Eter∣nity is the very sting of Hell: take that out, and the Sinner will think it tractable enough.
The very thought of an eternal Hell inter∣vening (and it will often intrude it self) strikes a cold damp to his very Heart in the midst of his Jollities, end will much qualifie and allay all his Pleasures and Enjoyments. Rid him of this fear, and he will be apt to despise Hell and all its Torments, be they never so grievous or lasting. Take off this Bridle, and, as we hinted before, he will rush into Sin as a Horse rusheth into the battel. He will be ready thereupon thus to argue with himself, What need I take so much pains to strive against Sin? What need I swim against the Stream, and resist the Tide and Eddy of my Passions, my natural Appetites and Inclinations, and the Solici∣tations of Company? What need I maintain such a constant Watch and Ward against my spiritual Enemies, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh? If I fall into Hell at last, that is no eternal State, it lasteth but for a time, and will come to an end. I'll venture it: I hope I shall make a shift to rub through well enough. Let me ask thee, But how if thou shouldest find thy self mistaken? If the Event ftustrate thy Hopes, and fall out contrary to thy Expectation? What a sad case wilt thou be in then? How will the un∣expectedness thereof double thy Misery?
Improvisa graviùs feriunt. How wilt thou be strucken as it were with a Thunderbolt, when the Almighty Judge shall fulminate against thee a dreadful indeed, but by thee formerly undreaded Sentence, adjudging thee to endless Punishments? How wilt thou damn thine own Credulity, who by a groundless Belief of a temporary Hell, hast precipitated thy self into an eternal, which otherwise thou mightest possibly have a∣voided? Well, but suppose there be some shadow of hope of the determination of the punish∣ments of the Damned: It is by all acknow∣ledged to be a great piece of folly to leave matters of the highest moment, and which most nearly concern us, at uncertainties: and a point of Wisdom, to secure the main chance, and to be provided against the worst that can come. An eternal Heaven or state of compleat happiness is the main chance, and is not to come into any competition, or so much as to be put into the ballance a∣gainst a few short, transient, sordid, loathed, and for the most part upon their own ac∣count repented pleasures: To secure to our selves an interest in such a state is our greatest wisdom. And as for being provided against the worst that may or can come.
What can be worse than an eternal Hell? which, there is I do not say a possibility, but the greatest probability imaginable, that it will be our portion; if we persist in im∣penitency, and dye in our sins. But sup∣pose the best should happen that we can hope or conceive, that Hell should last only , for Ages of Ages, and at last determine: do we think this a small matter? If we do, it is for want of conside∣ration and experience of acute pains. Should any of us be under the sense and suffering of a raging Paroxysm of the Stone, or Gout, or Collick, I doubt not but rather than endure it for ten thousand years he would willingly part with all his expectation of a blessed estate after that term were expired, yea, and his being to boot. But what are any of these pains to the torments and perpessions of Hell? or the duration of ten thousand years to those Ages of Ages? If thou makest light of all this, and nothing can restrain thee from sin, but the eternity of punishment, thou art bound to thank God, who hath used this only effectual means, threatning an eternal Hell. And it ill becomes thee to complain of his rigour and severity, who wouldest have made so pernicious an use of his lenity and goodness. But thou who hast
entertained such an Opinion, and abusest it to encourage thy self to go on in thy sins, though others should escape with a tempo∣rary punishment, surely thou hast no reason to expect any milder doom, than to be sen∣tenced to an eternal.
Ʋpon a Review of the Prece∣dent Discourse, some Things thought fit to be Added and Amended. Pag. 51. Lin. 29. Add, WHich is made one great Reason that such great Numbers (even whole Woods) of subterraneous Trees are frequently met with and dug up at vast Depths in the Spanish and Dutch Netherlands, as well as in many places of this Island of Great Britan. Page 70. Those Words, (nay this latter [the Me∣diterranean] receives also abundance of Water from the great Ocean; running in at the Streights of Gibraltar, and therefore by subterraneous Passages must needs discharge their Waters into the Abyss of Waters un∣der the Earth, and by its intervention into
the Ocean again) were written without due Consideration, in compliance with the com∣mon Opinion, before I had seen Mr. Halley's Philo∣sophic. Transact. Numb. 89. Estimate of the Quantity of Vapour raised out of the Sea by the warmth of the Sun, &c. which upon second Thoughts I find reason to revoke. For that the Mediterranean Sea doth not communicate with the Ocean by any subterraneous Passages, nor thereby impart any Water to it, or receive any from it, may be demonstrated, from that the Su∣perficies of it is lower than the Superficies of the Ocean, as appears from the Waters running in at the Streights of Gibraltar; for if there were any such Communications, the Water keeping its Level, the Mediter∣ranean, being the lowest, must by those Pas∣sages receive Waters from the Ocean; and not the Ocean, which is (as we have proved) the highest, from the Mediterranean. Hence it necessarily follows, that the Mediterranean spends more in Vapour than it receives from the Rivers; which is Mr. Halley's Conclusion; tho in some of his Premises or Hypotheses he is, I think, mistaken, as 1. In that he enumerates the Tyber amongst his nine great Rivers, each of which may yield ten times as much Water as the Thames; whereas I question whether that yields once so much; and whereas
he passes by all the rest of the Rivers as smaller than it; there are two that I have seen in Italy it self, whereof the one, viz. the Arnus, on which Florence and Pisa stand, seemed to me not inferiour in bigness to the Tiber; and the other, viz. the Athesis on which Verona stands, I could not guess to be less than twice as big. 2. In that he thinks himself too liberal in allowing these nine Ri∣vers to carry down each of them ten times so much Water as the Thames doth. Whereas one of those nine, and that none of the big∣gest neither, viz. the River Po, if Ricciolus his Hypotheses and Calculations be good, affords more Water in an hour, than Mr. Halley supposes the Thames to do in a day; the hourly Effusions of the Po being rated at eighteen millions of Cubical Paces by Ricciolus; whereas the daily ones of the Thames are computed to be no more than twenty five millions three hundred forty four thousand Cubical Yards of Water by Mr. Halley: but a Geometrical Pace con∣tains five Feet, i.e. 1⅔ of a Yard. Now if the Po pours so much Water hourly into the Sea, what then must the Danow and the Nile do? each of which cannot (I guess) be less than treble of the Po. Tanau, Borysthenes and Rhodanus may equal, if not exceed it. Howbeit I cannot approve Ric∣ciolus
his Hypotheses, judging them to be too excessive, but do believe that as to the whole Mr. Halley comes nearer the truth▪ Sure enough it is, that in the Mediterranean, the Receipts from the Rivers fall short of the Expence in Vapour: tho in part of it, that is the Euxine, the Receipts exceed, as ap∣pears from that there is a constant Current sets outward from thence through the Thra∣cian Bosphorus, and Hellespont. But tho the Mediterranean doth indeed evaporate more than it receives from the Rivers, yet I believe, the Case is not the same with the Caspian Sea; the Superficies whereof seems to me not to bear any great∣er proportion to the Waters of the Rivers that run into it, than that of the Euxine doth to it; which we have observed not to spend the whole Receipt in Vapour. You'll say, Why then do not great Floods raise the Seas? I answer, As to the Caspian, if it communicates with the Ocean, whether the Rivers bring down more or less, its all one; if more, then the Water keeping its Level, the Caspian raiseth the Ocean; if less, then the Ocean communicates to the Caspian, and raises that. But as to the Mediterra∣nean, we may say, that when it receives more on the one side, it receives less on the other, the Floods and Ebbs of the Nilus and
the other Rivers counterbalancing one ano∣ther; Besides by reason of the Snows lying upon the Mountains all Winter, the greatest Floods of those great Rivers in Europe do not happen when the Mediterranean evapo∣rates least in the Winter-time; but in the Spring. You'll demand further, if the Mediterra∣rean evaporates so much what becomes of all this Vapour? I answer, it is cast off upon the Mountains, and on their sides and tops is condensed into Water; and so returned a∣gain by the Rivers unto the Sea. If you proceed to ask what becomes of the Surplusage of the Water, which the Me∣diterranean receives from the Ocean, and spends in vapour; I answer, It seems to me, that it must be cast further off over the tops of the Mountains, and supply in part Rain to these Northern Countries: for we know that the South-Wind brings Rain, with us and all Europe over. As to the great Ocean, I do not believe that it evaporates so much as the Mediterra∣nean; both 1. Because the whole Mediter∣ranean, excepting the Euxine, lies in a hot Climate, and a great part of it as it were in a Valley, Ridges of high Mountains, At∣las on one side, and the Alps and Apennine, &c. on the other running along it. And
2. Because the Surface of the whole Ocean bears a greater proportion to the Waters it receives from the Rivers of at least this Con∣tinent, than that of the Mediterranean doth to its. And therefore I think also that Mr. Halley exceeds in his Estimate of the Heat of the Superficies of the Sea Water. I can∣not persuade my self, that were it all com∣mixt, I mean the hotter part with the cooler all the Surface over to such a thickness, it would equal the heat of our Air in the hottest time of Summer. But I leave that to fur∣ther Trial and Enquiry. Here give me leave to suggest, that we are not to think, that all the Vapours that supply our Rains and Dews proceed from the Sea; no a great part of them, viz. all that, when condensed, waters the Earth, and serves for the Nutrition of Plants and Animals, (if not the same individual Water at least so much) was exhaled out of the Earth before, and re∣turned again in Showers and Dews upon it. So that we receive no more from the Sea, than what the Rivers carry back, and pour into it again. But supposing Mr. Halley's Hypotheses to be good, and that the Ocean doth evaporate, and cast off to the dry Land 1/10 of an inch thickness daily, and this suf∣fices for the Supply of all the Rivers; how intolerably extravagant must their Hypothe∣ses
be, who suppose the Rivers of all the World together to yield half an Ocean of Water daily? Though I must confess my self to be at a loss as to those vast Rivers of Ame∣rica of ninety Miles broad; for if they should run with any thing a swift Current, it is in∣deed inestimable what a quantity of Water they may pour forth. All therefore that I have to say of them is, that we want a true History and Account of their Phaenomena from their Fountains to their Out-lets. Pag. 72. lin. 29. and of Gravity; I add also of Magnitude: which is ex∣ceedingly convenient, as well for the facility as the equability of the Earths diurnal mo∣tion. This Hypothesis of the Continents be∣ing dispersed equally on all sides of the Globe makes these Centers concur in one Point, whatever cause we assign of the rais∣ing up of the Dry Land at the first. Whereas if we should suppose the Dry Land to have been raised by Earthquakes only on one side of the Globe, and to have cast off the Wa∣ter to the other, and also that the Water could find no way into the Caverns that were left within; then the watery side must needs preponderate the land-side, and bring the Center of Gravity nearer to its Superfi∣cies; and so raise the land-side still a great deal higher, and make a considerable di∣stance
between the Centers of Magnitude and of Gravity. In our Hypothesis of the equal dispersion of the Continents and Islands no such thing would happen: but each Con∣tinent, taking it with all its internal Ca∣verns, whether lighter or heavier than its bulk in Water, that is, Whether the Water did make its way into the Caverns thereof, or did not; (for in the first Case it would be heavier, in the second lighter) would have its counterpoise on the opposite side; so that the Centers would still concur. The Case would be the same if the Dry Land were discovered, and the Mountains raised by the immediate application of the Divine Power. Pag. 94. after lin. 15. add, Since the receipt of this Letter, an Expe∣riment (give me leave so to call it) occur∣red to me, which much confirmed me in the belief and persuasion of the truth of those Histories and Relations which Writers and Travellers have delivered to us concerning Dropping Trees in Ferro, S. Thome, Guiny, &c. of which before I was somewhat diffident; and likewise in the approbation of the Hy∣pothesis of my Learned Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson for the solving of that Phoenomenon. The same also induces me to believe, that Va∣pours may have a greater interest in the pro∣duction of Springs even in temperate and cold
Regions, than I had before thought. The Experiment or Observation is this, About the beginning of December 1691. there happened to be a Mist, and that no very thick one, which continued all day: the Vapour whereof, notwithstanding the Trees were wholly divested of Leaves, con∣densed so fast upon their naked Branches and Twigs, that they dropped all day at such a rate, that I believe the Water destil∣ling from a large Tree in twenty four hours, had it been all received and reserved in a Vessel, might have amounted to a Hoggs-head. What then may we rationally conje∣cture, would have dropped from such a Tree; had it been covered with Leaves of a dense Texture, and smooth Superficies, apt to collect the Particles of the Vapour, and unite them into Drops? It is clear by this effect, that Trees do destil Water a pace when Clouds or Mists hang about them; which they are reported by Benzo constantly to do about the Foun∣tain tree in Ferro; except when the Sun shines hot upon it. And others tell us, that that Tree grows upon a Mountain too: So that it is no wonder, that it should drop abundance of Water. What do I speak of that Tree? all the Trees of that kind grow on the sides of vast Mountains, as Dr. Robin∣son
hath noted. Besides that in hot Regions Trees may in the night time destil Water, though the Air be clear, and there be no Mist about them, seems necessarily to follow, from Mr. Halley's Experiment. Now if there be in Mists thus much Va∣pour condensed upon Trees, doubtless also there is in proportion as much upon the Sur∣face of the Earth and the Grass: And conse∣quently, upon the Tops and Ridges of high Mountains, which are frequently covered with Clouds or Mists, much more, so much as must needs have a great interest in the production and supply of Springs, even in temperate Countries. But that invisible Vapours, when the Sky is clear, do at any time condense so fast up∣on the Trees, as to make them drop, I ne∣ver observed in England or elsewhere, no not in the Night-season; though I do not deny, but upon the Appennine and Southern side of the Alps, and elsewhere in the hotter parts of Europe in Summer Nights they may. How∣ever considering the Penetrancy of such Va∣pours, that in moist Wether they will insinu∣ate themselves deeply into the Pores of dry Wood, so that Doors will then hardly shut, and Chinks and Crannies in Boards and Floors be closed up, I know not but that they may likewise strike deep into the
Ground, and together with Mists contribute to the feeding and maintenance of Springs, in Winter-time, when the Sun exhales but little; it being an Observation of the Lear∣ned Meteor lib. 5. c. 7. Artic. 3. Fromondus, Quod hyeme nec nivali, nec imbrifera fontes tamen aquam largiùs quàm aestate (nisi valdè pluvia sit) vomant. That in Winters neither snowy nor rainy, yet foun∣tains powre forth more Water than in Summer, unless it happen to be a very wet season. Yet are their Contributions inconsiderable, if compared with the supplies that are afforded by Rains. And one reason why in Winter Fountains flow more plentifully may be, be∣cause then the Sun defrauds them not, nor exhales any thing out of the Earth, as in Summer time he doth. Therefore whenever in this Work I have assigned Rain to be a sufficient or only cause of Springs and Rivers, I would not be under∣stood to exclude, but to comprehend there∣in Mists and Vapours; which I grant to have some interest in the production of them, even in Temperate and Cold Regi∣ons; and a very considerable one in Hot. Though I cannot be persuaded, that even there they are the sole Cause of Springs, for that there fall such plentiful and long conti∣nuing Rains, both in the East and West In∣dies in the Summer Months: which must
needs contribute something to their Ori∣ginal. Pag. 169. lin. 19. add, This end and use of Mountains I find as∣signed by Mr. Halley in his Discourse con∣cerning the Original of Springs and Rivers,Philos. Trans. num. 192. in these words: This, if we may allow Final Causes, (and why may we not? What needs this hesitancy and dubitation in a thing that is clear?) seems to be the Design of the Hills, That their Ridges being placed through the midst of the Continents, might serve as it were Alembicks to distil fresh Water for the use of Man and Beast; and their heights to give a descent to those Streams, to run gently like so many Veins of the Macrocosm, to be the more beneficial to the Creation. Pag. 170. lin. 10. add, To summ up all relating to the Division and Disposition of the Water and Earth in brief. 1. I say, the Water being the lighter Ele∣ment doth naturally occupy the upper place, and stand above the Earth, and so at first it did. But now we see it doth not so; the Earth being contrary to its nature forcibly elevated above it; being (as the Psalmist phraseth it) founded above the Seas, and established above the Floods: and
this because it was best it should be so, as I shall clearly prove and deduce in particulars in another Discourse. 2. The Dry Land is not elevated only upon one side of the Globe; for then had it had high Mountains in the middle of it, with such vast empty Cavities within, as must be equal to the whole Bulk raised up, the Center of Magnitude must needs have been considerably distant from the Center of Gravity▪ which would have caused a very great and inconvenient inequality in the Motion of the parts of the Earth: but the Continents and Islands are so equally dis∣perst all the Globe over as to counterbal∣lance one another, so that the Centers of Magnitude and Gravity concur in one. 3. The Continents are not of exactly equal and level Superficies or Convexity. For then the Parts subject to the Course of the Sun, called the Torrid Zone, would have been, as the Ancients fancied them, unha∣bitable for Heat and Drought. But there are huge Ridges and extended Chains of lofty Mountains, directed for the most part to run East and West; by which Means they give free Admittance and Passage to the Va∣pours brought in by the Winds from the Atlantick and Pacifick Oceans; but stop and inhibit their Excursions to the North and
South, either condensing them upon their sides into the Water, by a kind of external Destillation; or by streightening and consti∣pating of them compelling them to gather into Drops, and descend down in Rain. These are great things, and worthy the Care, Direction, and Disposal of the Great and Wise Creator and Governor of all things: And we see they are accordingly excellently ordered and provided by him.
Some Greek and Latin Quotations Englished. Pag. 25. Lin. 7. THose Words of Lactantius, Ergo quoniam sex dierum, &c. signifie in English, There∣fore because all the Works of God were per∣sected (or finished) in six days, it is neces∣ary (or necessarily follows) that the World shall continue in this State six Ages, that is six thousand years▪ For the great Day of God is terminated in a Circle of six thou∣sand years: as the Prophet intimates, who saith, A thousand years in thy sight, O Lord, are but as one day. Pag. 26. lin. 25. , &c. He acutely calls the Death of the Elements their change into better. Pag. 32. Lin. 18. Cùm tempus advenerit, &c. When the time shall come, that the World again to be re∣stored (or to recover it self) shall perish, these things shall beat or mall themselves by
their own strength, the Stars shall run, or fall foul upon one another; and all the mat∣ter flaming whatever now shines according to its settled Order or Disposition shall then burn. Pag. 33. lin. 25. Resoluto mundo & Diis in unum confusis. When the World shall be dissolved, and the Gods confounded into one. Atque omnes pa∣riter Deos perdet Nox aliqua & Chaos. And in like manner a certain Night and Chaos shall destroy all the Gods. Pag. 34. lin. 10. , &c. That there shall some∣time be a change of the World into the Na∣ture or Substance of Fire. Pag. 36. lin. 5. , Then God not mitigating his an∣ger, but aggravating it, shall destroy by fire the whole Race of Mankind. Pag. 5. lin. 45. In plenum, &c. In summ, it is observed, that the measure of all Mankind becomes daily less, and that there are few taller than their Parents, the burning heat consuming the Luxury of the Seeds. Ibid. Terra ma∣los, &c. The Earth breeds now Men bad and small.
Pag. 107. lin. 20. Non procul, &c. Not far from the Moun∣tain called Paterno, where the Bononian Stone is gotten, about an Italian Mile distant, (the name of the place is slipt out of my memory) is a huge hanging Mountain, broken by the violence of the Torrents, caused by the con∣fluence of Waters descending from the Neigh∣bouring Mountains after frequent Showers, throwing down great heaps of Earth from it. In the upper part of this broken Moun∣tain are seen many Beds or Floors of all kind of Sea-shells, much Sand interposing between Bed and Bed, after the manner of stratum super stratum, or Layer upon Layer, as the Chymists phrase it. The Beds of Sand in∣terceding between these Rows of Shells were a yard thick or more. These Shells were all distinct or separate one from another, and not stuck in any stone, or cemented to∣gether, so that they might be singly and se∣parately viewed and handled with ones Hands. The Cause whereof was their be∣ing lodged in a pure Sand not intermixt with any Mud or Clay, which kept the Shells en∣tire for many Ages. Yet were all these Shells, by reason of the length of time they had lain there, easily resoluble into a purely white Calx or Ash.
Pag. 133. lin. 17. Prodigiosi, &c. Prodigious and lasting Defects of the Sun, such as happened when Caesar the Dictator was slain, and in the War with Anthony, when it was continually pale and gloomy for a whole year. Pag. 185. lin. 5. Ego non audeo tempora dinumerare, &c. I dare not calculate times, neither do I think, that concerning this matter any Prophet hath predicted and defined the Number of Years: What therefore the Lord would not have us to know, let us willingly be ignorant of. FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed and Sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Church-Yard. THE Honourable Robert Boyl's New Experiments Phi∣sico-Mathematical, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air and its Effects. Quarto. —Considerations touching the Usefulness of Experimen∣tal Natural Philosophy, &c. Quarto. —An Experimental History of Cold. Quarto. —An Essay about the Origine and Virtues of Gems. Oct. —Experiments relating to Flame and Air, and about Explisions. Octavo. —Essays of the strange subtilty, and nature of Essu∣viums. Octavo. —Observations about the Saltness of the Sea, with a Dialogue about the positive and privative nature of COld. Oct. —Suspicions about the hidden Qualities of the Air, &c. against Hobbs. Octavo. —Experiments, &c. about the Mechanical Origine or Production of divers particular Qualities. Octavo. —The Sceptical Chymist, or Chymico-Physical Para∣doxes and Experiments about the producbleness of Chymi∣cal Principles Octavo. —The Natural History of human Blood, and the Spirit of that Liquor. Octavo. —Experiments about the parosity of Bodies, in two Es∣says. Octavo. —The natural Experimental History of Mineral Waters. Octavo. —Of Speciick Medicines, and the Advantages of the Use of Simple Medicines. Octavo. —Great Effects of languid and unheeded motion, with the Causes of the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air and its Effects. Octavo. —Medicina Hydrostatica, or Hydrostaticks applyed to the Materia Medica, shewing how divers Bodies used in Physick may be discovered whether Genuine or Adulterate. Octavo. 1690.
