r865 11885572 50362
A RELATION Of the Re-taking of the ISLAND OF STA HELENA, And Three Dutch East-India SHIPS. Published by Authority. In the SAVOY, Printed by Thomas Newcomb. M.DC.LXXIII.
A RELATION Of the Re-taking of the ISLAND of STA HELENA, and Three Dutch East-India Ships. ON the Fourth of May last in the Morning, We came in sight of the Isle of Sta. Hele∣na; in two hours after, We had con∣cluded what to do, for the Re-taking of the Island, and Ordered 200 Men, with Field-Colours and Officers, ap∣pointed to be put on Board a Vessel, out of which they might be Landed, whilst We Attacked the Ships in the Road, in case there should be any there; About 11. in the Forenoon, the Assistance Fregat made Sayl, that we might be near in the night, to discover the Strength of the Road, the rest of our Ships having furled all their Sayls, lay so till the Evening, and came in to Us in the Night; The next Morning about seven of the clock, all our Ships being to Windward of the Isle about five Miles, Our Boat came on Board, and told us, That the Road was clear, so We immediately put 200 Men more on Board the Castle Fireship, and left her and the other Vessel to Land our 400 Men, to Windward of the Island, in Prosperous Bay; The
four Men of War, made Sayl for the Forts, against which We Anchored about one in the Afternoon, and after four hours Dispute, went to the Westward, and there let go our Anchor again, being confident out Men must be Lan∣ded, and Gained the Hills before that time, and that by the next Morning We might expect them on the back of the Forts, against which time it was resolved, to have the William and Thomas, and one Ship more, close under the Fort. The Dutch no sooner saw us come up again, and that We did not intend to leave them, but they came off and yielded the Island, upon condition, That they might not be Stripped, which We accepted, they not yet knowing of any Army that We had Landed; At Sun-set We took Pos∣session of James Fort, and dispatched a Trumpet to Cap∣tain Keigwin, Commander of our Land Force, to acquaint him with what had passed, to prevent any Injury that might be done to the Isle by our Men, in their March to the Fort. On the Eleventh, between seven and eight in the Evening, a Ship appeared in sight, with a Flag aloft, which We cut after, and by eleven at night, came up with her, and took her, which proved one of the Dutch East India Fleet, sent before with the new Governor for Sta. Helena. On the 26 early in the Morning, We saw our Flags on the Mount hoisted, which gave us an Account, That there were six Sayl n sight; About ten in the forenoon We had Advice, that four were coming one way, and two the other, who immediately appeared in sight, at both ends of the Island; They no sooner saw us, but clapped by a Wind, and We after them; The Assistance, the William and Thomas, and the Castle Fireship to the Eastward, with one Merchant Man, after Four; The Mary and Martha, with two Merchant Men, to the Westward, after Two; but it being a very hard Gale, We could do nothing on them; At night the Assistance got up with their Vice-Admiral, and the William and Thomas with their Admiral, whom they kept company all night, and the 27. in the Morning took them, but not in compa∣ny one with the other, every Ship Steering his own Course, believing by that, to lose us. The said four Men of War, Fireship, and three Dutch East-India Prizes, together with five English East-India Ships, who came in Company with the Men of War, are since safely arrived. FINIS.
