s1147 13704083 101458
ACT, Ordaining some Horsemen to be Levied out of the several Shires of this Kingdom. Edinburgh,the eighteenth day of April, 1689. THe Meeting of the Estates finding it necessary, that this Kingdom be put in a posture of Defence, for Security thereof, alswel against the danger of Invasion from Abroad, as any Intestine Trouble that may fall out therein; And for that effect, that a competent number of Forces be raised, and keeped up within the same; Therefore they Ordain, the number of Horsemen aftermen∣tioned, to be Levied and Raised from the Shires of this Kingdom, which are lyable, and have been in use to Out-reik Horses, being the fourth part of their proportions, contained in the 27 Act of the Par∣liament 1663. as follows, viz. From the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk thirty seven Horses; From the Shire of Berwick eighteen Horses and the half of an Horse; From the Shire of Haddingtoun eighteen and an half, From the Shire of Edinburgh eighteen and an half; From the Shire of Peebles seven and the fourth part of an Horse; From the Shire of Linlithgow ten, and the half of an Horse; From the Shire of Dumfreis twenty two; From the Shire of VVigtoun and Stewattry of Kirkcudbright twenty two; From the Shires of Air and Renfrew, fourty four; From the Shire of Lanerk, thirty seven; From the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, twenty two; From the Shires of Fife and Kinross; fourty four, From the Shire of Perth, fourty four; From the Shire of Forfar, twenty five Horses and three fourth parts of an Horse; From the Shire of Kincardin and Marischals part of Aberdenes Shire, eighteen Horse and an half; From the Shire of Bamff, and Errols part of the Shire of Aberdene, fourty four; From the Shires of Elgin, Nairn, and this side of Ness, twenty two; From the Earl of Seaforth, and Lord Lovat their Division of Inverness, twenty two; From the Shires of Sutherland and Caithness, and the rest of Inverness, twenty two Horses. And the Estates Do Ordain and Require, the Commissioners of the Militia, and the Leaders of the Militia Horses in the saids Shires, to meet at the Head-Burghs of the several Shires, viz. These on this side of the North-Water-Bridge, upon the twenty fifth day of April instant; And these benorth the said Bridge, upon the second day of May next: And appoints the several Sheriff-Clerks to Conveen them to that effect: And Ordains the saids Commissioners and Leaders, being mett, to Proportion, and cause to be Outreiked, their respective numbers of Horses above-exprest, according to the Rule of the Militia, with ten days Provision, and to appoint the Frac∣tions to be paid in to the Leaders within fourty eight hours after the Cast shall be made, and in case of refusal or delay, to appoint the Commanding Officer to quarter upon the Deficients, and to cause deliver the Horsemen Outreiked, to some of the Officers who shall be appointed to receive and Com∣mand them, at the Head-Burgh of the Shire upon the days following, viz. For these Shires on this side of the said North-Water-bridge, on the second day of May next; And these be-north the said Bridge, upon the ninth day of May: And the Estates do Nominat and Appoint Major Hugh Buntine, and such other persons as shall be Deputed by him to Muster the said Horsemen, and to see that the Horses be sufficient, each Horse worth at least ten Pound Sterling, and the Ryders and Horses sufficiently pro∣vided with Arms and Furniture, to the value of five Pound Sterling. And it is hereby Declared, That the said Horsemen shall be taken into the Kings Pay, according to the Establishment of this Kingdom, after expiring of the ten days, for which they are appointed to be provided by the Out∣reikers, as said is. And Ordains these Presents to be Published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh; and likewise appoints the Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires to cause Publish the same at the Mer∣cat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the respective Shires, that none may pretend Ignorance. Ex∣tracted out of the Records of the Meeting of he Estates, by me Al. GIBSON, Cls. Edinburgh, Prined in the Year, 1689.
