S2205 13135504 97911
A Seasonable ADDRESS To the Right Honourable, the LORD MAYOR, Court of Aldermen, AND COMMONERS Of the CITY of LONDON, Upon their Present Electing of SHERIFS. By PHILO-PATRIS, Citizen, &c. My LORD, and Fellow-Citizens, IT is now high time to consider of an Expedient to cure the Distem∣pers that so much prevails in our Corporation, since Matters are grown to such a hight, that too many amongst Ʋs, think it their Great Interest to Cross, yea, and Oppose too the present Constitu∣tion of the Government: Have we not already been deluded by the Subtilties and Contrivances of the buisy Jesuit? and the Male-contented men amongst Ʋs? to Act such things within the Me∣mory of Man, which has exposed Ʋs to the Scorn and Contempt of all Nations round about us: Have we been led into Rebellion by their Stratagems and Devices, and with our Power and Purses destroyed the best Government, and the best of Kings? and shall we still be deluded; have we not enough smarted under the Tyranny
and Cruelty of Murderers and Ʋsurpers, who brought us so low, that if the imme∣diate hand of God had not interpos'd, and restor'd us to Peace and Settlement, we had certainly been the most miserable Nation in Europe; and after all this to be forgiven all our Murders, Rebellions, and whatever Crimes we had committed against our lawful King and Government, still to murmure and repent, and fill our  with Complaints, as if we had rather return again to our old Trade of ove∣nting, and Curse ye Meroz, then live in Peace and be obedient to our Gover∣nours. Surely the hand of Heaven has been upon us by Warrand Plague, will that give us no Warning neither? Nay do we not see a sensible Decay and Poverty,  wasting of the very Spirit and Life of the City and Nation, occasioned by the Discon∣tents and Confusions, that are among us, whereas had we united and lovd one ano∣ther (though of different Perswasions in Religion) or had we all joyn'd together to oppose Popery, Prophaness, and the Outrages of Fanaticism, and been contented un∣der the several dispensations of Governments since the Kings Return, been obedient to the Laws, and true lovers of our King, and of our own Peace me might have now been the happiest City in the World. Oh my Lord, I wish that these things may ne∣ver again be told of in Gath, nor Published in the Gates of Askalon, least the An∣tichristian Crew Tryumph, and Sing their Io-Paeans on our Destruction. Do we not plainly see that the same principled men are now again working their Designs, to put us, in the same confusion as before? See what Affronts, what Inso∣lencies are daily offer'd to the Persons of Governours and the Government, How many little Citizens become (in their own opinion) States-men, and instead of minding their Shops and Business, are hearded into little Parties, to consider what are fit Instruments to be set up to carry on their little Policies against the establish'd Government and Laws? So that it is high time, My Lord and Bretheren, that we (who love our King, and the true Reformed Religion is Establish'd among us by Law) be very diligent to put the Laws in Execution against such publick and scandalous Offenders, since all the fair Means imaginable will not perswade them to Unity and good Order. My Lord and Fellow Citizens, why shall we permit our Adversaries to triumph over us thus, with their noise and non-sense? Let us stand up like Men of Courage, and hand in hand joyn together against the torrent of Jesuitical Plots and Fana∣tical-Rage, lest we all perish in the gainsaying of Corah. Is it not too obvious to us all, that those very many Testimonies we have had of a Damnable Popish Design to subvert our Government, are now become highly esteemed of through the Follies of those that testified? Do we not see those very Men, instead of joyning with the Church of England, (the only Bulwark to keep Popery out, secure the Monarchy, and keep us in Peace and Ʋnity) follow the discontented men amongst us; nay as if there were a kind of agreement made between Rome and Geneva? Have we not seen what misguided Zeal has formerly done? And did we not see men lately in Authority among us, pursuing Popery so hot, that the very Effigies of our Saviour must be made Fuel, with the other Superstitious Rags of Antichristian Trumpery Thus we cry out Popery, Jesuits, Popishly affected, &c. and lead our selves at the same time into Confusion or Destruction. Let us but keep quiet, submit to our Governours and our Laws, and then we need not fear Popery, nor (which is as bad) Arbitrary Government. Have we not seen among the Crew of our late Refor∣ming Murderers, a notorious Jesuite, triumphing to see the Sacred Head of the best of Kings taken off even at his own Gate (as the Famous Du Moulin offers to prove) and shall we still be blind, and not consider that the very same Emissaries (since they could not effect their late bloudy Designs) are now amongst us in Sheeps cloa∣thing, blowing up the Coals of Sedition and Discontent, on purpose to accomplish their work in the midst of our Confusions.
Wherefore, my Lord, It highly concerns us all to look home, since our King and Government is in danger, that we admit none into any publick places of Trust in our City, but such as are of undoubted Loyalty, and great Integrity, not such who can swallow Oaths upon Oaths, and contradictory ones too, when it serves their Interest, not such who have laid themselves forth for the pretended good of the Subject, in all changes of Government among us. Then shall we bear Testimony of our Sincerity to maintain the true Interest of our King, and the true Reformed Religion. For what trust ought there by the King or Ʋs, be put into Their hands, who are men of such dangerous Principles? Or what security can there be given for them, when Zeal, and the advantages of high Places, and love of Faction, shall byass them under the changes of any Government. Oh that we did all consider our own Interests and Peace, and that we would lay it to heart before it be too late, Let not our Murmurings and Repinings, nor our Po∣pish and Factious Designs, provoke the King to Wrath, let us remember what the Wise man said, The Wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death, but a Wise man will pacifie it. Let us not forfeit our Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; throw away our Peace, our Religion, Liberty and Property, for the sake of a few Scraps of Policie and Faction, which will be our Ruine. Let us not under the notion of Zeal for the Protestant Interest be Protestants frighted out of our Wits. Thanks be to God we have a good King, a King that has expressed more affection to us by his frequent Vi∣sits, by adding large Immunities to our City, then was ever done by many of our Kings before him, and Thanks be to God he may live many Years to Reign over us (which God Grant) so that what ever Fears and Jealousies we have of Popery, & to be sure we are safe both in our Religion and Property as long as the King lives, and we cannot but know that 'tis not so easie a matter to introduce Popery amongst us, as 'twill be a Common-Wealth (the bottom of all these Designs) when once, our Di∣visions drive us into Rage and Madness. My Lord, I have my Being amongst you, and would not willingly see my Bre∣thren led away again into Captivity under n Task-Masters; Let us all unite in Brotherly Love, and let those who endeavour to widen our differences, by Preach∣ments and Coffee-House Discourses, be strictly called to an Accompt, according  the Law Commands, that we may be once again reduced to a state of Peace and Hap∣piness among our selves. My Lord, Now whatever reasons they are that do perswade the Discontented Par∣ty amongst us, to be out of Love with Peace and Ʋnity, and the present settlement, I am sure they can no ways compensate the Mischiefs which do of Consequence attend such Actions. My Lord, I have no Design in sending this Address to Your Lordship, but to cast in a Mite according to my duty at this juncture of time, endeavouring to per∣swade my fellow Citizens that they would become good Mens, and good Christians, and that I am sure the Consequence will be Peace and Tranquility in our Israel; for, My Lord what ever Interests are set up against the Established Law of this Kingdom, either in Church or State, must lead to Sedition and Rebellion, from which as 'tis your Lordships Care and Duty to prevent, so I do assure your Lordship, that notwithstanding the noises the Popish and Fanatick Rage may make, You will find that nothing can secure us but by observing these Oaths, that oblige Magistrates to put in Execution such Laws as may curb the Insolencies of such Persons, My Lord, and Fellow-Citizens, I am, Your Obedient Servant, LOVE. London July 19th. 1680.
POSTSCRIPT. MY LORD, I Shall not fail to acquaint Your Lordship in a few Days, (God willing) both with my Name, and Place of Living; that what I have written may not be taken for a LIBEL, but the well meaning of a true Lover of the KING, and His Royal Interest, the Church of ENGLAND, and this Honourable CITY, and all the Honourable Members thereof.
