S2218 13135467 97906
A Seasonable Caution to all LOYAL SUBJECTS, AGAINST Antimonarchical Principles. In an Answer to a pretended Petition of the Common Hall, in London, assembled on Midsummer-Day last, to the Honourable House of Commons; which is designed for a Vindication of the Common Hall, as innocent of the Affront and Indignity thereby offered, by some ill-minded Persons in their Name, to the Supreme Authority. WHereas the said printed Paper (which, verbatim, follows in the last part of this sheet) was soon after Midsummer last published, under the Title of, An Account of the Proceedings of the Common-Hall, on Midsummer-day last; thereby pretending it to be done to prevent Misrepresentation; and asserting a Petition therein set forth, to be unanimously approved of, and agreed upon, by that pub∣lick Assembly of the Livery, representing the whole City of London,) to be presented to the High Court of Parliament: To which, this Answer was then immediately printed, with Allowance, and some thousands put in∣to the Hawkers Hands, which were so in∣dustriously bought up, or stifled, that very few Copyes came to light: But now the same Paper having been (as we are informed) se∣cretly spread abroad amongst their Majesties Subjects, as well in the City as also into most Corporations, and other parts of the King∣dom, (for what design let sober and thinking Men judge,) to the great reproach of this City, and dissatisfaction of many honest and well-meaning Persons; who from thence, and from the restless Endeavours of some Men, who by the same unusual Methods, which they condemned as Crimes in others, do now create and set up instruments to serve their own Turns, though to the disturbance and hazard of the Publick. We are under a necessity, by this Answer, again to counter∣mine such dangerous and pernicious Engi∣neers. We cannot imagine it was so Printed and Published with any colour of Authority, but must rather conclude it was done by some ill minded Persons, to cast an Odium on this great City, and to create Misunderstandings between their Majesties Subjects, under a disguise of Opposition to Popery, though principally designed to serve their own Turn. 'Tis true, and cannot be denyed, than a small number of Citizens (when so duly assem∣bled) make a Common-Hall, and the Petition in that sense, may not improperly be so styled: But it doth not from thence follow, that the Matters contained therein were assented unto, so as to be approved of, and desired by more Persons than were so assem∣bled together, and personally present ap∣proving of the same, when it was read and proposed to them. And therefore we do judge it a duty high∣ly incumbent on us, (as we are Members of that great Body, and were the same Day present in Common Hall, but heard not one Word of that Petition) to publish this Apo∣logy on behalf of our selves and the whole City, as a Vindication (of that great Body) humbly offered to their Sacred Majesties, and both Houses of Parliament, as also to the whole Kingdom; for which we have this to say, That the Authors and Managers of that Imposture, are either affraid or ashamed to own it; and this we do also to prevent (as much as in us lies) the evil Influence that Pa∣per may have on the Minds of easie and cre∣dulous Persons: To the end Truth it self (which needs no little arts or tricks to sup∣port it) may, by its own sinews, at last pre∣vail to undeceive such as have been already mis-informed thereby. We pass by the Matter of the Petition, and what entertainment it met withal from the House of Commons, as more fit for con∣sideration of our Superiours. And only take notice, how vehement and earnest some Men were, in that great Assem∣bly, to put the Commoners in Nomination before the sitting Aldermen, which greatly surprized many of the Electors; and it was manifest, scarce one in twenty understood the
Question when it was put, in regard of the Noise and Opposition, which was made by those that did apprehend it: And it could not but be matter of trouble (to such as so∣berly desire and consult the publick Peace and Tranquillity of this City) to observe what earnest endeavours were used to invert Or∣der and Decency therein, (as it were, shifting Feet and Face,) by postponing such as are already advanced to the Dignity of Senators, to their Inferiours in Nomination. And to behold such a zeal for particular Persons, as if they had combin'd and deter∣min'd before they came there (as one Man) to carry on a Dsign, rather for a particular Interest, than the whole, and with so much Heat and Passion, as if they would proclaim a prejudice towards all that opposed. These things we briefly touch upon, as matters deeply to be resented by every good Citizen, so as to endeavour they may be laid aside for the future, to promote that peace∣able Temper and publick Spirit, that should govern in every Breast, in order to prevent caballing, and private Clubs, to serve a Turn, to the hazard of our Publick Weal. And we shall now plainly declare what followed the publick Election; for Truth whereof we appeal to those many Hundreds then present, who are all ready to attest the same. When the choice of the Sheriffs, Chamber∣lain, Bridge Masters, and Ale-Conners, were made, we concluded the Work of that Day was over, not dreaming, in the least, of this Petition, or any other to be set up: But the Livery (as in a Congregation, when Sermon is ended) made all towards the door, crow∣ding to get out, as we our selves did when many hundreds were gone before before, and others pressing after; but never heard one Word of this Petition, till from the Votes of the House of Commons, which puts us upon enquiry of our Brethren concerning it. And at length we were informed by those that happened to be in the reer, that when most part of the Members were gone, or going away, this Petition was proposed to be read; and that they, with the rest remai∣ning, (out of curiosity to know the Contents,) held up their Hand for the reading of it; but solemnly affirmed, That most (of those so remaining) who so held up their Hands for reading it, did not hold up their Hands for presenting it. We shall close with our hearty Prayer to Almighty God, to make us every one sensible, how far we have all (even the best of us) come short of our Duty, that we may search our Hearts, and try our Ways, and see what cause we have all to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, both for our Hypo∣crisie and Profaneness. And that we may all of us endeavour to lay aside Pride, Passion, and Self-love, on the one hand, and Debauche∣ry and Immorality on the other; and labour more sincerely to discharge our Duty to God, our Neighbour, and our Selves, as the only Means to make us good Christians; and then we shall be sure to be good Subjects, and good Citizens; so as no longer to envy, despise, and rail at, or prosecute each other; but to love as Brethren, and to make Truth the badge of our Christian Profession. This is the only way to promote the Ho∣nour and Reputation of our National Church, and the Religion established by Law among us; whose Foundation is not laid in Hypocrisie, and aspiring Dominion, under a Disguise of Re∣ligion, to delude and ensnare the Honest and Well meaning to side with us, after the example of our Adversaries; whose Designs as they have been, so they still are, to un∣dermine and subvert the Government. There∣fore let us countermine them, in amendment of our lives, to crdit this our Holy Reli∣gion; which needs no other Reformation, but that of Manners in its Members; accor∣ding to its pure and wholesome Doctrine and Discipline. And as the Honourable House of Commons have, by their Impartial Votes, declared those who invaded Charters, &c. and those who endeavoured to take off the Penal Laws, and the Test, &c. to be equal Transgressors; though we are satisfied the Major part, on either side, might have had no such corrupt intention, as may render them Criminals, but rather acted by awe, influence, or misgui∣dance of others: So let us consider each other as Christians, and learn the Discipline of Self-Denial, (after our Redeemer's example,) to be more ready to forget and forgive, than (Devil like) to recriminate and revenge, and rake into each others Follies and Faults, tor∣menting only to be tormented, thereby pro∣voking one another, and God's vengeance on us all, when it is the duty of every one (For who hath so acted as not to need it?) ra∣ther to labour after, and press for an Healing Act of Indempnity, (and Woe be to them that have hitherto hindred it, as the only means to unite our Divisions in these our greatest dangers; and to support our Religion, Law, and Liberties, as the surest Bulworks against our Common Enemies. Here follows the said printed Paper, and pretended Petition, so published in the Name of the Common-Hall.
A true Account of the Proceedings of the COMMON-HALL, at the Election of Officers for the Year En∣suing, held at the Guild-Hall of the City of London, June 24. 1689. As also the Petition of the Citi∣zens of London to the Commons of England assembled in Parliament. ABout Eleven a Clock on the said Day, (the Hall being full of the Liveries of the respective Com∣panies) the Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen proceeded to the Hustings, where, after a Proclamation for Silence, made by the Common Cryer, there was a Speech made by the Deputy-Recorder, and after him another by the Common Sergeant, both setting forth the occasion of their being met there that Day; and desiring their procedure in the business of the Day, might be carried on with that Unanimity and Prudence, as might both promote their own Honour and Advan∣tage, and their Majesties Interest: Which Speeches were received with the Applause of the whole Hall. After which (the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen being withdrawn in the Council Chamber, and the Two Sheriffs remaining upon the Hustings) the Names of the Can∣didates for Sheriffs were Read; which were, Mr. Richard Chiswel, Stationer, Mr. Francis Child, Goldsmith, Mr. Richard Scot, Salter, Sir Thomas Lane Alderman, Cloathworker, Christopher Lethelier Alderman, Mr. John Hubland, Grocer, Mr. John Deagle, Draper; and some of these being Aldermen, and some Commoners, there arose a Dispute whether the Aldermen should have the Pre∣cedency in their Nomination, or whether they should be nominated promiscuously, without any distinction of Aldermen or Commoners; and the Question being put, it was carried for the latter, as the Right of the Hall. Then each Candidate being severally proposed to the Hall for their Suffrage, Christopher Lethelier, Esquire, Al∣derman, and Mr. John Hubland, Grocer, were Unanimously Chosen; and by the She∣riffs immediately declared to be duly Elected Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the Year Ensuing. In the next place, the Hall proceeded to the Election of a Chamberlain, the Candi∣dates being Sir Peter Rich, the late Cham∣berlain, Mr. John Jekyl, Mr. Matthew Meri∣ton, Mr. Leonard Robinson, Mr. Edward Hart∣wel, Mr. Edward Bushel, Mr. Benjamin Ducame, Mr.  Rooksby, who being severally propos'd to the Hall, the Majority appeared to be for Mr. Leonard Robinson; which being declared by the Sheriffs, there were some that cried out, A. Poll, a Poll; but the She∣riffs being desirous to save the Citizens that Trouble, proposed the putting up the Question a second time between Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Leonard Robinson; to which the Hall having consented, they were both propos'd to the Hall again; and the Majority then evidently appearing to be for Mr. Leo∣nard Robinson, he was a second time declared by the Sheriffs to be duly elected, and the Demand of a Poll was no farther insisted on. The Hall then proceeded to the Choice of Bridge-Masters, and Mr. Thomas Nicholas, and Mr. Isaac Puller (the former Bridge-Masters) were continued. They next proceeded to the Election of Auditors of the Chamber and Bridge House Accounts, and of them, Mr. John Morice, Mr. Peter Hubland, and Ralph Box Esq were continued; and for the fourth, Slingsby Be∣thel Esq and Mr. Justas Odgar were Can∣didates, but the Choice fell upon the for∣mer. Last of all, they proceeded to chuse their Ale-Conners, and the three surviving ones being continued, one Johnson was chosen for the fourth, in the room of him that was de∣ceased. The Election of Officers being thus over, there was immediately a Petition, (propo∣sed to be presented to the Honourable the House of Commons) given into the Hands of the Common Serjeant, to be read, for the Approbation of the Hall: And the Question being put, Whether it should be Read, or not? It was unanimously carried in the Affirmative; and after it was read, as unanimously approved; which was suf∣ficiently Testified both by several Vollies of
loud Shouts and Acclamations, and also by their desire to have it read again, which was done accordingly, and thereupon their Shouts and Acclamations were again repea∣ted. Then the Question was put, Who should present it? And it was carried by the whole Hall, That it should be presen∣ted by the Sheriffs and the common Ser∣jeant, with such other Citizens as the Sheriffs should think fit to accompany them. The Petition it self was as followeth: To the Honourable the Commons of England, in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the Citi∣zens of London in the Common Hall assembled. Most humbly Sheweth, THat the Body Representative of the City of London, in Common-Hall assembled, for the Choice of their Sheriffs, cannot but with all humble Thankfulness acknowledge upon this Occasion, the infinite Mercy of Almighty God, in his Gifts of heroick Courage, and excellent Conduct to His now Majesty; and Wisdom, and Council to your Honours, whereby the Pe∣titioners Right to elect their chief Magistrates freely and quietly, hath been wonderfully pre∣served, all their Liberties, and the very Being of Justice, Peace, and Prosperity in the City, de∣pending thereupon. That by the gracious Influence of Divine Providence, this City is become very powerful and a strong Bulwork for the defence of the Pro∣testant Interest, and the Security and Quiet of His now Majesty and the Kingdom; if an universal Amity and Ʋnity be preserved amongst the Prote∣stant Citizens, who do equally and perfectly re∣nounce and detest all Communion whatsoever with the Papacy, and the Roman Church, and adhere only to the Authority of the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament: The principal Danger impending over our English Church and State, being from the politick Popish Designs to divide the Protestants as they did heretofore in the beginning of the Reformation, whereby they first subdued and destroyed the Calvinists, and then with the like blood-thirsty-Cruelty suppres∣sed the Lutherans, whom they had deluded to help them in the Destruction of their Protestant Brethren. Your Petitioners therefore most Humbly Pray, That by the Wisdom and Justice of this Honourable House, the Ancient Right of this City freely to elect their Sheriffs, and other Magistrates, may be fully and clear∣ly vindicated from all Invasions of it, and Questions concerning it: And for that purpose, That the Bill for restoring Corporations to their Rights and Privi∣leges may be perfected, as Your weighty Affairs will permit. And in regard of the present dangerous Con∣spiracy of the Papists, and their Accompli∣ces, against the Protestant Religion, our King, and Government, and the Invasion threatned by the French King, whereby the united Force of all the Protestants is most apparently necessary; They pray that our Gracious King may be freed from all Re∣straints of using His Protestant Subjects, in∣differently, in His Military and Civil Services, according to their several Qua∣lities and Abilities, wherewith God Al∣mighty, Nature, Education and Experi∣ence, have endowed them, to that very end, that they might be useful to their King and Country, and therein serve their God in their Generation. Guild Hall, London, June 24. 1689. And your Petitioners shall always pray, &c. This Petition was the next day (viz. June 25.) presented to the Honourable House of Commons, who at first rejected it, for want of being sign'd; but being af∣terwards sign'd by the Sheriffs and Com∣mon Serjeant, as the sense of the Common-Hall; it was ordered by the House to be read, which was done accordingly. Thus much was thought necessary to be made publick for general satisfaction; as well to prevent Mis-representations, as to let the World know that the Citizens of London can now chuse their own Officers, without running the hazard of being indi∣cted for Rioters, and are now no more liable to have Officers imposed upon them against their Consents: For which valuable Mercy, let us all in the first place return our un∣feigned Thanks to Almighty God, as the blessed Author of it; and in the next place acknowledge the Goodness of their gracious Majesties, whom God has made the glorious Instruments thereof. And for whom there∣fore we ought all heartily to pray, God bless King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1690.
