S2413 12739630 93089
Threno-Maria. A Rapsodicall Essay ON THE DEATH Of our late Gratious Soveraign QUEEN MARY Of Ever-Blessed Memory. . Theoc. By Mr. Si. SEGAR. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Leving, at Gray's-Inn-Gate, next the Walkes. 1695.
Threno-Maria. A POEM on the DEATH of Her SACRED MAJESTY THE LATE GRATIOUS QUEEN MARY, &c. PLung'd ore in unexhausted floods of Brine, Not such, which round sad Albions Empire twine Their surly Waves: Nor in such Streams that swell, The hollow Veins of the Pierian Hill: But in full Cataracts of that Extent, The Eyes Alymbick never yet could Vent;
In such vast Deluges of Tears, whose stores And Crowding Conflux stopp'd the Optick Pores; My strugling Muse at last has burst my Brain, And forces me a tributary Swain, To pay the Homage of a Dolefull Strain: To Mourn the Royal shades contracted date, To Mourn the great Maria's hapless fate: That complex perfect All Maria; who When Stubborn Death had struck the dismall Blow, Gaurded by glorious Seraphs, Slumber'd hence Unto the Thrones of blest Omnipotence; Whilst the Extravagant Caelestial Choire, Weleom'd her Advent with transported Lyres. Oh! what sweet Hymns, what Anthems did they frame? What Halleluja's tun'd were to her Name? The Notes so charm'd, thro' use the busie Throng, Forgot the Accents of their Former Song;
That when their Wills attempted to rehearse Their dread Creator's facts in proper Verse; The silent strings flagg'd frighted at the touch, Nor could Angelick Art reduce them such; Maria still, no other Sacred sound, Would shake an Ela the Horrison round. But where am I? Close up my Muse again. The abrupt Numbers of a Mortal Pen (Tho' ne're so pure, extracted or calcin'd, Heaven-thought, and spun by an inspired mind) Can her bright Zenith blazon, or display The dazling Lustre, where her narrow Ray Creates one part o'th Everlasting Day. Crush therefore that Effort, and back retire, Least by to near Approach your Bard expire: Our Sacrilegious Fancy must not pry, Nor track the Steps of Immortality:
Come, leave the Empyrean Chambers, Come, Center your flights within the Circle Home: Let Albion, Let Albions wretched Isle, More curst than our prime Parents barren soil, Exhale your Sorrow to bemoan a while. Or let your Howls in savage Features tell, Th' immeasur'd Loss, when great Maria Fell; The heaps of Tortures, the Convulsive greif, The Horror that inwrapps our sunk relief, Our Agonies, Our Hell that stabb'd so late, The throbbing Vitalls of our bleeding State. But this is Labour too:—A Work immence, Excentrick from the scope of Human Sence. What fit Words, suited symptoms, outward signes? What marks, or what Characteristick Lines, Can give the true Idea; And the Pain Portray, the infant Globe did first sustain, (when tott'ring on the Hinges to and fro,
Thro' Adam's guilty Crime that damn'd it so.) The nodding Weight sway'd on the brink of Woe? They who that Can the same Disorders trace, May paint with equal Stroaks Brittania's Case: All other Drafts will else be weak and bare, Nor reach the heightn'd Passions suffer'd here. Nay! Now I fear beyond Comparison Maria's Death, in the Effects brought on. Lo! How a Chaos threat'ns its Return, T' intomb within th' Abyss of its own Urn The Universal Machine:—See! The Light, How eager it precipitates its flight, And is scal'd o're with an Eternal Night. The Crusted frame:—Look! Crumbles down; The Ball Shrunk, at the News to senceless Atoms fall: The Basis fails; Both Poles and Axis Crack, Th' Intelligences Faint, Their motions slack, The toiling Orbs grown feeble heavy move,
The Astral Pow'rs amaz'd at random rove, Since Blest Maria's gone, they careless roul: Since great Maria's fall; who was the Soul Of Nature, and whose Virtues did Cement, Th' intrinsick Concord in each Element. Could Death's tyrannick force extend so far, To Crop the Radix of the World in her? An Emperour (th' Infernall Pit's chief brood, More fat than other Monstrous Feinds with blood.) Once wish'd his Anger strong enough to doom A single Blow, that should disbowell Rome: He limited revenge, Confin'd his Hate One City's Ruine might him Satiate. But this Grim Monarchs sudden Avarice, Ha's supermounted That, His Artifice His ravinous Palate by one meal in gross, Hath quite Destroy'd whole Nations Genius; And all confus'd decay: Unless Nassaw
The pious Trouble for Maria awe: Our Roses fade, The Cambrian Feathers pale, The Thistles their low heads supinely drail, Batavia's Lyon reels the Eagle droops, And trembling Spain beneath the burthen stoops, Untill thy Pleasure shall revive their Troops. Rouse therefore mighty Prince, revert the Clouds Dispell the Mists and black Cimaerian shrouds; Tear thence the Stupifying Cypress boughs, That twist their Paleness on thy Laurell'd brows; Serene thy Aspect with a Sober Mirth, As flush'd thy dear Maria's breathing Earth. The Temper of the Climes are in Convulse, And swelling dangers puff up ev'ry Pulse; Their open Rifts for Comfort gape amain, Nor will they shut their dreadfull Wombs again, Till France repleat them with her Armies slain. And thou Heroick William must be He;
If ought a Poet e're could Prophecie, Or that his Prances can presage events, From past Transactions, present Accidents: 'Tis thy firm Hand together that must tye, The broken Threads of Europe's Destiny; And root up the presumptive Lilly'd Crown, That urg'd thy Thunder and provok'd thy frown. 'Tis thou great William for our loss and thine, Must act the Scene of cold Irena's Boyne In Gallia's reeking Gleebs: Whilst to reward Death's Insolence, who no Maria spar'd; Thy Foes shall dye so fast, the thronging store Shall Choke, and surfeit Death for evermore. Go, hast the Crisis then, Anticipate the fear; Let Death's Catastrophe begin the year, And after may thy Monarchy command The wide-extended Ocean and the Land; Or for thy Consorts life late took away May Heav'ns add Seav'ns to thee and crown thy head with gray.
How well Maria liv'd, Her constant Pray'rs That Chain'd the bent Jehovah's listning Ears; Her holy Flames, devout religious Fires; Unspotted Raptures and divine Desires, The Chast Devoirs that hung her Nuptial Bed; The frequent Alms her scatter'd bounty spread, Which with the Doner's now extinguished: The Sublime Meekness, decent Mercy seen; The Symbols of a Godhead and a Queen; Her mein Deportment and Majestick Grace, The modest Smiles that beam'd her Orient Face, Her Judgment, melting Language, Beautious form, Her prompt discretion in a lowring Storm, Her wit's large Magazines: How just she sway'd, How much admir'd, how lov'd and how obey'd: As those Endowments boundless, did excell Their Springs themselves and grand Original: Let Silence (the best Speaker) Comprehend, For Tongues to apt Expressions cant ascend. FINIS.
