T1050 R19739 11765742 48727
AN EPILOGUE TO THE TRAGEDY OF THE Church of England, BEING A Necessary Consideration and brief Resolution of the chief Controversies in Religion that divide the Western Church: Occasioned by the present Calamity of the CHURCH of ENGLAND; In three BOOKS: viz. Of I. The Principles of Christian Truth. II. The Covenant of Grace. III. The Lawes of the Church. By HERBERT THORNDIKE. LONDON, Printed by J. M. and T. R. for J. Martin, J. Allestry, and T. Dicas, and are to be sold at the sign of the BELL in St PAUL's Church-yard. M.DC.LIX.
A PREFACE To all Christian Readers. IT cannot seem strange, that a man in my case, removed by the force of the Warr, from the Service of the Church, should dedicate his time to the consideration of those Controversies which cause division in the Church. For, what could I do more to the satisfaction of mine own judgment, than to seek a solution, what truth it is, the oversight whereof hath divided the Church; and therefore, the sight whereof ought to unite it? But, that I should publish the result of my thoughts to the world, this, even to them that cannot but allow my conversing with those thoughts, may seem to fall under the Historians censure; Sipsum fa∣tigano nihil aliud quâm odium quaerere, extremae esse dementiae. That, to take pains to get nothing but displeasure, is the extremity of madness. Socrates (if wee believe his Apology in Plato) could never rest for his Genius, alwayes putting him upon disputes, tending to convict men, that they knew not what they thought they knew. The dis∣pleasure which this got him, hee makes the true cause of his death. The opinion which I publish, being indeed the fruit of more time and leisure, of less ingagement to the world, than others are under, will seem a charge upon those who ingage otherwise. And when, be∣sides, so much interest of this world depends upon the divisions of the Church; what am I to expect, but; Great is Diana of the Ephesi∣ans? My Apology is this. The title of Reformation which the late Warr pretended, menti∣oned onely Episcopacy and the Service. The effect of it was a new Confession of Faith, a new Catechism, a new Directory, all new; With chapter and verse indeed, quoted in the margine, but, as well over a∣gainst their own new inventions, as over against the Old Faith of the Church. This burthen was as easily kicked off by the Congre∣gations, as layed on by the Presbyteries; As carrying, indeed, no conviction with it, but the Sword, and what penalties the Sword should inforce it with. Which failing, what is come in stead of it, to warrant the salvation of Christians, but that the Bible is preached, (which, what Heresie disowneth?) and, by them whom the Tryers count godly men; Make they what they can of it. I, from my non age, had embraced the Church of England, and attained the Order of Priesthood in it, upon supposition that it was a true Church, and salvation to be had in it, and by it; Owning nevertheless (as the Church of England did own) the Church of Rome for a Church, in which, salvation, though more difficult, yet might be had and ob∣tained. That there is no such thing as a Church by Gods Law, in the nature of a Body, (which this state of Religion requireth) is oppo∣site
to an Article of my Creed, who alwayes thought my self a mem∣ber of such a Body, by being of the Church of England. The is∣sue of that which I have published, concerning that title of Refor∣mation which the Warr pretended, was this; That they are Schis∣maticks, that concurr to the breaking or destroying of the Church of England, for those causes. And, the objection there necessarily star∣ting; Why the Church of England no Schismaticks, in Reform∣ing without the Church of Rome; My answer was, that the cause of Reforming must justifie the change which it maketh, without consent of the Whole Church. For, the pretense of Infallibility in the Church on the one side, the pretense of the Word and Sacraments, for marks of the Church, on the other side, I hold equally frivolous; As, equally declaring a resolution, never to be tried by reason, in that which wee alwayes dispute. For, what dispute remains, i the Decrees of the Council of Trent be Infallible? If, that form of Doctrine and ministring the Sacraments, which the Reformation may pretend, be marks to distinguish a Church from no Church? If they were, where there is no such form, there are no such marks; And therefore, no such thing as a Church. Nor is it so easie to de∣stroy these doubts in mens judgments, as the Laws by which the Church of England stood. And, if the salvation of a Christian consist in professing the common Christianity, as I show you at large; shall not the salvation of a Divine consist in professing what he hath attained to believe, when, hee thinks, the exigent of the time renders it necessary to the salvation of Gods people? How shall hee, other∣wise, be ministerial to the work of Gods Grace, in strengthening them that stand, in comforting and helping the weak, in raising them that are fallen, in resolving the doubtfull, without searching the bot∣tom of the cause? Nay, how shall hee make reparation for the of∣fenses hee may have given, by not knowing that, which now, hee thinks hee knows? The causes of division have a certain depen∣dence upon common principles, a certain correspondence one with another, which, when it cannot be declared, the satisfaction which a man intends is quite defeated; when it is declared, that dissatisfa∣ction, which the consideration of particulars of less waight causeth, must needs cease. Whether it were the distrust of my own ability, or the love of other imployment, or, whatsoever it were, that diver∣ted mee from considering the consequence of those principles which I alwayes had, till I might come to that resolution, which now I de∣clare; Neither was I satisfied till I had it, nor, having it, till I had de∣clared it: And, if I be like a man with an arrow in his thigh, or like a woman ready to bring forth, that is, as Ecclesiasticus saith, like a fool, that cannot hold what is in his heart; I am in this, I hope, no fool of Solomons, but, with S. Paul, a fool for Christs sake. Now, the mischiefs which division in the Church createth being invaluable; all the benefit that I can perceive it yield is this, that the offenses which it causeth seem to drown, and swallow up as it were, that offense, which, declaring the truth, in another time, would pro∣duce. For, Unity in the Church is of so great advantage to the ser∣vice of God, and that Christianity from whence it proceedeth, that
it ought to overshadow, and cover very great imperfections, in the Laws of the Church; All Laws being subject to the like. Especial∣ly, seeing I maintain, that the Church, by divine institution, is, in point of right, one visible Body, consisting in the communion of all Chri∣stians, in the offices of Gods service; and ought, by humane admini∣stration, in point of fact, to be the same. For, the Unity of so great a Body will not allow, that the terms should be strict, or nice, upon which the communion thereof standeth; But obligeth all, tat love the general good of it, to pass by, even those imperfections in the Laws of it, which are visible, if not pernicious. But, where this Unity is once broken in pieces and destroye, and palliating cures are out of date, the offense which is taken, at showing the true cure, is imputable to them that cause the fraction, not to him that would ee it restored. For, what disease was ever cured, without offending the body that had it? The cause of Episcopacy, and of the Service, is the cause of the whole Church, and the maintenance thereof infer∣reth the maintenance of whatsoever is Catholick. Owning, there∣fore, my obligation to the Whole Church, notwithstanding my obli∣gation to the Church of England; I have prescribed the consent thereof, for a boundary to all interpretation of Scripture, all Refor∣mation in the Church. Referring my pinion, n point of Fact, what is Catholick, to them, who, by their Title, are bound to acknowledg, that, whatsoever is Catholick ought to take place. While all English people, by the Laws of the Church of England, had suffiin and probable means of salvation ministred to them; it had been a fault to acknowledg a fault, which, it was more mischief to mnd than to bear with. But, when the Unity that is lost may as well be obtained, by the primitive Truth and Order of the Catholick Church, as by that which served the turn in the Church of England, because it served to the salvation of more; I should offend good Christians, to think that they will stand offended at it. In fine, all variety of Religion, in England, seems to be comprised in three parties; Papists, Prelatical, and Puritanes; comprehending under that, all parties, into which the once common name stands di∣vided. All of them are originally, as I conceive, terms of dis∣grace; which therefore, I have not been delighted with using. This last, I have found some cause to frequent, when I would signifie some thing common to all parties of it. If with eagerness at any time; the English Proverb says; Loosers may have leave to speak. I finde my self disobliged by the Papists, in that, desiring to serve God with all Christians, they barr mee their Cōmunion, by clogging it with con∣ditions inconsistent with our common Christianity. I finde my self disobliged by the Puritanes, in that, desiring to serve God with all Christians, but acknowledging the Catholick Church; I stand obli∣ged by the Rule of it, not to communicate with Hereticks or Schis∣maticks. I complain for no Benefice, or other advantage. That, de∣siring to communicate with all Christians, I am confined, for oppor∣tunity of serving God with his Church, to the scartered remains of the Church of England; is that for which I complain. If, owning this offense, I suffer mine indignation, at the pretense of Inallibility,
or of Reformation, to escape from mee; I do not therefore intend to revenge my self by words of disgrace. Let him that thinks so call mee Prelatical, let him use mee with no more moderation than I use. In the mean time, I remain secured, that the offense which my opinion may give is imputable, in the sight of God, to those that cause the division. One offense I acknowledg, and cannot help; That I undertake a design of this consequence, and am not able to go through with it as it deserves. I should not have set Pen to pa∣per, till my materials had been prepared in writing, that no term might have escaped mee unexamined. Till the quotations of mine Authors had been all before mee, so as to need no recourse to the Copies. A labor, which, I have not been able every where to under∣go. In fine, till I had cleared all pretense of obscurity or ambi∣guity in my language. For, the obscurity of my mater I am not sory for. If, writing in English, (because here the occasion commences) the reasons, by which I determine the sense of the Scriptures in the Original, if, the consequence▪ o it, in some maters, seem obscure; I conceive it ought to teach the World, that the people are made parties to those disputes, whereof they are not able to be judges. And, I am willing to bear the blame of obscure, if that lesson may be learned by the people. The desire of easing my thoughts, by giving them vent, hath resolved mee to put them into the world ough-baked, on purpose to provoke the judgments of all parties, or the furnishing of a second Edition, (if God grant mee life) with that which shall be missing in this. I am therefore content, to con∣fine my self to the model of an abridgment, and referr my self, for the consent of the Church, to those books which I am best sa∣tified with, in each point. When that could not be done, I have alleged authorities, which I may call translatitias, because I lay them down as I finde them alleged; Not doubting, that I justifie my opinion, so farr as I desire to do here, that there is no consent of the Church against it. What the sense of the Church is positive∣ly, and hath been, (into which, I conceive, that which here I say hath made mee a fair entrance) I shall, upon examination of parti∣culars, indeavor to give satisfaction, in that which may be found missing here. In the mean time, it shall suffice to have advanced thus much, towards the common interest of Christianity, in the re-union of the Church. But let no man therefore barre mee the lot of Reconcilers; To be contradicted on all sides. I profess no such thing. It is enough for the greatest Powers in Christendom to undertake. If it be an offense, for a man of my years, equally concerned with all Christi∣ans in our common Christianity, to say his opinion, upon what terms the parties ought to reconcile themselves; it remains, that offenses remain unreconcileable. But, contradiction, from all parties, I shall not be displeased with. Hee that will tell mee alone, in writing, what hee findes fault with, and why, shall do a work of charity to mee a∣lone. Hee that will tell the world the same, shall do mee the same charity that hee does the world, in it. Hee who can delight in that barbarous course, which Controversies in Religion have been ma∣naged
with among Christians, by casting personal aspersions; Let him rather do it than be silent, provided the stuff hee brings be con∣siderable, to bear out such inhumanity among civil people. But, let him consider the dependences, and concernments, of the point hee speaks to; let him not say, for answer, that these things are an∣swered by our Divines. It is easie to make bjections, but not easie to clear difficulties. And, whether or no these difficulties were clear already, I must referr it to the Reader to judge. In the mean time, though no arbitrator, to chuse a middle opinion for par∣tis to agree in; I take upon mee the person of a Divne, in deliver∣ing mine opinion, what is true, not in confining the parties to a mean. Wee have seen two men of repute now amongst us cenure Grotius his labors upon the Scriptures; (from which, I acknowledg to have received much advantage) The one of them hath made him a So∣cinian, the other a Papist. Both could have given us no better argu∣ment that hee was neither, than this, that hee cannot be both. It is not my intent, to bring mens persons into consideration, with the common concernment of Christianity, and of Gods Church. To his own Master hee stands or falls. I do but instance in an eminent person, that must needs be a Papist, though never reconciled to the Church of Rome; That must needs be a Socinian, though appeal∣ing to the Original consent of the whole Church; Upon which terms, how should there be any such thing as Papists or Socinians? I remember an admonition of his bitter adversary Doctor Rivet▪ That the Sea of Rome will never thank him for what hee writ. And from thence I inferred, as charity obliged mee to inferr; That the common good of Christianity, and of Gods Church, obliged him to that, for which hee was to expect thanks on no side. This for certain; Grotius never lived by maintaining division in the Churc. Whether any body doth so or not, I say not. Their Master will judge them for it if they do. Now, to show the world, that I am in a capacity to recall any thing that I have said, upon due information; I will here pass a Review upon that which I have said, to the hardest point that I have spoke to; the agreement of Gods fore-knowledg and providence with contingence. For I conceive it had need be limited a little further, to be free from offene. That the consideration of the object, which providence presents a man with, determines the Will to every choice that it makes; (which I argue at large II. 24.) may be understood two wayes; in the nature of an object, (which belongs to the for∣mal cause, when wee speak of faculties, habits, and acts, which are specified by their objects, as the Scholes speak) or in the nature of an effective cause. Not as if the object were not the effctive cause, in respect to the act of deliberation: But because, in respect to the act of resolution, or choice, it determineth one∣ly as an object, without consideration whereof, the choice could not be made; not as a motive, effectively producing the choice. For I acknowledg, in point of reason, that there may be such contingencies as the School calls ad utrumlibet; where a man is no more inclined to this side than to that. And, in point of Faith,
I acknowledg, that, setting aside the temptations, by which, the Angels and our first parents that ell might be said to incline, rather to fall than to stand; as they were created by God, they were not inclined to fall, but to stand. Besides, should I say, that the ob∣ject ffctively determineth the choice, how should I say, that which I take express notice of pag. 200. that those contingen∣cis, wherein the will inclineth to the one side, as balanced by a propensity of disposition towards it, (not as every faculty is in∣clined to the object, to which it naturally tends) remain uncertain, as nevertheless contingencies, whatsoever probability that propen∣siy may create? And indeed, though it is a perfection in mans knowledg, rising from the consideration of the object, to say what is like to come to pass, though it fail; yet to Gods, which th from God alone, it were blasplemy to suppose it to fail, be∣cause then God should fail. The infalliblity, therefore, of it, no▪ being deivable from the object; must necessarily be resolved into the infinity, eternity, immensity of that perfection which is his nature, comprehending the future inclination and resolution of that will (moved with a consideration capable to determine it) which, nothing but the native freedom thereof effectively determi∣neth. And, if it be further demanded, how that reason can stand, which resolveth into that which no man understands; The answer is necessary, that, it is an argument of infidelity to demand how, in rs of Faith. It is, and ought to be sufficient, that it invol∣veth no manner of contradiction, that the thing which may not be, shll certainly be; and therefore, may be known and revealed by God, that it shall come to pass. For, if it be a point of perfecti∣on, rather to know this than not to know it, of necessity God must have it, how little soever wee understand how. And therefore, what appearance soever there may be, in the motives which the ob∣ject preenteth, agreeing with the present disposition of the Will, that choice wil follow; yet, so long as it continueth undetermined, though not indifferent, (by reason of the agreement, between the inclination thereof and the motives tendred) it is alwayes able to de∣termine it self to the contrary of that which it is moved to; though, not without appearance of a motive determining it otherwise. And the tender of that motive is that act of providence, in which, I say pag. 201. that Gods determining of future contingencies ends; consisting with another, whereby hee maintains the will in that abi∣lity of taking or refusing, which the creation thereof constituteth. In which case, hee who maintaineth, that it is not impossible for the infinite wisedom of God, comprehending all things, to see what man will do; shall not derive his fore-sight from the object, but from his very Godhead; Onely supposing, that it hath pro∣ceeded to the work of providence, in purposing to place every man in an estate so circumstanced, as at each moment hee compre∣hendeth. For, as man cannot proced to chuse this and not that, not supposing the consideration upon which the choice proceeds; (which also must make it a good or a bad choice) so neither doth God fore see his choice, not fore-seeing the motive which the ob∣ject
presenteth him with. Which, seeing hee fore-seeth in the pur∣pose of his providence, supposing that perfection of his Godhead, which his proceeding to the same requireth; It is manifest, that, according to this saying, that which hee seeth, hee seeth in himself, and not in his creature. Wherefore, I confess, it may be said, that, seeing a Divine, when hee is come thus farr, must stay here, and resolve the rest of his inquiries into the vast and bottomless chaos of Gods infinite per∣fections; it had been better to have said so at the first, and never have troubled the Reader with a discourse, to prove by the Scri∣ptures, that God considereth the state wherein his providence pla∣ceth men, for the ground upon which hee fore-seeth what they will do (which that XXIV. Chapter containeth) For, why should not our ignorance be as learned at the first, as at the last? But, that which hath been said, will serve to make the discourse no way superfluous. For▪ contingencies that shall be, though they be nothing before they cme to pass; yet is God something, and the purpose of his pence omething, for the placing of every man, every mo∣mn,   estate, which thereby hee fore-seeth▪ And the possibi∣lity o fore-seeing what will follow, being something, (because no conriction destroyes the consistence of the terms, inerrs, by the infi perfection of God, the actual fore-sight of what will come to p▪ though not in it self, which is nothing, yet in God, who is all things. And, all this involving no predetermination of mans will by God; the discourse cannot be superfluous, which resolveth the fore∣sight of future contingencies into the decree, which supposeth the knowledg of things conditionally future, not which inferreth the fore knowledg of things absolutely future. For, by this means, no∣thing that is found in the Scripture will contradict the substance of Faith, which predetermination destroyeth; though disclaiming all possibility of making evidence to common sense, how it may come to pass. And, though Gods decree to permit sin, can be no sufficient ground of his fore sight, that, what hee hindreth not shall come to pass; as I have argued, pag. 209. yet, if wee consider withall, that there is no question of Gods permitting any man to sin, but onely him that is prevented with temptation to sin; it may not untruly be said, that God fore-sees sin in his own deccee of permitting it, in∣cluding the state of him that is tempted, in that case, wherein God decrees to permit sin. In which case, God fore-seeth it properly, in his decree of placing the man in that estate, not of suffering himto sin; which, the opinion that I contradict, in that place, absolutely refuseth. And upon these terms, when it is resolved Chap. XXVI. that predestination to the first Grace is absolute, you must not un∣derstand predestination to the act of conversio; but to the helps which effect it. For, whatsoever be the motives upon which a man actually resolves it, in whatsoever circumstance hee meets them; nothing but his own freedom determines his conversion, though, without those helps, hee had not, or could not have deter∣mined it. And therefore, if it be said, that it is a barr to the prayers and indeavors of those that are moved to be Christians, to
tell them, that their resolution depends upon something which is not in their Power; To wit, that congruity, wherein the efficacy of Grace consisteth; The answer is; That, absolutely, whatsoever is requisite to the conversion of him who is called to be a Christian, is in his Power; Though, upon supposition of Gods fore-knowledg, that may be said to be requisite, without which, God fore-sees hee will not be converted, when absolutely, if hee would, hee might have been converted, and when, supposing hee had been otherwise moved, hee would have been converted. In which case, it is abso∣lutely enough to the charging of any man with his duty, that, abso∣lutely, hee wanted nothing requisite to inable him for a right choice; Though, upon supposition of Gods fore-knowledg, the doing of his duty requires whatsoever God fore-sees that it will not be done without it. I have no more to say, but, that the Contents of the Chapters are premised instead of a Table, for which they may well serve, in books of this nature. And that, in regard to the difficulty of the Copy, and the ordinary faileurs of the Press, the Reader is desi∣red to correct the faults that are marked, before hee begin, and to serve himself in the rest.
THE CONTENTS OF THE First Book. CHAP. I. ALL agree, that Reason is to decide controversies of Faith. The objection, tha Faith is taught by Gods Spirit, answered. What Reason decideth questions of Faith. The resolution of Faith ends not in the light of Rea∣son, but in that which Reason evidenceth to come from Gods messengers. Page 1 CHAP. II. The question between the Scripture and the Church, which of them is Judge in matters of Faith. Whether opinion, the Tradition of the Church stands better with. Those that hold the Scripture to be clear in all things necessary to salvati∣on, have no reason to exclude the Tradition of the Church. What opinions they are, that deny the Church to be a Society or Corporation by Gods Law. 3 CHAP. III. That neither the sentence of the Church, nor the dictate of Gods Spirit, can be the reason why the Scripures are to be received. No man can know that hee hath Gods Spirit, without knowing that he is a true Christian; Which supposeth the truth of the Scriptures. The motives of Faith are the reason why the Scriptures are to be believed. And the consent of Gods people the reason that evidences those motives to be infallibly true. How the Scriptures are believed for themselves. How a circl is made in rendring a reason of the Faith. The Scriptures are Gods Law to all, to whom they are published, by Gods act of publishing them; But Civil Law, by the act of Soveraign Powers, in acting Christianity upon their Subjects. 7 CHAP. IV. Neither the Dictate of Gods Spirit, nor the athority of the Church, is the reason of believing any thing in Christianity▪ Whether the Church be before the Scripture, or the Scripture before the Church. The Scriptures contain not the Infallibility of the Church. Nor the consent of all Christians. 18 CHAP. V. All things necessary to salvation are not clear in the Scriptures to all understand∣ings. Not in the old Testament. Not in the Gospel. Not in the Writings of the Apostles. It is necessary to salvation to believe more then this; that our Lord is the Christ. Time causeth obscurity in the Scriptures, aswell as in other Re∣cords. That it is no where said in the Scriptures, that all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scriptures. Neither is there any consent of all Chri∣stians to evidence the same. 25
CHAP. VI. All interpretation of Scripture is to be consined within the Tradition of the Church. This supposeth that the Church is a Communion instituted by God▪ What means there is to make evidence of Gods Charter, upon which the corpo∣ration of the Church subsisteth. The name of the Church, in the Scriptures, often signifieth the Whole or Catholick Church. CHAP. VII. That the Apostles delivered to the Church a Summary of Christianity, which, all that should be baptized were to profess. Evidence out of the Scriptures. Evidence out of the Scriptures for Tradition regulating the Communion of the Church, and the Order of it. Evidence for the Rule of Faith, out of the records of the Church. For the Canons of the Church, and the pedegree of them from the order established in the Church by the Apostles. That the profession of Christi∣anity, and that by being baptized, is necessary to the salvation of a Christian CHAP. VIII. That the power of Governing the whole Church was in the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, and those whom they tooke to assist them in the part of it. The power of their Successors must needs be derived from those. Why that succession which appears in one Church, necessarily holdeth all Churches. The holding of Coun∣cils evidenceth the Unity of the Church. CHAP. IX The Keyes of the Church given to the Apostles, and exercised by excommuni∣cation under the Apostles. The ground thereof is that profession, which, all that are baptized are to make. That Penance and abatment of Penance hath been in force ever since and under the Apostles. In particular, of excluding Hereticks. CHAP. X. Evidence of the Apostles act from the effect of it, in preserving the Ʋnity of the Church. Of the businesse of Marcion and Montanus. That about keeping Easter. That of the Novatians, of rebaptizing Hereticks, of Paulus Samosa∣tenus, of Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Arius. Of communicatory leters, and the intercourse of the Church under and after the Apostles, CHAP. XI. Upon what grounds the first book de Synedriis holds that the Church cannot ex∣communicate. Before the law there was no such Power, nor by it. Christians went for Jewes under the Apostles. His sense of some Scriptures. What the Leviathan saith in generall concerning the Power of the Church. Both suppose that Ecclesiasticall Power includeth Temporall, which is not true. Of the Oxford Doctors Paraenesis. CHAP. XII. That the Law expresly covenanted for the Land of Promise. A great Objection against this, from the Great precept of the Law. The hope of the world to come under the Law, and the obedience which it required, was grounded upon reason from the true God, the tradition of the Fathers, and the Doctrine of the Pro∣phets.
The Love of God above all by the Law extendeth no further than he pre∣cepts of the Law; the lve of our Neighbor onely to Jews. Of the Ceremonial, Ju∣dicial and Moral Law. CHAP. XIII That the Law tendereth no other promise but that of the Land of Canaan. How the Resurrection is signified by the Prophets. Expresse texts of the A∣postles. Their Arguments, and the Arguments of our Lord do suppose the my∣stical sense of the Scriptures. That this sense is to be made good throughout the Scripture, wheresoever the ground of it takes place; Christianity well grounded supposing this. What parts of Scripture may be questionable, whether they have a mysticall sense or not. The sayings and doings of our Lord have it; As also those passages of the Old Testament, which are fulfilled by the same. The sense of the Fathers. CHAP. XIV. The Leviathans opinion, that Christ came to restore that Kingdome of God which the Jewes cast off when they rejected Smuel: It overthroweth the foun∣dation of Christianity. The true Government of Gods ancient people. The name of the Church in the New Testament cannot signifie the Synagogue. Nor any Christian State. CHAP. XV. How the Power of the Church is founded upon the Law. The Power of the Kingdome, Priesthood, Prophets, and Rulers of that people all of divine right. How farre these qualities and the powers of them are to continue in the Church. The sense of the Fathers in this point. That the acts of S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles, were nt of force by virtue of the Law. What Ecclesiastical Power should have been among the Jewes, in case they had recei∣ved the Gospel, and so the state had stood. CHAP. XVI. The Church founded upon the Power given the Apostles. What is the sub∣ject mater of Church Lawes. The Right of the Church to Tythes and Oblati∣ons is not grounded upon the Law, though evidenced by it, and by practice of the Patriarchs. Evidence of the Apostles Order in the Scriptures. The Church of Jerusalem held not community of Goods. The original practice of the Church. CHAP. XVII. The Power of Excommunication in the Church is not founded in the Law. What argument there is of it in the Old Testament. The allegorical sense thereof is argumentative. It was not necessary that the Christians should incurre persecu∣tion for using the Power of the Keyes, and not by virtue of the Law. CHAP. XVIII. The difference between S. Pauls anathema and that of the Jews. It is not necessary that the Christians anathema should signifie cursing. That the incestuous person at Corinth was Excommunicated by S. Paul. Jurisdiction of the Church. Telling the Church, binding and loosing, holding him that is bound for a Heathen or a Publican, signifie the same. The coherence of our Lords discourse. Of Ex∣communication and Indulgence by private persons in the Ancient Church. That Excommunication and the Power of the Church could not come in force by the voluntary consent of the first Christians. How it may be said to be voluntary. Of the confederacy of the primitive Christians.
CHAP XIX. That Power which was in Churches under the Apostles, can never be in any Chri∣stian Soveraign. The dfference between the Church and the Synagogue in that regard. The interest of Seculr Power in determining maters of faith presup∣pseh the Sociey of the Church, and the act of it. No man can be bound to profsse te contrary of that which he believeth. Every man is bound to professe tht Christianity which hee believeth. The Church is the chiefe Teacher of Christianity through Christendom, as the Soveraign of Civil Peace, thorough his Dominions. Why the Church is to decide maters of Faith rather then the State, neither being infallible. 146 CHAP. XX. The rest of the Oxford Doctors pretense. The Power of binding and loosing sup∣poseth not onely the Preaching of the Gospel, but the outward act of Faith. Chri∣stians are not at liberty to cast themselves in what formes of Churches; the Law of Nature alloweth. They are Judges in chief for themselvss in mater of Religion, supposing the Catholick Church: not otherwise. Secular Power can∣nt punish for Relgion, but supposing the act of the Church nor do any act to in∣force Religion, unlsse▪ the Church determine the mater of it. 151 CHAP. XXI. How the Tradition of the Church limits the interpretation of Scriptures. How the declaration of the Church becomes a reasonable marke of Heresie. That which is not found in the Scriptures may have been delivered by the Apostles. Some things delivered by the Apostles, and recorded in the Scriptures, may not oblige. S. Austines Rule of Apostolical Traditions. 159 CHAP. XXII. The Authority of the Fathers is not grounded upon any presumption of their Lear∣ning or Holinesse. How farr they challenge the credit of Historical truth. The pre-eminence of the Primitive. The presumption that is grounded upon their ranks and qualities in the Church. Of Arnobius, Lactantius, Tertulli∣n, Origen, Clemens and the approbation of Posterity. 165 CHAP. XXIII. Two istances against the premises; besides the obection concerning the beginning of Antichrist under the Apostles. The General answer to it. The seven Trum∣pes in the Apocalypse fore-tell the destruction of the Jewes. The seven Vials, the plagues inflicted upon the Empire for the ten persecutions. The correspon∣dence of Daniels Prophesie inferreth the same. Neither S. Pauls Prophesie nor S. Johns concerneth any Christian. Neither the opinion of the Chiliasts, nor the the giving of the Eucharist to Infants new Baptized, Catholick. 169 CHAP. XXIV. Two sorts of means to resolve whatsoever is resolvable concerning the Scripture. Ʋpon what terms the Church may, or is to determine controversies of Faith. And what obligation that determination produceth. Traditions of the Apostles oblige the present Church, as the reasons of them continue or not. Instances in our Lords Passeover and Eucharist. Penance under the Apostles, and afterwards. S. Pauls vail, eaing blood, and things offered to Idols. The power of the Church in limiting these Traditions. 178
CHAP. XXV. The power of the Church in limiting even the Traditions of the Apostles. Not eve∣ry abuse of this power, a sfficient warrant for particular Churches to reforme themselves. Heresie consists in denying something necessary to salvation to be be∣lieved. Schism, in departing from the unity of the Church, whether upon that, or any other cause. Implicite Faith no virtue; but the effect of it may be the work of Christian charity. p. 163 CHAP. XXVI. What is to add to Gods Law; What to adde to the Apocalypse. S. Pauls Anathema. The Beraeans. S. Johns Gospel sufficient to make one believe; and the Scrip∣tures; the man of God perfect. How the Law giveth light, and Christians are taught by God. How Idolatry is said, not to be commanded by God. 168 CHAP. XXVII. Why it was death to transgress the determinations of the Jewes Consistory, and what power this argueth in the Church. A difference between the authority of the Apo∣stles, and that of the Church. The being of the Church to the worlds end, with power of the Keyes, makes it not infallible. Obedience to Superiours, and the Pillar of truth inferre it not. 175 CHAP. XXXI. The Fathers acknowledge the sufficiencie  rnesse of the Scriptures, as, the Traditions of the Church▪ They are to be reconciled, by limiting the termes which they use. The limitations of those sayings which make all Christian truth to be contained in the Scriptures. Of those which make the authority of the Church the ground of Faith. 181 CHAP. XXXII. Answer to an Objection, that choice of Religion becomes difficult upon these terms. This resolution is for the Interest of the Reformation. Those that make the Church Infallible cannot, those that make the Scriptures ear nd sufficient may own Tradition for evidence to determine the meaning of the Scriptures, and controversies of Faith. The Interest of the Church of England. The pre∣tense of Rushworthes Dialogues, that we have no unquestionable Scripture; and, that te Tradition of the Church never changes. 192 CHAP. XXXI. That the Scriptures which wee have are unquestionable. That mistakes in Copying are not considerable to the sense and effect of them. The meaning of the He∣brew and Greek▪ even of the Prophets, determinable, to the deciding of Contro∣versies. How Religion delivered by Tradition becomes subject to be corrupted. 198 CHAP. XXXIV. The dispute concerning the Canon of Scripture, and the translations thereof, in two Questions. There can be no Tradition for those books that were written since Prophesie ceased. Wherein the excellence of them above other books lies. The chife objections against them are questionble. In those parcels of the New Testament that have been questioned, the case is not the same. The sense of the Church. 207
CHAP. XXXIII. Onely the Originall Copy can be Authentick. But, the truth thereof may as well be found in the translations of the Old Testament, as in the Jewes Copies. The Jewes have not falsified them of malice. The points come neither from Moses, nor Esdras, but from the Talmud Iewes. 218 CHAP. XXXIV. Of the ancientest Translations of the Bible into Greek first; With the Authors and authority of the same; Then into the Chaldee, Syriack, and Latine. Ex∣ceptions against the Greek, and the Samaritane Pentateuch. They are helps ne∣ver thelesse to assure the true reading of the Scriptures, though with other Copies; whether Jewish or Christian. Though the Vulgar Latine were better than the present Greek, yet must both depend upon the Original Greek of the New Testa∣ment. No danger to Christianity by the differences remaining in the Bible. 224 The CONTENTS of the second Book. CHAP. I. TWo parts of that which remains. How the dispute concerning the Holy Trinity with Socinus belongs to the first. The Question of justification by Faith alone. The Opinion of Socinus concerning the whole Covenant of Grace. The opinion of those who make justifying Faith the knowledge of a mans Predestination, op∣posite to it in the other extream. The difference between it and that of the Anti∣nomians. That there are mean Opinions. p. 1 CHAP. II. Evidence what is the condition of the Covenant of Grace. The contract of Baptism. The promise of the Holy Ghost annexed to Christs, not to Johns Baptism. Those are made Christs Disciples as Christians, that take up his Cross in Bap∣tism. The effects of Baptism according to the Apostles. 5 CHAP. III. The exhortations of the Apostles, that are drawn from the patterns of the Old Testament, suppose the same. How the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament are the same, how not the same. How the new Testament and the New Covenant are both one. The free-will of man acteth the same part in dealing about the New-Covenant, as about the Old. The Gospel a Law. 12 CHAP. IV. The consent of the whole Church evidenced by the custome of catechising. By the o∣pinion thereof concerning the salvation of those that delayed their Baptism. By the rites and Ceremonies of Baptism. Why no Penance for sins before, but after Bap∣tism. The doctrine of the Church of England evident in this case. 17 CHAP. V. The Preaching of our Lord and his Apostles evidenceth, that some act of Mans free choice is the condition which it requireth. The correspondence between the Old and New Testament inferreth the same. So do the errors of Socinians and Antinomians concerning the necessity of Baptism. Objections deferred. 23
CHAP. VI. Justifying faith sometimes consists in believing the truth. Sometimes, in trust in God grounded upon the truth. Sometimes in Christianity, that is, in imbracing and professing it. And that in the Fathers as well as in the Scriptures. Of the informed and formed Faith of the Schools. 30 CHAP. VII. The last signification of Faith is properly justifying Faith. The first by a Metony∣my of the cause; The second of the effect. Those that are not justified do truly believe. The trust of a Christian presupposeth him to be justified. All the pro∣mises of the Gospel become due at once by the Covenant of Grace. That, to be∣lieve that we are Elect or justified, is not justifying faith. 37 CHAP. VIII. The objection from S. Paul; We are not justifyed by the Law nor by Works, but by Grace and by Faith. Not meant of the Gospel, and the works that suppose it. The question that S. Paul speakes to, is of the Law of Moses and the workes of it. He sets those workes in the same rank with the works of the Gentiles by the light of nature. The civil and outward works of the Law may be done by Gentiles. How the Law is a Pedagogue to Christ. 43 CHAP. IX. Of the Faith and Justification of Abraham and the Patriarkes, according to the Apostles. Of the Prophets and righteous men under the Law. Abraham and Ra∣hab the harlot justified by Workes, if justified by Faith. The promises of the Gospel depend upon works which the Gospel injoyneth. The Tradition of the Church. 52 CHAP. X. What Pelagius questioneth concerning the Grace of Christ, what Socinus, further of the state of Christ before his birth. The opposition between the first and se∣cond Adam in S. Paul, evidenceth original sinne. Concupisence in the unrege∣nerate, and the inability of the Law, to subdue it, evict the same. The second birth by the holy Ghost evidenceth that the first birth propagateth sin. 66 CHAP. XI. The old Testament chargeth all men as well as the wicked to be sinful from the wombe. David complaineth of himself as born in sin, no lesse then the Wise man of the children of the Gentiles. How Leviticall Laws argue the same. And temporal death under the Old Testament. The book of Wisdome and the Greek Bible. 76 CHAP. XII. The Heresie of Simon Magus the beginning of the Gnosticks. That they were in being during the Apostles time. Where and when the Heresie of Cerintus pre∣vailed, and, that they were Gnosticks. The beginning of the Encratites under the Apostles. It is evident that one God in Trinity was then glorified among the Christians, by the Fulnesse of the Godhead which they introduced in stead of it. 80 CHAP. XIII. The Word was at the beginning of all things. The apparition of the old Testament Prefaces to the Incarnation of Christ. Ambassadors are not honoured with the
honour due to their Masters. The word of God that was afterwards incarnate was in those Angels, that spoke in Gods Name. No Angel honoured as God un∣der the New Testament. The Word was with God at the beginning of all things, as after his return. 89 CHAP. XIV. The Name of God not ascribed to Christ for the like reason as to creatures. The reasons why the Socinians worship Christ as God do confute their limitations. Christ not God by virtue of his rising again. He is the Great God with S. Paul, the true God with S. John, the onely Lord, with S. Jude. Other Scriptures. Of the form of God, and of a servant in S. Paul. 94 CHAP. XV. Not onely the Church but the World was made by Christ. The Word was made flesh in opposition to the Spirit. How the Prophets, how Christians, by receiving the Word of God, are possessed by his Spirit. How the title of Sonne of God import∣eth the Godhead. How Christ is the brightnesse and Image of God. 100 CHAP. XVI. The testimonies of Christs Godhead in the Old Testament are first understood of the figures of Christ. Of the Wisdome of God in Solomon and elsewhere. Of the writings of the Jewes as well before as after Christ. 112 CHAP. XVII. Answer to those texts of Scripture that seem to abate the true Godhead in Christ. Of that creature whereof Christ is the first-born, and that which the Wisdome of God made. That this beliefe is the originall Tradition of the Church. What means this dispute furnisheth us with against the Arians. That it is reason to submit to revelation concerning the nature of God. The use of reason is no way renounced by holding this Faith. 116 CHAP. XVIII. The necessity of the grace of Christ, is the evidence of Original sinne. How the ex∣altation of our Lord depends upon his humiliation, and the grace of Christ upon that. All the work of Christianity is ascribed to the grace of Christ. Gods pre∣destination manifesteth the same. 133 CHAP. XIX. Evidences of the same in the Old Testament; Of Gods help in getting the Land of Promise, and renewing the Covenant: And that for Christs sake. That Chri∣stianity cannot stand without acknowledging the grace of Christ. The Tradition of the Church; In the Baptism of Infants: In the Prayers of the Church: In the decrees against Pelagius, and other records of the Church. 140 CHAP. XX. Wherein Original sinne consisteth; What opinions are on foot. That it is not Adams sinne imputed to his posterity. Whether man were at the first created to a superna∣tural end, or not. An estate of meer nature, but innocent, possible. Original sinne is concupisence. How Baptism voids it. Concerning the late novelty in the Church of England about Original sinne. 151
CHAP. XXI. The opinion that makes the Predestination of mans will by God the sourse of his freedom. And wherein Jansenius differs from it. Of necessity upon suppositiou and absolute. The necessity of the Will following the last dictate of the under∣standing is onely upon supposition. As also that which Gods foresight creates. The difference between indifferent and undetermined. 163 CHAP. XXII. The Gospel findeth man free from necessity, though not from bondage. Of the Antecedent and consequent Will of God. Praedetermination is not the root, but the rooting up of Freedom and Christianity. Against the opinion of Jansenius: 170 CHAP. XXIII. A man is able to do things truly honest under Originall sinne. But not to make God the end of all his doing. How all the actions of the Gentiles are sinnes. They are accountable onely for the Law of nature. How all men have or have not Grace sufficient to save. 181 CHAP. XXIV. Though God determineth not the will immediately, yet he determineth the effect thereof by the means of his providence, presenting the object so as he foresees it will chuse. The cases of Pharoah, of Solomon, of Ahab, and of the Jews that crucified Christ. Of Gods foreknowledge of future conditionalls that come not to passe. The ground of foreknowledge of future contingencies. Difficult ob∣jections answered. 189 CHAP. XXV. The grounds of the difference between sufficient and effectual. How naturall occa∣sions, conduce to supernatural actions. The insufficience of ansenius his doctrine. Of sufficient grace under the Law of Moses and Nature. 202 CHAP. XXVI. Predestination to grace absolute, to glory respective. Purpose of denying effectuall Grace absolute, of punishing respective. The end, to which God predestinates, is not the end for which he predestinates. Grace the reward of the right use of Grace. How much of the question the Gospel dètermines not. That our in∣deavours are ingaged no lsse, then if predestination were not, it determineth. Of the Tradition of the Church, and of Semipelagians, Predestinatians and Arminians. 212 CHAP. XXVII. The question concerning the satisfaction of Christ with Socinus. The reason why Sacrifices are figures of Christ, common to all sacrifices. Why, and what Sa∣crifices the Fathers had, what the Law added. Of our ransom by the price of Christs propitiatory Sacrifice. 233
CHAP. XXVIII. Christ took away our sinne by bearing the punishment of it. The Prophesie of Esay LIII. We are reconciled to God by the Gospel, inconsidcation of Christs obe∣dience. The reconcilement of Jews and Gentiles, Men and Angels, consequent to the sae. Of purging and expiating sinne by Christ, and making propitiation for it. Of Christs dying for us. 238 CHAP. XXIX. The grant of Grace, in consideration of Christ, supposes satisfaction made by him for sinne. Neither our sinnes imputable to Christ, nor his sufferings to us, for∣mally and personally, but, as the meritorious causes which satisfaction answer∣h. The effect of it, the Covenant of Grace, as well as helpe to perform it. The Fathers saved by the Faith of Christ to come. The Gospel a new Law. The prpery of satisfaction and punishment in Christs sufferings. Of the sense of the Catholick Church. 245 CHAP. XXX. God might have reconciled man to himselfe without the coming of Christ. The promise of  Gspel dpend as well upon his active as passive obedience. Christ need  pis that we might not. The opinion that maketh justi∣g  rust in God not true; Yet not prejudicial to the Faith. The dc of the Council of Trent, and the doctrine of the Schoole; how it is not preudicial to the Faith. As also that of Socinus. 254 CHAP. XXXI. The state of the question concerning the perseverance of those that are once justi∣fied. Of three senses, one true, one inconsistent wih the faith, the third neither true nor yet destructive to the Faith. Evidence from  writings of the Apo∣stles. From the Old Testament. The grace of Prohee when it presupposeth sanctifying grace. Answer to some texts. and of S. Pauls mang in the VII. of the Romans. Of the Polygamy of the Fathers. What assurance of Grace Christians may have. The Tradition of the Church. 266 CHAP. XXXII. How the fulfilling of Gods Law is possible, how impossible, for a Christian. Of the difference between mortall and veniall sinne. What love of God and of our neighbour was necessary under the Old Testament. Whether the Sermon in the Mount correct the false interpretation of the ewes, or inhanse the obligatin of the Law. Of the difference between matter of Precept and matter of Coun∣sail; and the Perfection of Christians. 285 CHAP. XXXIII. Whether any workes of Christians be satisfactory for sinne, and meritorious of hea∣ven, or not. The recovery of Gods grace for a Christian fallen from it, a worke of labour and time. The necessity and essicacy of Penance to that purpose, ac∣cording to the Scriptures, and the practice of the Church. Merit by virtue of Gods promise, necessary. The Catholick Church agrees in it, the present Church of Rome allowes merit of justice. 300
The CONTENTS of the third Book. CHAP. I. THe Society of the Church founded upon the duty of communicating in the Of∣fices of Gods service. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, among those Offices, proper to Christianity. What opinions, concerning the presence of Christs body and Blood in the Eucharist, are on foot. page 1 CHAP. II. That the Natural substance of the Elements remaines in the Sacrament. That the Body and Blood of Christ is neverthlsse present in the same, when it is received, no by the receiving of it. The eating of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cs necessarily requireth the same. This causes no contradction nor im∣property  the words of our Lord. 3 CHAP. III. That the presence of Christs body in the Eucharist depends not upon the living  of him that receives, but upon the true profession of Christianity in the  th clbrates. The Sciture that are alleged for the dependence of  the communication of the properties. They conclude not the sense of them b  ey are alleged. How the Scripture confineth the flesh of Christ to the . 16 CHAP. IV. The opinion which maketh the Consecration to be done by rehearsing the operative words. That our Lord consecrated by Thanksgiving. The Form of it in all Lurgies, together with the consent of the Fathers. Evidence, that there is o Tradition of the Church for the abolishing of the Elements. 23 CHAP. V. It cannot be proved by the Old Testament that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice. How, by the New Testament it may be so accounted. Four reasons thereof, depend∣ing upon the nature of Justifying Faith premised. The consent of the Catholick Church. The concurrence of the Church of England to the premises. 38 CHAP. VI. The reason of the Order by which I proceed, brings me to the Baptism of Infants in the next place. The power of the Keyes seen in granting Baptism, as well as in communicating the Eucharist. Why Socinians make Baptism indifferent: Why Antinomians make it a mistake to Baptize. The grounds upon which I shake off both: With answer to some objections. 53
CHAP. VII. The ground of Baptizing Infants Originall sinne, though not instituted till Christ rose again. No other cure for it. Infants of Christians may be Discipl, are holy. The effect of Circumcision under the Law, inferreth the effect of Baptism under the Gospel. 58 CHAP. VIII. What is alledged to impeach Tradition for Baptizing Infants; Proves not, that any could be saved regularly, who dyed unbaptized; but, that, baptizing at years was a strong means to make good Christians. Why the Church now Bap∣tize. What becomes of Infants dying unbaptized, unanswerable. What those In∣fants get who dye baptized. 5 CHAP. IX. What controversie the Reformation hath with the Church of Rome about Penance. Inward repentance that is sincere, obtaineth pardon alone. Remission of ▪ by the Gospel onely: The condition of it by the Ministry of the Church. What the power of binding and loosing contains more then Preaching, or taking away of∣fences. Sinne may be pardoned without the use of it. Wherein the necessity of using it lyeth. 73 CHAP. X. The Scts of the Montanists, Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians, evidence the cure of sinne by Penance, to be a Tradition of the Apostles. So doh the agree∣ment of primitive practice with their writings. Indulgence of regular Penance from the Apostles. Confession of secret sinnes in the primitive Church. That no sinne can be cured witho the Keyes of the Church, there is no Tradition from the Apostles. The necessity of confessing secret sinnes, whereupon it stands. 86 CHAP. IX. Penance is not required to redeem the debt of temporall punishment when the sinne is pardoned. What assurace of forgivenesse, the law of auricular Confession, as it is used in the Church of Rome, procureth. Of injoyning Penance, after absolution performed. Setting aside abuses, the Law is agreeable to Gods. Of the order taken by the Church of England. 98 CHAP. XI. The Unction of the sick pretendeth onely boaily health, upon supposition of the cure of sinne by the Keyes of the Church. Objections answered. The Tradition of the Church evidenceth the same. 106 CHAP. XII. The ground of the Right of the Church in Matrimoniall causes. Mariage of one with one isolubly is a Law of Christianity; The Law of Moses not injoyn∣ing it. The Law of the Empire not aiming at the ground of it. Evidence from the primitive practice of the Church. 114
CHAP. XIV. Scripture alledged to prove the bond of Mariage insoluble in case of adultery, un∣effectual. S. Paul and our Lord speak both to one purpose, according to S. Je∣rome, and S. Austine. The contrary opinion more reasonable, and more general in the Church. Why the Church may restrain the innocent party from marying again. The Imperial Lawes could never be of force to void the Power of the Church. Evidence for it. 125 CHAP. XV. Another opinion, admiting the ground of Lawfull Impediments. What Impe∣diments arise upon the Constitution of the Church, generally as a Society, or par∣ticularly, as of Christians. By what Law some degrees are prohibited Christians. And, of the Polygamy of the Patriarchs. Mariage with the deceased wives Sister, and with a Cousin Germane, by what Law prohibited. Of the Profes∣sion of Continence, and the validity of clandestine Mariages. The bound of Ecclesiastical Power in Mariage upon these grounds. 134 CHAP. XVI. Of the Power of making Governours and Ministers of the Church. Ʋpon what ground the Hierarchy of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons standath, in opposition to Presbyteries and Congregations. Of the Power of Confirming, and the evidence for the Hierarchy which it yeeldeth. Of those Scriptures which seem o speake of Presbyteries or Congregations. 145 CHAP. XVII. The power given the XII. under the Title of Apostles, and the LXX. Disciples. That the VII were Deacons: Of the first Presbyters at Jerusalem, and the in∣terest of the People. Presbyters appropriated to Churches under the Apostles. S. Pauls Deacons no Presbyters. No ground for Lay Elders. 152 CHAP. XVIII. The Apostlet all of equall power; S. Peter onely chiefe in managing it. The ground for the pre-eminence of Churches, before and over Churches. Of Alex∣andria, Antiochia, Jerusalem and Rome. Ground for the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, before all Churches. The consequence of that Ground. A summary of the evidence for it. 161 CHAP. XIX. Of the proceedings about Marcion and Montanus at Rome. The business of Pope Victor about keeping Easter; a peremptory instance. The businesse of the No∣vatians evidenceth the same. Of the businesses concerning the rebaptizing of He∣reticks, Dionysius of Alexandria, Paulus Samosatenus, S. Cypriane, and, of the Donatists under Constantine. 168 CHAP. XX. Of the constitution and authority of Councils. The ground of the pre-eminence of Churches in the Romane Empire. The VI. Canon of the Council of Niaea▪ The pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, and that of Constantinople. Some
instances against the Superiority of Bishops, out of the records of the Church; what offices every Order by Gods Law, or by Canon Law, ministreth. 175 CHAP. XXI. Of the times of Gods service; By what Title of his Law the first day of the week is kept Holy. How the Sabbath is to be sanctified by Moses Law. The fourth Commandment, the ground upon which the Apostles inacted it. Ʋpon what ground the Church limiteth the times of Gods service. Of Easter, and the Lent Fast afore it. Of the difference of mats, and measure of Fasting. Of keeping of our Lords Birth-day, and other Festivals, and the regular hours of the day for Gods service. 190 CHAP. XXII. The people of God tied to build Syngogues, though not by the leter of the Law. The Church to provide Churches, though the Scripture command it not. Prescribing the form of Gods publick service, is not quenching the Spirit. The Psalter is prescribed the Church for Gods Praises. The Scriptures prescribed to be read in the Church; The order of reading them to be prescribed by the Church. 203 CHAP. XXIII. The consecration of the Eucharist prescribed by Tradition, for the mater of it. The Lords Prayer prescribed in all Services. The mater of Prayers for all estates prescribed. The form of Baptism necessary to be prescribed. The same reason holdeth in the formes of other Offices. 211 CHAP. XXIV. The service of God prescribed to be in a known Language. No pretense that the Latine is now understood. The means to preserve Unity in the Church, notwith∣standing. The true reason of a Sacrifice inforceth Communion in the Eucha∣rist. What occasions may dispense in it. Communion in both kinds commanded the People. Objections answered. Who is chargeable with the abuse. 217 CHAP. XXV. Prayer the more principall Office of Gods service then Preaching. Preaching, neither Gods word, nor the meanes of salvation, unlesse limited to the Faith of Gods Church. What, the edification of the Church by preaching further requires. The Order for divine service according to the course of the Church of England; According to the custome of the universal Church. 273 CHAP. XXV. Idolatry presupposeth an imgination that there is more Gods then one. Objecti∣ons out of the Scripture, that it is the worship of the true God under an Image. the Original of worshipping the elements of the world: The Devill: And I∣mages. Of the Idolatry of Magicians, and of the Gnosticks. What Ido∣latry the cases of Aaron and Jeroboam involve. Of the Idolatries practised under the Kings and Judges, in answer to objections. 282
CHAP. XXVI. The place, or rather the State of happy and miserable Soules, otherwise understood by Gods people before Christs ascension, then after it. What the Apocalypse, what the rest of the Apostles declare. Onely Martyrs before Gods Throne. Of the sight of God. 302 CHAP. XXVII. The Souls of the Fathers were not in the Devils Power till Christ; Though the Old Testament declare not their estate. Of Samuels soul. The soul of our Lord Christ, parting from his body, went with the Thiefe to Paradise. Of his triumph over the powers of darknesse. Prayer for the dead signifieth o deli∣vering of souls out of Purgatory. The Covenant of Grace requires imperfect happinesse before the generall judgement. Of forgivenesse in the world to come, and, paying the utmost farthing. 310 CHAP. XXVIII. Ancient opinions in the Church, of the place of souls before the day of judge∣ment. No Tradition that the Fathers were in the Vrge of Hell, under the Earth. The reason of the difference in the expressions of the Fathers of the Church. What Tradition of the Church for the place of Christs soul, during his death. The Saints soules in secret mansions, according to the Tradition of the Church. Prayer for the dead supposeth the same. No Purgatory accord∣ing to the Tradition of the Church. 325 CHAP. XXIX. The ground upon which Ceremonies are to be used in the service of the Church; Instances out of the Scriptures and Tradition of the Apostles. Of the equivo∣cation of the word Sacrament, in the Fathers. The reason of a Sacrament in Baptism and the Eucharist. In extream Unction. In Mariage. In Confir∣mation, Ordination, and Penance. 340 CHAP. XXX. To worship Christ in the Eucharist, though believing transubstantiation, is not I∣dolatry. Ground for the honour of Saints and Martyrs▪ The Saints and the Angels pray for us. Three sorts of Prayers to Saints. The first, agreeable with Christianity: The last may be Idolatry: The second a step to it. Of the Reliques of the Saints Bodies. What the second Commandment prohibiteth or alloweth. The second Council of Nicaea doth not decree Idolatry; And yet there is no decree in the Church for the worshipping of Images. 350 CHAP. XXXI. The ground for Monastical life in the Scriptures; And in the practice of the primitive Church. The Church getteth no peculiar interest in them who pro∣fesse it, by their professing of it. The nature and intent of it renders it subordi∣nate to the Clergy. How farre the single life of the Clergy hath been a Law to the Church. Inexecution of the Canons for it. Nullity of the proceedings of the Church of Rome in it. The interest of the People in the acts f the Church; And in the use of the Scriptures. 368
CHAP. XXXII. How great the Power of the Church, and the offect of it is. The right of judging the causes of Christians ceaseth, when it is protected by the State. An Ob∣jection; If Ecclesiastical Power were from God, Secular Power could not limit the use of it. Ground for the Interest of the State in Church matters. The in∣consequence of the argument. The concurrence of both Interests to the Law of the Church. The Inerest of the state in the indowment of the Church. Con∣currence of both in matrimonial causes, and Ordinations. Temporall penalties upon Excommunication from the State. No Soveraigne subject to the greater Excommunication, but to the lesse. The Rights of the Jewes State and of Chri∣stian Powers, in Religion, partly the same, partly not. The infinite Power of the Pope not founded upon Episcopacy, but upon acts of the Secular Powers of Christendom. 381
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF Christian Truth. The First BOOK. CHAP. I. All agree, that Reason is to decide controversies of Faith. The objection, that Faith is taught by Gods Spirit, answered. What Reason decideth questions of Faith. The resolution of Faith ends not in the light of Reason, but in that which Reason evidenceth to come from Gods messengers. THe first thing that we are to question in the beginning is, Whe∣ther there be any means to resolve, by the use of reason, those controveres which cause division in the Church? Which is all one, as if we undertook to enquire, whether there be any such skill or knowledg, as that for which men call themselvs Divines: For if there be, it must be the same in England as at Rome. And if it have no principles, (as no principles it can have, unlesse it can be resolved what those principles are) then is it a bare name, signifying nothing. But if there be certain principles which all parties are obliged to admit, that discourse which admits no other will certainly pro∣duce that resolution, in which all shall be obliged to agree. And truely this hope there is left, that all parties do necessarily suppose, that there is means to resolve by reason all differences of Faith: Inasmuch as all undertake to per∣swade all, by reason, to be of the judgment of each one, and would be thought to have reason on their side, when so they do; and, that reason is not done them when they are not believed. There are indeed many passages of Scripture, which say, that Faith is only taught by the Spirit of God: Mat. XVI. 17. Blessed art thou Peter son of Ionas, for flesh and blood revealed not this to thee, but my Father which is in the heavens. II. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes. 1 Cor. I. 26, 27, 28. For, Brethren, you see your calling, that not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble. But, the foolish things of the world hath God chosen to shame the wise: The weak things of the world hath God chosen to shame the strong: The ignoble and despicable things of the world hath God chosen, and the things that are not, to confound the things that are. John VI. 45. It is written in the Prophets; And they shall be all taught of God. Heb. VIII. 10. Jer. XXXI. 33. This is the Cove∣nant that I will make with the house of Israel in those dayes, saith the Lord; I will put my Laws in their mindes, and write them in their hearts. These and the like Scriptures then, asribing the reason why wee believe, to the work of Gods Spirit, seem to leave no room for any other reason, why wee should believe. But this difficulty is easie for him to resolve, that diinguishes between the reason that moveth in the nature of an object, and that motion which the active cause produceth. For, the motion of an object supposes that consideration, which discovers the reason, why wee are to believe. But the motion of the Holy
Ghost, in the nature of an active cause, proceeds without any notice that wee take of it: According to the saying of our Lord to Nicodemus, John 111. 8. The winde bloweth where it listeth, and a man hears the noise of it, but cannot tell whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth: So is every one that is born of the spirit. For, wee must know, that there may be sufficient reason to evict the truth of Christianity, and yet prove ineffectual to induce the most part, either inwardly to believe, or outwardly to professe it. The reason consists in two things: For, neither is the mater of Faith evident to the light of reason, which wee bring into the world with us; And, the Crosse of Christ, which this profession drawes after it, necessarily calls in question that estate, which every man is setled upon in the world. So that no marvel, if the reasons of believing fail of that effect, which, for their part, they are sufficient to produce; Interest diverting the considerati∣on, or intercepting the consequence of such troublesom truth, and the motives that inforce it. The same is the reason, why the Christian world is now to barren of the fruits of Christianity: For, the profession of it, which is all, the Laws of the world can injoyn, is the common privilege, by which men hold their estates: Which, it is no marvel those men should make use of, that have neither resol∣ved to imbrace Christ with his Crosse, nor considered the reason they have to do it: who, if they should stick to that which they professe, and when the pro∣tection of the Law failes; or act according to it, when it would be disadvantage to them in the world so to do, should do a thing inconsequent to their own prin∣ciples; which carried them no further than that profession, which the Law, whereby they hold their estates protecteth. The true reason of all Apostasy in all trials. As for the truth of Christianity; Can they that believe a God above, refuse to believe his messengers, because that which they report stands not in the light of any reason to evidence it? Mater of Faith is evidently credible, but cannot be evidently true. Christianity supposes sufficient reason to believe; but, not standing upon evidence in the thing, but upon credit of report, the temptation of the Crosse may easily defeat the effect of it, if the Grace of Christ and the operation of the Holy Ghost interpose not. Upon this account, the knowledg of Gods truth revealed by Christ may be the work of his Grace, according to the Scriptures; (for, that so it is, I am not obliged, neither have I any reason here to suppose, being to come in question hereafter, for the Principles, which here wee seek, to decide) but supposing sufficient reason propounded, to make it evidently credible. And hee that alleges Gods Spirit, for what hee cannot show sufficient reason to believe otherwise, may thank himself, if hee perish by be∣lieving that, which hee cannot oblige another man to believe. Here wee must make a difference between those men, whom God imployes to deal with other men in his name, and those which come to God by their means. For, of the first, it is enough to demand, how it appears that they come from God. To demand, by what means hee makes his will known to them, (supposing they come from him) is more than needs, at least in this place. For, if it be granted mee, that the Apostles and Prophets were the messengers of God, suppose I cannot tell, how Prophesies are made evident to the souls of them, to whom the Spirit of God reveals them; No body will question; Whe∣ther or no hee ought to believe these, whom hee acknowledges Gods messen∣gers. And therefore it will be no prejudice to my purpose, to set aside all curi∣ous dispute, how, and by what means, God reveales his messages to those, whom, by such revelations, hee makes Prophets. But, those that derive their knowledg from the report of such as are believed to come from God, must as well give ac∣count, how they know, that which they believe to come from such report, as, why such report is to be believed. For, if wee believe, that God furnished those whom hee imployed, with sufficient means, to make it appear that they came on his message, wee can dispute no further, why their report is to be believed. If wee believe it not, there will be no cause, why those, who pre∣tend themselves to be Gods messengers, should not be neglected as fools, or re∣jected as impostors; Nay, there will be no cause, why wee should be Christi∣ans,
upon the report of those, that show us not sufficient reason to receive them for Gods messengers. But this being admitted and believed, unlesse evidence can be made what was delivered by them that came on Gods message, it is in vain to impose any thing on the Faith of them, that are ready to receive, what∣soever comes upon that score. The resolution then of all controversies in Re∣ligion, which the Church is divided about, consists in making evidence, what hath been delivered by them, whom, all Christians believe, that God sent to man on his message. And therefore there will remain no great difficulty about the force and use of reason in matters of Faith, if wee consider, that it is one thing to resolve them by such principles as the light of reason evidenceth; another, to do it by the use of reason, evidencing what Gods messengers have delivered to us. For, all dispute, in point of Faith, tends only to evidence what wee have received from the authors of our Faith. Till that evidence come, doubt remaineth; when it is come, it vanisheth. Without the use of reason this evidence is not made, though not by that which the light of nature discovereth, yet by those helps which rea∣son imployeth, to make it appear, what wee have received from those, from whom wee received our Christianity; Which, without those helps, did not ap∣pear. But, if competition fall out, between that which is thus evidenced to come from God, on the one side, and, on the other side, the light of reason, seeming evidently to contradict the truth of it: First, wee are certain that this competition or contradiction is only in appearance, because both reason and revelation is from God, who cannot oblige us to make contradictory resoluti∣ons: Then, there is no help, without the use of reason, to unmask this appea∣rance. I will not here go about to controule that which may be alleged on either side, in any particular point, by any general prejudice; chusing rather, to referre the debate to that particular question, in which, cause of competition may appear, then to presume upon any thing, which the truth of Christianity (the only supposition which hitherto I premise) appeareth not so contain. On∣ly this I will prescribe; It is not the exception of a Christian to say; That which the light of reason evidenceth not to be possible is not true, though commen∣ded to us by the same reasons which move us to be Christians. For, the nature of God, the counsails of God, the works of God, being such things, as mans un∣derstanding hath no skill of, till it be enlightened by God from above, That sense of Gods oracles, which the motives of Faith do inforce, is no lesse undis∣putable, then it is undisputable, whether that which God saith be true or not, who inacts his revelations by those motives. CHAP. II. The question between the Scripture and the Church, which of them is Judge in mat∣ters of Faith. Whether opinion, the Tradition of the Church stands better with. Those that hold the Scripture to be clear in all things necessary to salvation, have no reason to exclude the Tradition of the Church. What opinions they are, that deny the Church to be a Society or Corporation by Gods Law. THe cure of all diseases comes from the sound ingredients of nature, when they get the upper hand, and restore nature, by expelling that which was against it. Neither can the divisions and distempers of the Church be cured, but by the common truth which the parties acknowledg, when the right understan∣ding of it clears the mistakes, which mans weaknesse tainteth it with. There is a sufficient stock of sound Principles left all the parties, which I mean, when all of them acknowledg the Scriptures, that is, so much of them, as all agree to contain the word of God. But, supposing the truth of them to come from God; First it remaines in difference, how the meaning of them may be deter∣mined, when doubt is made of it? And then, because nothing but the true meaning of the Scripture can be counted Scripture, (if there be a way to determine that) Whether any thing over and above it, is to be received
for the word of God with it? Concerning which point, it is well enough known what opinions there are on foot. When Luther first disputed against the Indul∣gences of Leo X Pope, those that appeared in defense of them, (the Master of the Popes Palace, and Eckius) finding themselves scanted of mater to allege out of the Scriptures, betook themselvs to the common place of the Church, and the Power of it; the force whereof stood upon this consequence; That, whatsoever the Church shall decree, is to be received for unquestionable. Afterwards, certain Articles extracted out of Luthers Writings being condemned by a Bull of the Pope, Luther interposes his appeal to a Council, that should decree according to the Scripture alone. This is the rise of the great Controversie still on foot, be∣tween the Church and the Scripture; between Scripture, and the Tradition of the Church; of what force each of them is, in deciding controversies of Faith. They that hold the Church to be the onely infallible Judge of all Contro∣versies of Faith, necessarily suppose, that the Church is, by Gods appoint∣ment, that is, Jure divino, a Corporation, Society, or Body of men, visible though not Civil; because standing upon Gods will, revealed in order to the happinesse of the world to come: In which Society, (because, in no Society, all that are Interessed can act for themselvs) it behooveth, that there be a publick Authori∣ty vested in some persons or Bodies, the Act whereof may oblige the whole. And, thus it may and must be understood, that the Church is maintained to be Judge in Controversies of Faith, by the definitive sentence of those, that have authority to oblige the Body; Whether Pope or Council, wee dispute not here, or what else may be imagined: For that, as all other Controversies in Re∣ligion, is to be decided by the resolution of the point now in hand, what is the means to determine by reason all such differences. Which, if it could not be decided without supposing whose authority is to tye the Church, there could be no end of differences in the Church, whatsoever there will be. Here is then an opinion famous enough, that the Church is indowed with a gift of Infallabi∣lity; by virtue whereof, whatsoever sentence is passed by them that are authori∣zed on behalf of the Church, becomes matter of Faith, and obliges all men to receive it, by the same reason, for which they receive the Christian Faith. Now they, who, in opposition to this opinion do maintain the Scriptures to be the onely Judge in Controversies of Faith, do involve, in this opposition, an equivocation manifest enough: For it is manifest, that their intent is to render a reason, by this position, why they submit not to that sen∣tence, which condemneth their positions in the name of the Church; To wit, because it is contrary to the Scriptures: And further, why they with-draw themselves from the communion of that Church which condemneth them, and joyn in communion grounded upon the profession of the positions condemned, maintaining themselves thereupon to be the true Church of God, and those that condemne them the corrupt and counterfeit. Whereby it appeareth, that, in effect, they do maintain, that there is no Judge provided by God, to be visible in his Church, with the gift of Infallible: But, that they are themselves, and ought to be Judges, to condemne all sentences given against the Scripture, by any authority established in the Church. By which means, the Scripture becomes no more the Judge, but the Rule, or the Law, by which men are to judge; Whether they are to stand to such sentences, as are given in the name of the Church, or not: Now, if the Scripture be the Law, or the Rule, by which Controversies of Faith are to be judged, there will be no pretense to exclude any means, that may serve as evidence, to clear the meaning of it. And there∣fore, there will be no cause, why the Tradition of the Church should not be joy∣ned with the Scripture, in deciding Controversies of Faith; Not disputing hither∣to, whether or no it contain any thing that the Scripture containeth not, to clear and to determine the sense of the Scripture. Whereas, they that maintain the sen∣tence of the present Church to be the reason of believing, can no way resolve their belief into the Tradition of the Catholick Church: Because, that suppo∣ses only the act of our Lord and his Apostles, delivering to the Church that which it holdeth; Which who so supposeth, can allege no other reason why hee be∣lieveth:
And therefore, the sentence of the present Church cannot be the rea∣son, why any man should believe that, which, there was reason from the be∣ginning, to believe, without it. They, who, to exclude the Tradition of the Church, state this position upon these terms; That all things necessary to salvation are clearly contained in the Scriptures; pretending to limit the generality of the question, put it upon an issue not to be tryed, till wee have resolved, what means there is to determine the meaning of the Scripture. For, to be necessary to salvation, is, to be true, and something more: So that, nothing can appear necessary to salvation, till it can appear to be true: Nor appear to be true, untill it can be resolved, what means there is, to distinguish between true and false. Besides, how unlimited this limitation is, may appear by this; Because, whatsoever is clear, is said to be clear in relation to some sight; And there is so much difference between the sight of several Christians, that nothing can be said to be clear to all, because it is clear to some. And, that which is not clear to all whose salvation is con∣cerned in it, what availes it those to whom it is not clear? Now, I suppose, those that advance these termes, will not grant, that nothing is necessary to sal∣vation, that may be questioned, by an argument out of the Scripture, which all Christians cannot answer; Knowing, that such things, as themselvs hold neces∣sary to salvation, may be assalted by such reasons out of the Scripture, as they do not think all Christians fit to resolve. Besides, they do not pretend that all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scripture of themselvs, but, by con∣sequence of reason, which may make them clear. Now hee that would draw true consequences from the Scripture, had need be well informed of the mater of that Scripture, which hee drawes into consequence. And, to that informa∣tion, how can it appear, that any thing is more necessary, than the Tradition of the Church? Therefore though I say not yet, whether it be true or false, that all things necessary to salvation are clearly contained in the Scriptures; yet, at the present I say, that this is not the prime truth, which must give a reason of all that followes upon it, but demands a reason to be given for it, by those princi∣ples, upon which, the resolution of all maters of Faith depends. All this while wee agree upon the supposition, that the Church is a Society of men subsisting by Gods revealed will, distinct from all other Societies. Be∣cause, as I said, those that have departed from the Church of Rome, have hitherto pretended, their own communion to be the true Church. For if it be said, that they do not, or scarce ever did agree in communion one with another, so that they can pretend to constitute all one Church; That is not, because they do not think, that they ought all to constitute one Church, but because they agree not upon the conditions; Each part thinking, that the other doth not believe, as those whom they may communicate with ought to believe. But this is now manifestly contradicted by two opinions among us, though the one can be no ect, the other as yet appears not to be one. The first is that of them that think themselves above Ordinances; the Communion of the Church onely obliging proficients, and every perfect Christian being to himself a Church. Of these, I said, there can be no sect, as communicating in nothing visible, as Christians. But, I need not have recourse to such an obscure Sect as this: For, the same is necessarily the opinion of all the sect that makes every Congregation Indepen∣dent and Sovereign in Church maters. For, if particular Congregations be not obliged, to joyn in communion to the constitution of one Church, wee may perhaps understand, the collection of all Congregations to be signified at once, by the name of the Church; but wee cannot imagine, that the Church, so un∣derstood, can be obliged by any sentence that can passe in it. And if this opi∣nion be true, it must be acknowledged, as of late years it hath been disputed a∣mongst us, that there is no crime of Schisme, in violating the unity of the Church; but, when a breach is made in a Congregation, obliged to communi∣cate one with another in Church maters. For, where there is no bond of unity, what crime can there be in dissolving it? This is then the ground of all Inde∣pendent Congregations, that there is no such thing as the Church, understanding
by the name of the Church, a Society or Corporation founded upon a Charter of Gods; which signification, the addition of Catholick and Apostolick in our Creed hath hitherto been thought to determine. But there is a second opinion in the Leviathan, who allowes all points of Ec∣clesiastical Power, in Excommunicating, Ordaining, and the rest, to the Sove∣raign Powers that are Christian; Though, before the Empire was Christian, hee granteth, that the Churches, (that is to say, the several Bodies of Christians that were dwelling in several Cities) had and exercised some parts of the same right, by virtue of the Scriptures. As you may see pag. 274-279. 287-292. Making that right, which the Scriptures give them for the time, to eschete to the Civil Power, when it is Christian, and dissolving the said Churches into the State or Common-wealth, which, once Christian, is, from thenceforth, the Church. And this, I suppose, upon this ground; (though hee doth not expresly allege it to that purpose) Because the Scripture hath not the force of a Law, obliging any man in justice to receive it, till Soveraign Powers make it such to their subjects, but onely contains good advice, which, hee that will, may imbrace for his souls health, and, hee that will not, at his peril may refuse. Thus hee teacheth, pag. 205. 281-287. If therefore the act of Soveraign Power give the Scripture the force of Law, then hath it a just claim to all rights and Powers founded upon the Scripture, as derived from it, and therefore vested originally in it. Hence followeth that desperate inference, concerning the right of Civil Power in mater of Religion, (not for a Christian but for an Apostate to publish) that, if the Soveraign command a Christian to renounce Christ, and the faith of Christ, hee is bound to do it with his mouth, but to believe with his heart. And therefore, much more, to obey whatsoever hee commandeth in Religion besides, whether to believe, or to do. The Reason; Because, in things not necessary to salvation, the obedience due by Gods and mans Law to the Soveraign, must take place. Now there is nothing necessary to salvation, saith hee; but to be∣lieve that our Lord Jesus is the Christ. All that the Scripture commandeth be∣sides this, is but the Law of Nature, which, when the Civil Law of every Land hath limited; whosoever observes that Law, cannot fail of fulfilling the Law of Nature. These things you have pag. 321-330. The late learned Selden in his first book de Synedriis Judaeorum, maintaining Erastus his opinion, that there is no power of Excommunicating in the Church by Gods Law, grants, (that which could not be denied) that the Church did exercise such a Power before Constantine, but, not by any charter of Gods, but by free consent of Christians among themselves. pag. 243, 244. Which, if hee will follow the grain of his own reason, hee is consequently to extend to the power of Ordaining, and, to all other rights which the Church, as a Corpo∣ration founded by God, can claim by Gods Law. And upon this ground, hee may dissolve the Church into the Common-wealth, and make the power of it an eschere to the Civil Power that is Christian, with lesse violence than the Levi∣athan doth: Because, whatsoever Corporations or Fraternities are bodied by suf∣ferance of the State, dissolve of themselves at the will of it, and resolve the powers which they have created into the disposition of it. And that this was his intent, whoso considereth what hee hath written; of the indowment of the Church in his History of Tithes; of Ordinations; in the second book de Syne∣driis of the right of the Civil Power in limiting causes of divorce; in his Ʋxor Ebraica; hath reason to judge, as well as I, who have heard him say, that all pretense of Ecclesiastical Power is an imposture. I say not that hee, or the rest of Erastus his followers make themselves, by the same consequence, liable to those horrible consequences which the Leviathan admits; But I say, that they are to bethink themselves, what right they will assign the Civil Power, in deter∣mining controversies in Religion that may arise; And, what assurance they can give their subjects, that their salvation is well provided for, standing to their de∣crees. Besides, I was to mention these opinions here, that those, who take the sentence of the Church to be the first ground of Faith, into which it is lastly re∣solved, may see, that they are to prove the Church to be a Corporation by di∣vine
Right, before they can challenge any such power for it. For, that which is once denied, it will be ridiculous to take for granted, without proving it. And, whatsoever may be the right of the Church, in deciding controversies of Faith, it cannot be proved, without evidence for this charter of the Church, as you shall see by and by more at large. CHAP. III. That neither the sentence of the Church, nor the dictate of Gods Spirit, can be the reason why the Scriptures are to be received. No man can know that hee hath Gods Spirit, without knowing that hee is a true Christian; Which supposeth the truth of the Scripture. The motives of Faith are the reason why the Scriptures are to be believed: And the consent of Gods people the reason that evidences those motives to be infallibly true. How the Scriptures are believed for themselves. How a Circle is made in rendering a reason of the Faith. The Scriptures are Gods Law to all, to whom they are published, by Gods act of publishing them; But Civil Law, by the act of Soveraign Powers, in acting Christianity upon their Sub∣jects. IT would not be easie to finde an entrance into such a perplexed Question, had not the dispute of it started another, concerning the reason why wee be∣lieve the Scriptures, whether upon the credit of the Church, or for themselves, or whether nothing but the Spirit of God speaking to each mans heart, is suffi∣cient to evidence, that it is the word of God which they contain. This if wee can resolve in our way, perhaps wee may discover ground to stand upon, when wee come to the main. Hee that sayes the Scriptures are to be believed for themselves, exposes them to the scorn of unbelievers, by tying himself to use no other reason for them, least for that reason, they should finde that credit, which, the seeking of it showes, they had not of themselves. Hee that sayes they are to be believed for the authority of the Church, is bound to give account how wee shall know, both that there is a Church which some persons may ob∣lige; And who is the Church, that is, who be the men whose act obliges the Church; And that, without alleging Scripture, because hitherto wee have no rea∣son to receive it: And being but men, how their Act obliges the Church, which cannot be showed, without showing, that God hath founded a Corporation of his Church, and given power to some men, or some qualities or ranks of men in it, to oblige the whole: Which, how it will be showed, without means to de∣termine the sense of the Scriptures, the parties agreeing in nothing but the truth of Christianity, and of the Scriptures, is impossible to be said. This position then induces that stop to all proceeding by reason, which Logicians call a Circle: When a man disputes in a round, as a mill-horse grindes, arguing this power to be in the Church by the Scriptures, (without which hee can say nothing to it) and arguing the truth of the Scriptures back again, by alleging the authority of the Church. Which destroyes that supposition upon which all dispute of reason proceeds, that nothing can be proved, but by that which is better known than that which it proveth. But, are those that allege the spirit for the evidence upon which they receive the Scripture lesse subject to this inconvenience? For, is it not manifest, that men may and do delude themselves, with an imagination, that Gods Spirit tells them that, which their own Spirit, without Gods Spirit conceives? How then shall it discerned, what comes from Gods Spirit, what does not, without supposing the Scriptures, by which the mater thereof is discer∣nable? And is not this the same Circle, to prove the truth of the Scriptures by the dictate of Gods Spirit, and that by alleging the Scriptures? To make the ground of this inconvenience still more evident, I will here insist upon this presumption; That the gift of the Holy Ghost presupposeth Christi∣anity, that is, the belief and profession of the Christian Faith; And therefore, that no man can know that hee hath the Holy Ghost, but hee must first know the truth of Christianity, and of the Scriptures. Not that it is my meaning, ei∣ther to suppose or prove in this place, that, whoso hath the Spirit of God, doth
or may know that hee hath it; For, that is one of those controversies, which wee are seeking principles to resolve. But, that no man can know that hee hath the Spirit of God, unlesse, first hee know himself to be a true Christian. That is to say, that, supposing for the present, but not granting, that a man can know that hee hath Gods Spirit, and that it is Gods Spirit which moves him to believe this or that; hee must first know what is true Christianity, and by consequence, the means to discern between true and false. And this I propose for an assumption necessary to the evidencing of that which followes, but not questioned by any party in the Church, because it is a principle in Christianity, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost is a promise peculiar to those that undertake it. Who were they on whom the Holy Ghost was first bestowed? Was it not the Apostles and the rest of Disciples assembled to serve God with the Offices of the Church, that is to say, already Christians? When Philip had converted the Samaritanes, came S. Peter and S. John to give them the Holy Ghost by laying on their hands, till they were baptized? Concerning the Disciples at E∣phesus, Acts XIX. 1-6. there is some dispute, whether they received the Holy Ghost by the imposition of S. Pauls hands, (by virtue of the Baptism of John, which they had received before they met with S. Paul) or whether they were ba∣ptized over and above with the baptisme of Christ, and thereupon received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of S. Pauls hands. But of this, they that will have them to have been baptized only with S. Johns baptisme, make no dispute, that they were fully made Christians by it. Can any thing be clearer than S. Pauls words, Gal. II. 2-5. That, by the hearing of Faith, (that is, obeying it) they had received the Holy Ghost, which by the works of the Law they could not re∣ceive? And 2 Cor. XI. 4. If hee that cometh preach another Jesus whom wee preached not, or yee receive another Spirit, which yee received not, or another Go∣spel which yee admitted not; Another Jesus, another Gospel, inferreth another Spirit. So Gal. III. 14. That the blessing of Abraham may come upon the Gen∣tiles through Christ Jesus, that yee may receive the promise of the Holy Ghost by Faith. The promise of the Holy Ghost then, supposeth the condition of Faith. And Gal. IV. 6. Because yee are sons, therefore God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts crying, Abba, Father. Heb. VI. 6. It is impossible for those that were once inlightened, and tasted the heavenly gift, and became partakers of the Holy Ghost; Upon inlightening, that is, baptisme, followes the participation of the H. Ghost. And, seeing the resurrection of the flesh unto glory is ascribed by S. Paul, to the Spirit of God that dwelt in it, while it lived upon earth Rom. VIII. 10, 11. as the resurrection of our Lord Christ is ascribed to the Spirit of holi∣nesse that dwelt in him without measure Rom. I. 4. John III. 34. of necessity the Holy Ghost dwelleth in all them that shall rise to glory. But Baptisme assureth resurrection to glory; Therefore it assureth the Holy Ghost by which they rise. Nor can it be understood how wee are the Temple of God, because the Spirit of God dwelleth in us, 1 Cor. III. 16. but because the promise of the Holy Ghost de∣pendeth upon that which distinguisheth Christians from other people. In fine, when our Saviour promiseth, John XIV. 23. If any man love mee, hee will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and wee will come to him and abide with him; Seeing the Father and the Son do dwell in those that love God, by the grace of the Holy Ghost, the gift of the Holy Ghost, of necessity supposeth the love of God in them that have it. And yet his discourse is more effectual Rom. VIII. 1-9. That, there is now no condemnation for those that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. For, as hee inferreth, that, if any man have not the spirit of Christ, hee is none of Christs: So hee had premised Rom. V. 1-5. Being justified by Faith, wee have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ, together with the joy of hope, by the love of God, poured out in our hearts through the Spirit of God which is in us. The Kingdome of God consisting in righteousnesse and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom. XIV. 17. If it be here objected, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost is necessary to bring a man to Christianity, and therefore can∣not suppose it; Supposing this for the present, but not granting it, because it is
in controversie, and must be resolved by the grounds which wee seek; It will be easie to distinguish between the grace of the Holy Ghost, and the gift of the Ho∣ly Ghost. For, hee that is converted to believe the truth of Christianity, may ac∣knowledge it to be of Grace, but must not presume of the gift of the Holy Ghost, that it is bestowed on him for his own, till his conversion be complete, by undertaking the profession of Christianity. If it be further alleged, that Corne∣lius and his company received the Holy Ghost before they were baptized: The answer is ready, from that maxime of Law; That, every exception against a Rule, establishes the Rule in cases not excepted. Cornelius, no Jew, but converted from Idols to worship the true God, under the promises which the Jewes expe∣cted, with his company of the same Faith, being in the state of Gods grace up∣on that account, receives the Holy Ghost before Baptisme, because God knew him ready to undertake the profession of Christianity, so soon as it could appear to be commanded by God. And this, for the satisfaction of S. Peter and the Jewes, in that secret, which hereby begn to be declared, that the Gentiles, as well as the Jewes, belonged to the Church. It is true, the graces of the Holy Ghost are of two kindes: For, some of them are given for the benefit and salvation of those in whom they are: Some for the benefit and edification of the Church. And it is true, that, both kindes are meant and expressed by these Scriptures. But it is no lesse true, that neither of them is to be had, but, supposing the truth of Christianity, and of the Scri∣ptures. For, the first kinde is granted to none, but those that imbrace Christia∣nity, with a sincere intention of living according to that which they professe: Being indeed, the help that God, by his Gospel, promises and allowes them, to go thorough with that high and difficult profession which they undertake. Wee see the Apostles forsake their Lord, and make a doubt of his resurrection, before the coming of the Holy Ghost; Whom having received, they are ready to pro∣fesse Christ, in the midst of utmost dangers. And S. John, as hee giveth the rea∣son why the righteous sin not, because their eed abideth in them, that is, the word of the Gospel by which they were ingendred anew to be Christians; 1 John III. 9. So hee giveth the reason, why they were not to be seduced by the Here∣sies of that time, because the unction which they had received from the Holy One taught them to know all things. 1 John II. 20, 27. Thus the Unction of the Spirit supposes the seed of the Word, and the seed of the Word inferres the Unction of the Spirit. And as, when the Word of God came to the Prophets, they were withall possessed by Gods Spirit, moving them to deliver it to the people: So, when the word of Faith is established in the heart of a Christian, (as David saith) the Spirit of God possesseth him with an inclination, both to professe it, and to live according to it. As for the second kinde, it is true, they are granted to those that are not heires of Gods promises, as it appeares by the instances of Saul, surprised with the Spirit of Prophesie, when hee intended the death of David, 1 Sam. XIX. 23, 24. Of those that have prophesied and cast out Devils and done miracles in our Lords name, to whom hee shall say; I know you not: Mat. VII. 22, 23. Of Caiaphas, who prophesied of our Lords death, when hee was compassing of it, John XI. 49,-52. And of Balaam in the last place, as all know. But, as the former kinde supposeth true Christianity in him that hath it, so doth this, correspondently, suppose the profession of it, as, under the old Law, the profession of the true God. The tryal of a Prophet under the Law was, not the doing of a miracle alone; If hee seduced from God, in stead of taking him for Gods messenger, they were to put him to death, Deut. XIII. 1-5. So, the tryal was, the doing of a miracle, under the profession of the true God. Under the Gospel; No man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus anathema, nor can any man call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. XII. 3. Supposing, that a man speaketh such things as must come, either from Gods Spi∣rit, or from evil Spirits, the tryal is, whether hee professe Christ or not. And 1 John IV. 2, 3. Every Spirit, that confesseth Jesus come in the flesh to be Christ, is of God. And every Spirit that confesseth not Jesus Christ, that is come in the flesh, is not of God. Every Spirit, that is, every inspiration which a man of
himself cannot have. God will not have his people so tempted, that, under the profession of the true Religion, the Devils instruments should have power to work miracles, to seduce them from it. Upon these terms prophesied Saul un∣der the Law, and upon the same terms prophesied those under the Gospel, whom our Lord will not own, having done miracles in his name. As for Caiaphas, it doth not appear that hee spoke those words, whereby S. John saith hee prophened of our Lords death, by revelation, or inspiration from God: For, the reason is given why hee prophened, because hee was High Priest that year. Now, when the High Priests declared Gods orders to his ancient people, there is no appea∣rance that they were inspired by revelation with that which they declared: But that, putting on the Pontifical robes, Gods will appeared by the brest-plate of Urim and Tummim, though now wee know not how. Accordingly, to were Caiaphas his words ordered, (this gift being ceased many ages afore) as to con∣taine a Prophesie of our Lords death by Gods intent, but without his. But Ba∣laams case is farre otherwise. Arnobius advers. Gent. I. tells us, that Magicians, in their operations, met with contrary Gods, whom hee calls Antitheos, that would not suffer them to proceed. Balaam met with the true God, and knew him to be so, and all his Inchantments controlable by him, and yet sacrifices to false Gods, that, by their help, hee might curse Gods people. In this case, Ba∣laam, though commanded as a subject, is not, as a friend, inspired by God, when God forces him to speak what hee would not. If any man, then, resolve the credit of the Scripture into the inward witness of Gods Spirit, dictating to his Spirit, that they are the word of God, it will be utterly impertinent to our purpose. For, seeking, as wee do, the means to re∣solve one another, it will be impertinent to allege that, which, though a man is inwardly satisfied with, yet outwardly to another cannot appear. And certain∣ly, if there be no reason to satisfie another man, of the truth of the whole, that is, of Christianity, or of the Scriptures; It cannot be expected, that there should be satisfaction, why this or that should belong to the truth of Christianity, or the intent and meaning of the Scriptures. For, of necessity, whatsoever evi∣dence can be made, for this or that truth contained in the Scriptures, must de∣pend upon the reason, for which Christianity is received as Gods truth. In fine, the reason why controversies in Religion may, and are to be ended by dispute of reason is this, as hath been premised, because that the Holy Ghost, which ef∣fectually moveth us to believe, supposeth sufficient reason, moving, in the nature of an object proposed, to believe. Therefore, neither the truth of Christiani∣ty, nor the Scripture is admitted upon the dictate of Gods Spirit, but, suppo∣sing the reasons which convict us that they are to be admitted. And correspon∣dently, the gift of the Holy Ghost, that inableth to continue in the profession and exercise of Christianity, supposeth the belief of that Christianity, which a man from his heart professes; And, by consequence, the reason why hee is to be∣lieve, which will not fail to inferre the truth of the Scriptures. But if it be said; That any person or persons, as Rulers of the Church, have the promise of inspiration or revelation from God, for a ground, upon which others are to be∣lieve; It hath been showed, that all such grace supposeth the profession of Chri∣stianity, and the truth of the Scriptures, and therefore the grounds of the same. If any man should say, as, I perceive some have a minde to say, that the gift of Infallibility in the Church, supposes no such inspiration or revelation, but onely the qualities of such persons as have power to conclude the Church, and that they do visibly proceed to determine; It will be evident, that they can no more challenge this right, not supposing Christianity, and the foundation of the Church, than the High Priest of the Jewes could proceed to give answer by U∣im and Tummim, not supposing, that God had given the Law, and appointed the Priest so to do. The resolution of this Question may make it appear, that Christians, falling out among themselves, maintain themselves upon such grounds, as would leave no room for the truth of that Christianity which both suppose. Had wee to do with the enemies of it, it would easily appear, wee must allege such reasons, for
the truth of Gods Word, as might convince the enemies of it, and not sup∣pose the truth of it, when the question is, how it may appear to be true. It were therefore fit to consider, whether a man can reasonably be a Christian, and yet question the truth of the Scriptures; or rather, not fit to consider that, which there can be no doubt in. The whole content of the Scripture is, either the motives, or the mater of Christianity. They that professe Christianity, suppose the motives of it true, which they admit to be sufficient. Supposing them true, they cannot question the Scriptures that record them: Supposing those Scri∣ptures, they cannot question those motives for true; Whether sufficient, is re∣solved, by admitting Christianity. Alwaies, the same reason that moves a man to be a Christian, resolves him to believe the Scripture; neither would hee allege any other, had hee to do with the enemies of Christianity. What those motives are concernes not us, proceeding upon supposition of common Christianity, to determine differences within it. Yet, that I may be the better understood, my meaning is; That the miracles, done by those from whom wee have the Scri∣ptures, is the onely motive to shew that they came from God, and therefore, that wee are obliged to receive what they preached, and, by consequence, the Scriptures that containe it. Not intending hereby to quit the advantage which the Law hath of Heathenism, and the Gospel of the Law, in regard of the rea∣sonablenesse and holinesse of the mater of each above other respectively, justi∣fied by the light of nature. But because the businesse is, at present, onely to shew the evidence wee have, that God did send, (whatsoever reason may be gi∣ven why hee would send) which, without other evidence, had remained unknown, though never so probable or reasonable. Not intending hereby to balk that witnesse, which the Scriptures of the Old Testament yield to the truth of the New. But because that witnesse depends upon the miracles done by Mo∣ses and the Prophets, to evidence their Commission from God: And so, the cre∣dit which the New Testament hath from the Old, is resolved into those miracles, which evidenced the sending of Moses and the Prophets, and consists in the miracle of fore-telling those things, by the one, which, by the other are full∣filled. I know the Jewes expresly deny the credit of the Law to depend upon any miracles done by Moses and the Prophets, but onely upon the appearance of God at giving the Law, to all that people, and speaking to them mouth to mouth: The like whereof not having been done, nor to be done, in giving Christianity, (belonging to all nations, who could not meet at once to receive it) they think themselves grounded thereupon, that the Law is not, nor could be reversed by it. Thus are they content, that God, sending Moses on his am∣bussage, with the miracles which hee gave him for his letters of credit, shall be thought, not to have convicted Pharao: That the Law provided no legal tryal, God no evidence to the conscience of his servants, distinguishing true and false Prophets, which cannot be imagined, but by their sayings and doings, predi∣ctions and other miracles. Well may the delivering of the Law have circum∣stances which no other miraculous action recorded in the Scriptures can com∣pare with; Shall that obscure the glory of Christs resurrection, fore-told by him expresse, to witnesse the truth of his message? Shall it make an Ocean of miracles, done by him and his Apostles, to stand for nothing? Shall it disable God himself, to do any thing competent to make faith of a message, the na∣ture whereof bore not those circumstances, which hee had used afore? Now, if the reason why wee believe the Scriptures to come from God, as they pretend, be the motives of Christianity, strange it is that a man should be troubled how to answer the difficulty that may be made, how wee know the truth of those motives, speaking onely to Christians, which have admitted them to be true. But I am sure, neither the witnesse of the Church, nor the dictate of the Spirit, can be alleged to Infidels, but by them that would have themselves and this Gospel laught at both at once. Seeing therefore that Christi∣ans do believe for the same reasons, for the which Infidels ought to believe, I shall yield, that it is onely the credit of Gods ancient people, and of Christs Church, that ma evidence, that those miracles were truly done, which I affirm
to be the onely motive to believe, being done at such distance of time and place from us. But, let not those that would learn, mistake what is meant by the name of the Church. For, if you suppose the Church to be a Society of men, whereof some, by Gods appointment, have power to oblige the whole, then will the credit of the Scripture be resolved into the authority of the Church, if the truth of those miracles, on which alone the credit thereof is said to depend, be grounded upon such a witnesse of the Church. But my meaning is, to sup∣pose no more by the name of the Church, in this place, but the whole number of believers from Christ to the worlds end; And so to say, that there is no o∣ther reason, why wee believe, that such men as Moses and the Prophets, as our Lord and his Apostles, did such works as the Scriptures report, to evidence that they came from God, but the consent of all Christians, that have imbraced the Gospel upon that motive. Neither shall the Gospel, hereby, depend more upon the witnesse of man, which may fail, than it depends upon the witnesse of him, who, upon seeing what was done by our Lord and his Apostles, should be mo∣ved to imbrace the Faith. For, though they had not taken effect with him; but for the report of his eyes, yet did not the force of them depend upon it. Hee that considers, shall finde, that the consent of all believers, in the whole motive of Faith, more than supplies the use of our eyes, in showing us sufficient reason to believe. There is a distance of place as well as of time; And, God forbid wee should say, those that never saw our Lord and his Apostles do the works for which wee believe, had not sufficient reason to believe. Their ears supplyed to them the use of their eyes, inasmuch as experience and common sense shows, that those things wherein the world agrees are no lesse certain and evident, though morally, than those which wee see with our eies. Hee that should not traffick into the East or West-Indies, or travail to Rome or Constantinople, before hee had seen them, must resolve not to see them. The reason is, because the world can have no common interest to deceive or to be deceived: Much lesse could the Law of Moses, least of all the Gospel of Christ have found credit, (the one imposing such an endlesse morosity of precepts to observe, the other the Crosse of Christ) had it not been originally manifest, that such things were done to evidence that and this. By which it appears, that this reason supposes no authority in the Church, founded upon the Gospel, as a Society communicating in it, because it supposes the same, in the people of the Jewes, as in the Church; The authori∣ty of the Church standing upon the Gospel, that which was over the Jewes, on the Law, whereof the one was to be removed, when the other took place. The reason, because it referreth nothing to the Church, but that intelligency which the community of mankinde furnish one another with, for assurance, in those things whereof all cannot be eye-witnesses, by the consent of all, which com∣mon reason makes to be as good evidence as our own senses. And now it will not be difficult to say, how the Scriptures are to be believed for themselves. For, inasmuch as the motives of believing are things recorded in Scripture, it will be necessary to grant, that the Scriptures are to be believed for themselves, which are to be believed for those things which the Scriptures report. But, if wee be further demanded, for what reason, those motives, which, if true, are sufficient to oblige all men to believe, are taken to be true? Hee that saies, because they are recorded in the Scriptures, grants that there is no reason to be∣lieve the Scriptures, granting, that there is no reason to believe the motives of faith, but the report of those Scriptures, the belief whereof supposes the truth of those motives. But, if wee impute the belief of that truth, to the common sense of all, who, upon the supposition of them, have submitted to Christianity and hold it, wee have the whole truth of the Scripture evidenced upon such a ground, as shall serve to inforce a resolution of whatsoever is questionable in Christianity, upon it. Whereas they who make the authority of the Church, or the dictate of the Holy Ghost the reason of believing, must either stand still when they are demanded the reason, or give it by supposing Christianity and the Scriptures; the truth whereof they pretend to prove by it, which is the Circle that I spoke of afore, admitting neither principle nor conclusion of discourse.
To confirm that which hath been said, let me demand how the Writings of Homer or Virgil, of Aristotle or Plato, of Tully or Demosthenes, of Hippocrates or Galen, come to be admitted without any question, for their Writings, after some two thousand years more or lesse? Is it not because, ever since they were penned, there have been those that have studied them for paterns of good Lan∣guage and Oratory, for the lest authors in Philosophy and Physick? Because, by them, and through their hands, they have been transmitted from age to age? Is not their credit by this means so unquestionable, that a man would be laught at, that should ask other reason for it? And yet, what is this in comparison of that which is to be said for the Scriptures? That, all nations having starred aside to worship many Gods, one people of the Jewes took upon them the worship of the onely true God, according to the Lawes recorded in the books of Moses; and that of so ancient time. That, being planted in the land of Canaan, God stirred them up Prophets from age to age, to keep them close to the service of their God. That, howsoever they kept them, they alwaies professed to be under those Lawes as Gods. That our Lord Jesus, and his Apostles by commission from him, in due time preached both Jewes and Gentiles to be rebels against God; And, that neither the Law of nature nor of Moses was able to free them from sin; Tendering in Gods name the terms upon which all may be reconciled to God, and evidencing their Commission by the works which they did in Gods name. That all parts of the civil world, being by that means convicted of the truth hereof, undertook to professe Christianity, notwithstanding the persecuti∣ons to which it was lyable, and do continue in it till this time. Is not this in∣fallible evidence, that wee have the very Writings of Moses, and of the Pro∣phets and Apostles, and that they who left them us were sent by God, seeing them admitted for Lawes to mens lives and conversations, which nothing but sufficient evidence that they came from God could have brought to passe? Here, if any man should say; I know I have the Writings of Homer, Aristotle or Tully, by the Writings themselvs, he might be convicted by tendering them to one that knowes nothing of Tully or Homer or Aristotle, and asking him, whether hee can say by those books, whether they be Homers or Aristotles or Tullies Writings. Bu he that first understands, what account the world alwaies hath had their Writings in, and studying them, finds the marks in them, may well say, that hee knows the authors by their Writings. So, tender the Scripture in Ebrew or Greek to a sa∣vage of the West-Indies, and ask him, whether they be the Word of God or not, who believes not in God as yet, do you believe hee can tell you the truth? But, convict him of that which I have said, how and by what means they came to our hands, how they have been and are owned for Lawes to the hearts and lives of Gods people, and hee will stand convict to God, if hee believe not, finding that written in the Books, which the men own for the rule of their conversa∣tions. So, by the same means that all records of Learning are conveyed us, are the Scriptures evidenced to be mater of historical faith. But, inasmuch as the mater of them had never been received but by the work of God, in that regard, they become mater of supernatural faith, in regard of the reason, moving in the nature of an object, to believe, as well as in regard of Gods grace, moving in the nature of an effective cause. I know there have been divers answers made to assoile this difficulty, by those that dispute Controversies; That the Scriptures authority is better known in or∣der of nature, the Churches in that order, by which wee get our knowledg, (as Logicians and Philosophers use to distinguish between notius naturâ and notius nobis, because our knowledg rises upon experience which wee have by sense of particulars, and yet the general reason, being once attained by that means, is in some sense better known than that which depends upon it) That the autho∣rity of the Scripture is the reason why wee believe, but, the authority of the Church, a condition requisite to the same, creating in the mindes of men that discreetly consider it a kinde of inferior Faith, though infallible, which disposes a man to accept the mater of that Faith which God onely revealeth, though the reason why we believe is only the act of God revealing that which he obligeth us
to believe. But all this to no purpose, so long as they suppose the foundation of the Church in the nature of a Corporation, for the ground of admitting the ma∣ter of Faith, not the credit of all believers agreeing in witnessing the motives of Faith. I remember in my yonger time in Cambridge an observation out of Averrois the Saracene his Commentaries upon Aristotle, which as I finde exactly true, so may it be of good use; That, in Geometry and the Mathematicks the same thing is notius naturâ and nobis, to wit, the first principles and rudiments of those sciences, which, being evident as soon as understood, produce in time those conclusions, which no stranger to those studies can imagine how they should be discovered. For, being offered to the understanding that comprehendsthe mean∣ing of them, they require no experience of particulars with sense & time brings forth, to frame a general conceit of that in which all agree, or to pronounce what holds in all particulars; Because it is immediately evident, that the same holds in all particulars, as in one, which a man has before his eyes. The like is to be said of the processe in hand, though the reason be farre otherwise. Hee that considers may see, that the motives of Faith, assured to the common sense and reason of all men, by the consent of believers, are immediately the reason, why wee believe the Scriptures in which they are recorded to be the Word of God, without so much as supposing any such thing as a Church in the nature of a Cor∣poration, indowed with authority over those of whom it consists; The consent of Christians as particular persons, obliging common reason, both to believe the Scriptures, and whatever that belief inferres. As this must be known before wee can believe the Scriptures, so being known, it must be, if any be, the onely reason why we believe either the Scriptures, or that Christianity which they con∣vey unto us. And if it be the onely reason why wee believe, then is it better known in order of reason as well as of sense, to be true, than the authority of the Church, the knowledg whereof must resolve into the reason why wee are Christians. And if this be true, then is not the authority of the Church, (as a Cor∣poration to be obliged by the act of some members) so much as a condition re∣quisite to induce any man to believe; All men, by having the onely true reason why all are to believe, being subject to condemnation if they believe not: But not if they believe not the Corporation of the Church, unlesse it may appeare to be a part of that Faith, which that onely reason moves us to believe. Neither doth the credit which wee give to all Christians, witnessing the motives of Faith to be true, by submitting to Christianity in regard of them, create in us any inferior Faith of the nature of humane, because the witnesse of man convayes the motives thereof to our knowledg. But serves us to the same use, as mens eyes and other senses served them, when they saw those things done, which Moses and the Prophets, which our Lord and his Apostles did, to induce men to believe that they came from God. For, as true as it is, that, if God have provided such signs to attest his Commission, then we are bound to be∣lieve; So true is it, that, if all Christians agree, that God did procure them to be done, then did hee indeed procute them to be done that men might believe. For so great a part of mankinde could not be out of their wits all at once: Let not therefore those miracles which God hath provided to attest the Commissions of Moses and the Prophets, of our Lord and his Apostles, be counted common and probable motives to believe, unlesse wee will confesse, that wee have none but common and probable motives. For, what reason can wee have to believe that shall not depend upon their credit? Unlesse it be the light of natural reason, which may make that which they preach more evidently credible, but never evi∣dently true. If these works were provided by God to oblige us to believe, then is that Faith which they create truely divine, and the work of God; Though, had all men been blinde, they had not been seen, and had all men been out of their wits, wee might presume, that they had agreed in an imposture. And now it will be easie to answer the words of S. Augustine contra Episto∣lam fundamenti cap. V. which alwaies have a place in this dispute, though I can as yet admit S. Augustine no otherwise than as a particular Christian, and his saying, as a presumption, that hee hath said no more than any Christian would
have said in the common cause of all Christians against the Manichees. Ego Evan∣gelio non crederem, saith hee, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae moveret authoritas. I would not believe, or have believed, the Gospel, had not the authority of the Catholick Church moved mee. For, some men have imployed a great deal of learning to show, that moveret stands for movisset, as in many other places both of S. Augustine and of other Africane Writers. And without doubt they have showed it past contradiction, and I would make no doubt to show the like in S. Hierome, Si∣donius and other Writers of the decaying ages of the Latine tongue, as well as in the Africane Writers, if it were any thing to the purpose. For is not the Question, manifestly, what it is that obligeth that man to believe who as yet be∣lieveth not? Is it not the same reason that obliges him to become and to be a Christian? Therefore, whether moveret or movisset, all is one: The Question is, whether the authority of the Church as a Corporation, that is, of those per∣sons who are able to oblige the Church, would have moved S. Austine to believe the Gospel, because they held it to be true: Or the credit of the Church as of so many men of common sense, attesting the truth of those reasons which the Gospel tenders, why wee ought to believe. What is it then that obliged S. Au∣stine to the Church? The consent of people and nations, that authority which miracles had begun, which hope had nourished, charity increased, succession of time settled, from S. Peter to the present, the name and title of Catholick so visible, that no Heretick durst show a man the way to his Church, demanding the way to the Catholick. So hee expresseth it cap. 111. And what is this in English, but the conversion of the Gentiles foretold by the Prophets, attested by God, and visibly settled in the Unity of the Church? Whereupon hee may boldly affirm, as hee doth afterwards, that, if there were any word in the Go∣spel manifestly witnessing Manes to be the Apostle of Christ, hee would not believe the Gospel any more. For, if the reason for which hee had once belie∣ved the Church that the Gospel is true, because hee saw it verified in the being of the Church, should be supposed false, there could remain no reason to ob∣lige us to take the Gospel for true. All that remaines for the Church in the na∣ture and quality of a Corporation, by this account, will be this; That it is more discretion for him that is in doubt of the truth of Christianity, to take the rea∣son of it from the Church, that is, from those whom the Church trusteth to give it, than from particular Christians, who can by no means be presumed to understand it so well as they may do. For otherwise, supposing a particular Christian sets forth the same reasons which the Church does, how can any man not be bound to follow him, that is bound to follow the Church? So that, the reasons which both allege being contained in the Scriptures, the Church is no more in comparison of the Scriptures, than the Samaritane in comparison of our Lord himself, when her fellow-citizens tell her John IV. 12. Wee believe no more for thy saying; For wee our selves have heard and know that this is of a truth the Saviour of the World, the Christ. For, the reasons, for which, our Lord himself tells us that wee are to believe, are contained in the Scriptures. But by the premises it will be most manifest, that the same Circle in dis∣course is committed by them, who resolve the reason why they believe into the dictate of the Spirit, as, into the decree of the Church. For, the question is not now of the effective cause, whether or no, in that nature, a man is able to imbrace the true Faith without the assistance of Gods Spirit or not; Which ought here to remain questionable, because it is to be tried upon the grounds upon which here wee are seeking. And therefore, that Faith which is ground∣ed upon revelation from God, and competent evidence of the same, is to be counted divine supernatural Faith, without granting, (whatsoever wee may sup∣pose) any supernatural operation of Gods Spirit, to work it, in the nature of an effective cause, which must remain questionable, supposing the reason why wee believe the Scriptures. But, in the nature of an object, presenting unto the un∣derstanding the reason why we are to believe, it is manifest by the premises, that no man can know that hee hath Gods Spirit, that knoweth not the truth of the Scriptures. If therefore hee allege, that hee knowes the Scriptures to be true,
because Gods Spirit saith so to his Spirit; hee allegeth for a reason, that which hee could not know, but, supposing that for granted, which hee pretendeth to prove; To wit, That the dictate of his own Spirit is from Gods Spirit. Indeed when the motives of Faith proceed from Gods Spirit in Moses and the Pro∣phets, in our Lord and his Apostles, witnessing, by the works which they do, their Commission as well as their message, who can deny that this is the light of Gods Spirit? Again, when wee govern our doings by that which wee believe, and not by that which wee see, who will deny that this is the light of Faith and of Gods Spirit? But, both these considerations take place, though wee sup∣pose the mater of Faith to remain obscure in it self, though to us evidently cre∣dible, for the reasons God showes us, to believe that hee saith it. If any man seek, in the mater of Faith, any evidence to assure the conscience, in the nature of an object, or reason why wee are to believe, that is not derived from the mo∣tives of Faith, outwardly attesting Gods act of revealing it, hee falls into the same inconvenience with those, who believe their Christianity because the Church commends it, and again the Church, because Christianity commends it. As for that monstrous imagination, that the Scripture is not Law to oblige any man in justice to believe it, before the Secular Powers give it force over their subjects; Supposing for the present that which I said before, that it is all one question, whether Christianity or whether the Scriptures oblige us as Law or not; Let mee demand, whether our Lord Christ and his Apostles have showed us sufficient reasons to convince us, that wee are bound to believe and become Christians? If not, why are wee Christians? If so, can wee be obliged, and no Law to oblige us? supposing for the present, though not granting, because it is not true, that, by refusing Christianity sufficiently proposed, a man comes not under sin, but onely comes not from under it, but remains under that sin, which, by refusing the Gospel, hee refuses to escape; The man whom God showes competent reasons to convict him of the truth of Christianity, does hee not thereby oblige to believe? If so, then is Christianity, by those reasons, and, by out Lord and his Apostles advancing them, published for Gods Law, to all them, to whom those reasons become known. Suppose that, not onely the Apostles, but God himself do no more than perswade men to believe, can any Secular Power do more? For, what can it do more, in making a Law, than de∣clare the will of the Soveraign, under a punishment expressed? And doth not God declare, when hee sends those that are furnished with means to convict the world of the truth of Christianity, that it is his will that they become Christi∣ans? And is it not competent punishment to inact a Law, that, by disobeying, men become incapable of escaping their own sin, and the punishment of it? If Christianity be no Law, because a man hath his choice whether hee will believe or not, hath not a thief his choice whether hee will be hanged or not steal? or is not the mischief that comes by refusing the Faith, as great as that? As for the point of justice, is not gtatitude justice? doth not God oblige them in point of justice, whom hee obligeth in point of gratitude? doth hee not oblige them in point of gratitude, whom, by his Gospel, hee showes the way to come from under sin, to everlasting happinesse? Again, is it not justice that mankinde should be subjects, and not rebels to God? doth not the Gospel preach, that mankinde are become rebels to God, and that they ought to return and become his Subjects? If wee can owe a debt of justice to God or to our selves, the greatest is that, which the Gospel bindeth upon us. But, suppose not onely that which this Dogmatist granteth, that hee who is bound to renounce Christ with his mouth when his Soveraign commandeth, is bound to believe him with his heart at the same time, let mee demand by what Law hee is bound to it, if the Scriptures be not Law? Or how a man can be bound to believe in heart that our Lord Jesus is the Christ, and not be bound to receive, either the mater, or the motives to believe that which Christ teacheth, which is all that the Scriptures containe? Wherefore wee are by no means to admit that which this Author presumes upon as evident truth; That it is one thing to demand, why a man believes the Scriptures, another thing to demand, how a man knowes them
to be the Word of God, and a third, by what authority they become Law: Be∣cause, saith hee, one man believes for this reason, another for that; But, to know the Scripture to be the Word of God, is a thing that no man can do, but onely hee to whom this or that Scripture was revealed. For, it is true, that one man be∣lieves for this reason, another for that, if they believe not for that reason for which they ought to. believe. But there is but one reason for which God requires us to believe, namely, his will, declared by the motives of Faith, which hee, by his messengers or deputies hath presented us with; And hee that is moved to believe for any reason besides that, is but called a believer, for hee is not such in Gods esteem. And hee that by these reasons stands convict, that those mes∣sengers came from God, though hee cannot know by the report of his senses, nor by any evidence of the mater which they contain, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, yet may hee reasonably be said to know that they are so, because hee knowes those reasons, by which hee stands convict that they are no other∣wise. And I have now further showed, that the publishing of Christianity, that is, the tendering of the Scriptures with this evidence, that they contain the word and will of God, bindes them for a Law upon the consciences of all that receive them so, obliging them not onely to believe all that they contain to be true, but to undertake and do whatsoever they require. Wherefore it is true, that the Scriptures, or Christianity, becomes the civil Law of a State, because the Soveraign Power thereof inacteth it; But wee are further to demand, whether Secular Power is able to do this because it is Soveraign, or because it is Christi∣an. For, if, because it is Sovetaign, it will follow of necessity, that those who are not subject to Christian Powers, are not obliged to believe the truth of the Scri∣ptures, nor to be Christians, if there be no other Law to require it at their hands but the will of their Soveraign; Because the onely reason, which, this o∣pinion saith, obliges them to believe, that is, the act of Soveraigne Power is wanting. If, because it is Christian, the question will have recourse, what it was that obliged the Soveraign Power to become Christian. For, the act of Soverigne Power hath no effect upon it self, but upon those that are under it; And yet, the same reason why the Soveraign Power is bound to believe, will convince all that are under it, that they also ought to believe, because concerning them as men, or at least, as those men whom the motives of Faith are published to, not as of this or that Common-wealth. But, in this businesse I am most ashamed for Euclid's sake, that a man so studied in Geometry, should build such a vast pretense in Christia∣nity, upon such an imaginary ground. Forsooth, Abraham, and the Patriarchs after him, and then Moses, had the Soveraign Power of their Families, and of Gods people; the Patriarchs by their birth and estate, Moses, by the contract of the Israelites, accepting of God for their Civil Soveraign, and Moses for his Lieu∣tenant. The same Patriarchs and Moses were absolute in maters of Religion, be∣cause Gods people inferiors were to be ruled in it by no other Laws, then those which God published to them, by the hands of those Superiors. Hee that will go about to draw the conclusion from these principles, (whether granted, or onely supposed) shall easily see that it followes not. For, half an eye will serve to di∣stinguish two qualities, in the Patriarchs, and in Moses, the one of Soveraignes, the other of Prophets, or Depuries and Commissaries, or Interpreters of the will of God to his people; And, this distinction being made, I will not be be∣holden to any man to say, which of the two it was, that could oblige their in∣feriors to obey, as Gods Lawes, those things, which persons so authorized should declare in his name. For if those, whom God, by sufficient evidence had wit∣nessed to be his Prophets and messengers, should falsify his trust, the blame of that which should be done upon such deceit must needs redound upon God. And therefore this author pag. 231, 287. agreeth with that which I argued even now, that revelations and inspirations of Gods Spirit are not granted under the Gospel, but to those who professe the true Christ; Nor under the Law were granted, but to those who professed the true God. And for this cause they are called by S. Paul 1 Cor. XII. 7. the manifestation of the Spirit; because they ma∣nifest
the presence of God in his Church. As 1 Cor. XIV. 22-25. hee saith; that unbelievers, seeing the secrets of their hearts revealed by those graces, were moved to fall on their faces, and worship God, declaring that God is in his Church of a truth. Those therefore who are thus witnessed by God, upon his witnesse are to be received, whatsoever they deliver in Gods name, concerning either the Law of Moses, or the Gospel of Christ. For, how can any man ima∣gine, that, upon every new revelation declared by a Prophet, upon every new letter written, or act done by an Apostle, a new evidence should be requisite, to attest a new Commission from God? Especially, the presumption, that God will not suffer his people to be abused by trusting him, being necessary, and not one∣ly reasonable. Since therefore our Lord and his Apostles carry this quality, no lesse than did Moses and the Prophets, it followes of necessity, that their wri∣tings, and what else they may have ordained, are no lesse the Law of God, no lesse obliging, than the Law of Moses, by virtue of their Commission, which makes their acts in Gods name to be Gods acts: Though civil Law they are not, till civil Powers binde them upon their Subjects. CHAP. IV. Neither the Dictate of Gods Spirit nor the authority of the Church is the reason of believing any thing in Christianity. Whether the Church be before the Scripture, or the Scripture before the Church. The Scriptures contain not the Infallibility of the Church. Nor the consent of all Christians. IT is now time to proceed to the resolution of some part of those disputes and opinions, which, wee showed the world divided into, upon occasion of the question, how Controversies of Faith are to be tryed and ended; That is to say, so much of them, as must be determined by him that will proceed in this dispute. For, supposing the premises to be true, I shall not make any diffi∣culty to conclude; That, neither the dictate of the Spirit of God to the Spirits of particular Christians, (that is, the presumption of it) nor the authority of the Church, (that is, the presumption of the like dictate to any persons that may be thought to have power of obliging the Church) is a competent reason, to decide the meaning of the Scripture, or any Controversie about mater of Faith, obliging any man therefore to believe it. And by consequence, that the authority of the Church, (that is, of persons authorized to give sentence in behalf of the Body of the Church, here understood) is not Infallible, which if it were, it must be without question admitted for a competent reason of be∣lieving all such sentences to be Infallibly true. The truth of this Conclusion is demonstrated by the premises, if any thing, in a mater of this nature, can be counted demonstrative. If whatsoever the Spirit of God can be presumed to dictate to the Spirit of any Christian, presupposeth the truth of Christianity, (as that which must try it, whether onely a presumption or truth) then can no mans word, that professes Christianity, be the reason why another man should believe. For, whosoever it is that gives the sentence, by professing Christiani∣ty, pretendeth to have a reason for what hee professeth, which reason, and not his judgment, if it be good, obligeth all Christians, as well as him, to believe. For, being once resolved, that, wee are obliged to believe whatsoever comes from those persons, whom wee are convinced to believe, that God imployed to declare his will to us; Whatsoever is said to come from them, must, for the same reason be received, and therefore, by the same meanes said to come from them, as it is said that they came from God. On the other side, whatsoever cannot by the same means be said to come from them, can never by any means be said to come from God, who hath given us no other means to know, what hee would have us believe, but those whom hee hath imployed on his message. Wherefore, seeing the authority of the Church supposeth the truth of Christianity, of neces∣sity it supposeth the reason, for which, whatsoever can be pretended to belong to Christianity is receivable; Because, supposing for the present, though not
granting, that the Church is a Body, which some persons, by Gods appoint∣ment, have authority to oblige, it is manifest, that no man can be vested with this authority, but hee must bear the profession of a Christian, and, by conse∣quence, suppose the reasons upon which whatsoever belongs to the profession of a Christian is receivable. For, that which cannot be derived, as for the evidence of it, from those means, by which wee stand convicted that Christianity stands upon true motives, cannot be receivable as any part of it. And therefore, how∣ever the generality of this reason may obscure the evidence of it, to them that take not the pains to consider it as it deserves, yet, the truth of it supposes no more than all use of reason supposes, that all knowledg that is to be had, pro∣ceeds upon something presupposed to be known. In which case, it would be very childish to consider, that the Church is more an∣cient in time than the Scriptures, at least, than some part of them, as the Writings of the Apostles for example, &, in some sort, then all Scriptures, if wee understand the people of God and the Church to be the same thing. For, to passe by sor the present the Fathers before the Law, as the people of Israel were Gods people by the Covenant of the Law, before they received the Law written in the five Books of Moses; So was the authority of Moses, (imployed by God to medi∣ate that Covenant) both good and sufficient, before they by accepting the Law became Gods people: And upon this authority alone, and not upon any au∣thority founded upon their being Gods people, (free, and possessed of the Land of Promise, to be ruled by themselves and their own Governors) dependeth the credit of Moses and the Prophets Writings. In like manner, the being of the Church (whether a Society and Corporation or not) supposing the profession of Christianity, and that, the receiving of the Gospel, which is the Covenant of Grace, and that, the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, as sent by God to establish it; Manifest it is, that the credit of their Writings depends on nothing else, but is supposed to the being of the Church, whatsoever it is. Which if it be so, no lesse manifest it must be, that nothing is receivable for truth in Christianity, that cannot be evidenced to proceed from that authority that is more antient than the being of the Church, as a truth declared by some act of that authority. And therefore, it would be childish to allege priority of time for the Church, (if perhaps it may be said, in some regard, that the Church was before the Scriptures) when as, in order of reason, it is evident, that the truth of Christianity is supposed to the being of it, inasmuch as no man can be, or be known to be of the Church, but as hee is, or is known to be a Christian. And truly those that dispute, the authority of the Church to be the the reason to believe the sentence of it in mater of Faith to be true, are to consider what they will say to that opinion, which utterly denies any such authority, any such thing as a Church; Understanding the Church to be a Society founded by Gods appointment, giving publick authority to some persons, so or so qualified by that appointment, in behalf of the whole; For this all must deny, that admit Era∣stus his opinion of Excommunication to be true, if they will admit the conse∣quence of their own doctrine. Which opinion I have therefore premised, in staring this Question, that it may appear to require such an answer, as may not suppose the being of the Church in that nature, but may be a means to demon∣strate it. But, as it is not my intent to begg so great a thing in question, by proceeding upon supposition of any authority in the Church, before I can prove it to be a Corporation founded with such authority as the foundation of it re∣quireth; So is it as farre from my meaning, to deny that authority which I do not suppose. For, hee that denieth the authority of the Church to be the reason why any thing is to be taken for truth, or for the meaning of the Scripture, may take the due and true authority of the Church to be a part of that truth, which is more ancient than the authority of the Church; Inasmuch as it must be be∣lieved, that God hath founded a Society of them which professe Christianity, by the name of the Church, (giving such authority to some members of it in behalf of the whole, as hee pleased) before it can be believed, that this or that is within the authority of the Church. For, that there is a
Church, and a publick authority in it and for it, and what things they are that fall under that authority, if it be true, is part of that truth, which our Lord and his Apostles, whose authority is more ancient than the Church, have declared. Indeed if it were true, that the first truth which all Christians are to believe, and for the reason of it to believe every thing else, is the saying of persons so and so qualified in the Church, then were it evident, that the belief of that which is questioned in religion, could not be resolved into any other principle. But if it be manifest, by the motives of Christianity, that the authority of the Apostles is antecedent to it, that all Scripture, and the meaning of Scripture, (which signifies nothing beside it own meaning) and Tradition of the Apostles, (if any such Tradition over and above Scripture may appear) is true, not suppo∣sing it, (as appeares by the premises) then is the authority of the Church no ground of Faith, and so not Infallible. There are indeed sundry Objections made, both out of Scripture and the Fathers, to weaken and to shake such an evi∣dent truth, which are not here to be related, till wee have resolved, as well what is the reason of believing in Controversies of Faith, as what is not. In the mean time, if wee demand, by what means any person, that can pretend to give sentence in Controversies of Faith, knowes his own sentence to be in∣fallible, or upon what ground hee gives sentence; Hee that answers by Scri∣pture, or authority of Writers that professe to have learned from the Scriptures, or reasons depending on the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, acknow∣ledges the authority of the Church not to be the reason of believing; For, what need wee all this, if it were? If hee say, by the same means, for which these are receivable, that is, by revelation from God; It will be presently de∣manded, to make evidence of such revelation, the same evidence as wee have for the truth of the Scriptures; Which, because it cannot be done, therefore, is this plea laid aside, even by them, who neverthelesse, professe to imbrace the Communion of the Church of Rome, because they believe the Church to be Infallible. But if it be destructive to all use of reason, to deny the conclu∣sion, admitting the premises, then let him never hope to prevaile in any dispute, that holds the conclusion, denying the premises. For to hold the sentence of the Church Infallible, when the means, that depend upon the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, proves whatsoever is to be believed, without supposing any such thing; when revelation, independent upon their authority there is acknow∣ledged to be none; averreth Infallibility in the sentence of the Church, deny∣ing the onely principle that can inferre it. And therefore, those that speak things so inconsequent, so inconsistent, I shall not grant that they speake those things which themselves think and believe, but rather, that, like men upon the rack, they speak things which themselves may, and in some sort do know not to be true. For, whosoever holds an opinion, which hee sees an argument against, that hee cannot resolve, is really and truly upon the rack, and, of necessity, seeks to escape, by contradicting what himself confesseth otherwise. Which every man of necessity doth, who, acknowledging the reason of believing Christianity to lye in the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, challengeth neverthelesse that Infallability, which is the reason of believing, to all sentences of the Church, the mater of which sentence, if it be true, the reason of it must depend immedi∣ately upon the same authority, upon which the authority of the Church which sentenceth dependeth. But the consequence of this assertion deserves further consideration, because all that followes depends upon it. Suppose, that the Scriptures prove them∣selves to be the Word of God, by the reasons of believing contained in them, witnessed by the common sense of all Christians. For this admits no dispute. If the same consent can evidence any thing belonging to the mater of Faith, that will appear to oblige the Faith of all Christians, upon the same reason as the Scriptures do, whether contained in the Scriptures or not. For who will undertake, that God could not have preserved Christianity, without either Scri∣ptures or new revelations? And therefore hee chose the way of writing, not as of absolute necessity, but as of incomparable advantage. If therefore
God might have obliged man to believe any thing not delivered by writing, whether hee hath or not will remain questionable, supposing the Scriptures to be the Word of God upon the ground aforesaid. Besides, there are many things so manifest in the Scriptures, that they can indure no dispute supposing the Scri∣ptures to be the Word of God: Many things are every day cleared more and more, by applying the knowledg of the Languages and of Historical truth to the text of the Scripture: And many things more may be cleared by applying the light of reason, void of partiality and prejudice, to draw the truth so cleared into consequence. No part of all this can be said to be held upon any decree of the Church; Because no part of the evidence supposes the Church in the na∣ture and quality of a Corporation, the constitution whereof inableth some per∣sons to oblige the whole. Because there are maters in question concerning our common Christianity and the sense of the Scriptures, upon which the great mis∣chief of divion is fallen out in the Church, it is thought a plausible plea to say, that the decree of the present Church, (supposing the foundation of the Church in that nature, and the power given to every part in behalf of the whole, of which no evidence can be made, not supposing all that for truth which I have said) obligeth all Christians to believe, as much as the Scriptures, supposing them to be the Word of God, can do. Which they that affirm do not consider, that it must first be evident to all that are to be obliged; Both that the Church is so founded, and whoe Act it is, and how that Act must be done which must oblige it. Seeing then that the Scriptures are admitted on all sides, to be the Word of God, let us see whether it be as evident as the Scriptures, that the act of the Pope, or of a General Council or both, oblige the Church to believe the truth of that which they decree, as much as the Scriptures. I know there are texts of Scripture alleged; First, concerning the Apostles and Disciples, Mat. X. 14, 15, 40. Luke IX. 5. X. 10, 11, 16. where those that refuse them are in worse estate than Sodom and Gomorrha. And, Hee that hea∣reth you, heareth mee; Hee that neglecteth you, neglecteth mee. Mat. XXVIII. 19, 20. Go make all Nations Disciples—teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you, and behold I am with you to the worlds end. 1 Thess. II. 13. Yee received the Gospel of us, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed, the word of God. Then concerning S. Peter, as predecessor of all Popes, Mat. XVI. 18, 19. Ʋpon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give thee the keyes of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou bin∣dest on earth shall be bound in heaven, whatsoever thou loosest on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Luke XXII. 32. I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not, and thou, once converted, strengthen thy brethren. John XXI. 15, 16, 17. Simon son of Jonas, lovest thou mee? Feed my lambs, feed my sheep. Again, concerning the Church and Councils, Mat. XVIII. 17-20. If hee heare them not, tell the Church: If hee hear not the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen or a Publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever yee binde on earth shall be bound in heaven: whatsoever yee loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you; If two of you agree on earth, upon any thing, to ask it, it shall be done them from my Father in heaven, For, where two or three are assembled in my name, there am I in the midst of them. John XVI. 13. The Spirit of truth shall lead you into all truth. Acts XV. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. 1 Tim. III. 15. That thou mayest know now it behoveth to converse in the house of God, which is the Churchof God, the pillar and establishment of the truth. You have further, the exhortations of the Apostles, 1 Thess. V. 12, 13. Now I beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And esteem them more than a∣bundantly in love, for their works sake. Heb. XIII 7, 17. Bee obedient and give way to your Rulers, for they watch for your souls, as those that must give account: That they may do it joyfully, and not groaning; Which is not for your profit. And afore, Rememeer your Rulers which have spoken to you the Word of God: And, conside∣ring the issue of their conversation, imitate their Faith. Those that spoke unto them the Word of God are the Apostles, or, their companions and deputies, whom hee commandeth them to obey no otherwise than those who presently
watched over them after their death. In the Old Testament likewise Deut. XVII. 5-12. Hee that obeyeth not the determination of the Court that was to sit be∣fore the Ark is adjudged to death. Therefore Hag. II. 12. Thus saith the Lord the God of Hosts; Ask the Priests concerning the Law. Mal. II. 7. The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and the Law shall they require at his mouth. For hee is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. The answers of the Priests resolved in∣to the decrees of the said Court; therefore they are unquestionable. And this Power established by the Law, our Lord acknowledging the Law, allowes Mat. XXIII. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit on Moses chair: whatsoever there∣fore they command you that do: But according to their works do not. This is that which is alleged out of the Scriptures for that Infallibility which is challenged for the Church. If I have left any thing behinde, it will prove as inef∣fectual as the rest; In all which there are so many considerations appear, why the sense of them should be limited on this side, or extended beyond the body of the Church, that it is evident they cannot serve for evidence to ground the Infalli∣bility of it. For, is it not evident, that the neglect of the Apostles, in question∣ing their doctrine, redounds upon our Lord, who by sending them, stamps on them the marks of his Fathers authority, which hee is trusted with? Not so the Church. For who can say, that God gives any testimony to the lie which it telleth, seeing Christianity is supposed, the Infallibility thereof remaining questionable? Is it not evident, that God is with his Chu,ch, not as a Corporation, but as the collection of many good Christians; Supposing that, those who have power to teach the Church by the constitution thereof, teach lies, and yet all are not car∣ried away with their doctrine, but believe Gods truth, so farre as the necessity of their salvation requires? If there were any contradiction in this supposition, how could it be maintained in the Church of Rome, that so it shall be when An∣tichrist comes, as many do maintain? Besides, is it as evident as Christianity, or the Scriptures, that this promise is not conditional, and to have effect, supposing, both the teaching, and the following of that which our Lord lud taught, and nothing else? Surely, if those that refuse the Gospel be in a worse state than those of Sodom and Gomorrha, it followeth not yet, that all that refuse to hear the Church without the Gospel are so. For the truth of the Gospel supposeth that there is no means but the Gospel to save us. But if wee be saved by believing the Gospel, wee may be saved, not believing that which the Church teacheth without it. For, that which the Gospel obligeth us to believe unto salvation, it is agreed already, that wee cannot be saved without believing it. Suppose now the Church to continue till the last day, not as one visible Body, but broken into pieces, as wee see it, so that alwaies there remain a number of good Christians, (for, whe∣ther or no they that communicate not with the Church of Rome may be good Christians, is the thing in question, not to be taken for truth without proving) shall the gates of hell be said to prevail against the Church all that while? Besides; Grotius expounds those words to signifie no more but this; That death and the grave (which  or Hell in the stile of the Old Testament signifies) shall never prevail over Christians; That is, that they shall rise again. And I suppose, it is not so evident that this exposition is false, as, that the Gospel is true. As for the Keyes of Christs Kingdom, let him that saith they argue Infallibility, say also, that they cannot be abused; But hee will have more shame, if not more sense, than to say it. The Thessalonians received the Gospel as the Word of God, be∣cause they supposed it to be , the Word which God sent them newes of. Would they therefore have received the decrees of the Church with the same reverence, not supposing them the Word of God, till some body prove it? But, suppose the promises made S. Peter to import as much as the power of the Apostles, is it as evident that the present Pope succeeds S. Peter, as, that Christianity is from God? That hee succeeds him in the full right of that Power which is given the Apostles? Certainly, wheresoever two or three are assembled in the name of Christ, there is not the Infallibility of the Church. Therefore it cannot be founded upon the promises made to all Assemblies of Christians as Christians. It is very probable, that the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem
had a revelation upon the place, signifying how they should order the mater in question, because there are many instances in the Scriptures, of inspirations at the very Assemblies of Gods people, as I have showed in the Right of the Church. Therefore it is not evident that all Councils may say the like. Therefore, they cannot presume that the Holy Ghost will lead them into all truth, whatsoever they take a humor to determine, because it was promised, that hee should lead the Apostles into all truth concerning our common Christianity. But if the Church be the pillar and foundation that upholdeth the truth, then must that truth first be evidenced for truth, before the effect of the Churches office in up∣holding it, as pillars uphold an house, can appear. The exhortations of the A∣postles, 1 Thess. V. 14, 15. Hebr. XIII. 7, 17. to yield obedience to the Rulers of the Church, are certainly pertinent to this purpose; But it is evident, that this obedience is limitable by the grounds and substance of Christianity delive∣red afore, as it is evident that all Power of the present Church presupposeth our common Christianity. As for the obedience required in the Old Testament to the Governors of the Synagogue and Priests confirmed by our Lord, Mat. XXIII. 2. I am very willing to grant the Church all Power in decreeing for truth, that can appear to have belonged to the Rulers of the Synagogue, because I am se∣cure, that those who could put malefactors to death, as they could, were not therefore able to tye men to believe that which they say to be true. But the great subtilty is the Prophesie of Caiaphas, John XI. 48-52. who, because High Priest, could not but truly determine, that our Lord must die least the people should perish, even in resolving to crucifie him. Indeed, at the beginning, God was wont to conduct his people by Oracles of Urim and Tummim in the High Priests brest-plate. And though this was ceased under the second Temple, as wee have reason to believe the Jewes, yet was it no marvail, that God should use the High Priests tongue to declare that secret which himself understood not, being the Person, by whom hee had used to direct his people in former ages. But hee that from hence concludes the Church infallible, must first maintain, that Caiaphas erred not in crucifying our Lord Christ. Now, if it be said, that the consent of all Christians, though not as members of the Church, (because as yet it appeareth not that the Church is a Corpora∣tion and hath members) determines the sense of these Scriptures to signifie In∣fallibility, which they may, but do not necessarily signifie; Let him consider the disputes that succeeded in the Church upon the decree of the Great Council at Nicaea, the breaches that have succeeded upon the decrees of Ephesus and Chal∣cedon, the division between the Greek and the Latine Church, between the Reformation and the Church of Rome. For is it imaginable, that all Christians holding as firmly as their Christianity, that the acts of the Pope and a Council, (that is the greater part of the present Church) is to be believed as much as the Scriptures, not onely the decree of Nicaea should be disputed again, but breaches should succeed rather than admit their decrees, retaining the common profession of Christianity? What disputes there have been betwixt the Court of Rome and the Paris Doctors, whether it be the act of the Pope or of a General Council that obligeth the belief of the Church, is as notorious to the world, as that they are not yet decided. And yet the whole question is disputed onely concerning the Western Church; The East which acknowledgeth not the Pope, appeareth not in the claim of this Infallibility, were both East and West joyned in one and the same Council. Now, among them that maintain the Pope, it is not agreed what acts of the Pope they must be that shall oblige the Church to believe, as it believes the Scriptures. For it is argued that Popes have decreed Heresie, Libe∣rius, Honorius, Vigilius, and perhaps others. And though I stand not to prove, I may presume that the contrary is not so evident as our common Christianity, or the Scriptures. And that some of them have held Heresie, seems granted without dispute. Is it then as evident as our common Christianity, what act of the Pope obliges us to believe? That hee cannot decree that error to be held by others, which, it is granted, himself holdeth? Besides, how many things are requisite to make a true Pope, (whose Power, unlesse it be conveyed by the
act of those that are able to give it, the acts thereof will be void) which it does not appear that the present Pope is qualified with, as it appeareth that the Scri∣ptures are true. And may not the same question be made of a General Council, whether constituted according to right or not, whether proceeding without force and fraud or not? Is it as evident to all Christians as their Christianity or the Scriptures, that it is not? If it be said, that all Catholicks agree that the Pope with a General Council, or a General Council confirmed by the Pope cannot erre; First, what shall oblige them to agree? For, if they agree not, their In∣fallibility is not evident to all Christians, nor if their agreement appear casual, can it be taken for a ground of Faith that is undefeifible. Then, to set aside all the East, which, contesting the Power of the Pope cannot concurre to this In∣fallibility, about the Councils of Constance and Basle, when the dispute between the Pope and Council was at the hottest, there lived divers Doctors of repute that have maintained this Infallibility to be the gift and privilege, not of the pre∣sent but of the Catholick Church; By name Ockam, Alliacensis, Panormitane, Antoninus, Cusanus, Clemangis and Mirandula: Whose words you may see in Doctor Baron of Aberdene his dispute de Objecto Fidei, Tract. V. Cap. XIX, XX. Further, I demand, if there be in the Church a gift of Infallibility ind∣pendent upon the Scripture, (that is, obliging to believe the decrees thereof, which our common Christianity evidenceth not) can it appear without the like reasons, for which wee believe the Scripture? Where is the evidence that Gods Spirit inspires them with their decrees? Nay, when wee see Popes and Coun∣cils imploy the same means to finde the truth of things in question which other men do, would they have us believe that they shall not fail by Gods providence, when they use no means but that may fail, nor have themselves any reason in them to evidence that they do not fail? For if they had, they might make it ap∣pear. But of all things the strngest is, that they should undertake to perwade the world this, when as the Church it self never determined it. Of all things that ever the Church of any time took in hand to decree, it will never appear that ever it was decreed, that the decrees of the present Church are to be admit∣ted for Gods truth. And therefore, there is not so much appearance of any opinion the Church of Rome has, that it is true, as there is of humane policy, in breeding men up in such prejudicate conceits, which education makes them as zealous of as of their Faith, though meer contradiction to the grounds of it; That being intangled in their own understandings, to hold things so inconsi∣stent, they may be the fitter instruments to intangle others, in that obedience to the Church which they hold necessary, though upon false reasons. For, as Antony disputes in Tully de Oratore, that no man is so fit to induce others into passion, as hee that appears really possessed with the same, so is no man so fit to imbroile the true reason and order of believing in another mans understanding, as hee that is himself first confounded in it. There is indeed a plauble incon∣venience alleged, if it be not admitted, to wit, that differences cannot be ended otherwise. But, to object an inconvenience, is not to answer an argument, say Logicians; Nor is it, say I, to demonstrate a truth. It is requisite the Church should be one; (Suppose wee this, for the present, for it is not proved as yet) but it is not therefore necessary, that the unity thereof should depend upon the deision of all Controversies that arise, what true, what false. It is a great deal easier to command men not to decide their own opinions, than to be∣lieve their adversaries. For to decide, is nothing else, but to command all men to judge one part to be true, when it appeareth, that a great part have already judged it to be false. But, not to offend him that hath declared a contrary judg∣ment, is a thing to be attained of him, that cannot see reason to judge the same. Charity may have place in all things in question among Christians, though Faith be confined to the proper mater of it, though wee cannot yet determine what that proper mater is, and upon what termes it standeth. It remains there∣fore; that all presumption concerning the truth of the Churches decrees pre∣supposeth the corporation of the Church, & the foundation thereof, nor can any way be evidenced by supposing onely the truth of the Scriptures, and the con∣sent
of Christians as Christians, which conveyes the evidence thereof unto us. So that, the belief of the Scriptures, and of all things so clear in the Scriptures, that they are not questioned in the Church, depending upon the evidence of Gods revelations to his messengers; But, the belief of the Churches decrees, inasmuch as not evidenced by the Scriptures, upon the presumption of the right use of the Power vested in them that decree, by the foundation of the Church; (if that foundation may appear) they do not allow us the common reason of all men that require us to yield the same credit to both. CHAP. V. All things necessary to salvation are not clear in the Scriptures to all understandings. Not in the Old Testament. Not in the Gospel. Not in the Writings of the Apostles. It is necessary to salvation to believe more than this, that our Lord is the Christ. Time causeth obscurity in the Scriptures, aswell as in other Re∣cords. That it is no where said in the Scriptures, that all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scriptures. Neither is there any consent of all Chri∣stians to evidence the same. IN the next place, to proceed by steps, I must negatively conclude on the o∣ther side, that, all things necessary to the salvation of all are not of them∣selves clear in the Scriptures to all understandings. Whereby I say not, that all such things are not contained in the Scriptures, as if some thing necessary to the salvation of all were to be received by Tradition alone: Nor, that, being in the Scriptures, they are not clear and discernable to the understandings of those, that are furnished with means, requisite to discern the meaning of the Scriptures: But, that which I stand upon is, that it is not, nor ought to be a pre∣sumption, that this or that is not necessary to salvation, because it is not clear in the Scriptures: Which if it were admitted, whosoever were able to make such an argument against any Article of Faith, as all understandings interessed in salvation could not dissolve, (such as, it is plain, may be made against the truth of Christianity) should have gained this, that, though it may be true, yet it can∣not be an Article of Faith. To my purpose indeed, it were enough, in this place, to prove, that this is not the first truth in Christianity, to wit, that all things necessary to salvation are clear by the Scriptures. For, having obtained, that there is no Rule to conclude those doctrines which may be questioned not to be Articles of Faith; so that it cannot thereupon be disputed by degrees, that they are not true; There would be nothing in my way, to hinder the resolution of a positive Rule, to distinguish between true and false, in all things concern∣ing the Christian Faith. Notwithstanding, because, by that which already wee have said, and that which appears to all men in the Scriptures, there is sufficient means to conclude so much as I have proposed, and that the proof of it will be an advantage to that which shall follow, I shall undertake it, supposing no more than I have said. I do remember the Argument made against Tradition, by Marinaro the Car∣melite, at the Council of Trent; Which, as it was thought so considerable there, that order was taken, that hee should appeare no more in the Council, so, seemed to mee, when I reade it, not easie to answer. Now, upon further considerati∣on, I make it my ground, to prove the conclusion which I have advanced. Hee argued; That it was not possible to give a reason, why God should provide, that some of those truths which are necessary to salvation should be recorded in Scri∣pture, others, equally obliging, not. For if you interpose the terme clearly, and argue; That there is no reason why God should deliver some things clearly by writing, others not; the argument will be the same. To mee it seems manifest, that hee who once holds, that all things necessary to the salvation of all are clear∣ly contained in the Scriptures, (adding onely clearly to his terms) to all under∣standings, ties himself, by giving the reason why they ought to be clear, because necessary, to maintain, that all truths are delivered by Scripture, in the same de∣gree
of clearnesse to all understandings, as they are in degree of necessity to the salvation of all souls. For, that every cause, every reason should inferre the consequence, produce the effect, answerable in degree, to that degree which the reason or cause is supposed to hold, is a thing that all reason inforces, every un∣derstanding justifies. But that all things are not clear by the Scriptures, in the same degree as they are necessary to salvation, is clear to all in point of fct: Inasmuch as there are infinite truths, which Christians diffr not about, in the Scriptures, because they think not their salvation concerned in the mater of them, those which are thought to concern it remaining in dispute, because not so clear. Neither is it for a Christian to prescribe a reason why it ought to be otherwise, because that were to prescribe unto Almighty God a rule, not de∣pending upon his will declared otherwise. This is the issue upon which I de∣monstrate my intent. Neither Gods act in general, of declring his will in writing, not his particular acts, of declaring his will in such several maters, as the several writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which make the Body of the Scri∣ptures, contain, do any way import the declaring of an intent in God, thereby to manifest all things necessary to the salvation of all clearly to all understand∣ings; therefore, that any thing is necessary to salvation, is no presum∣ption, that it is clearly declared in Scripture to all understandings; In∣asmuch as it is manifest, that no man can give Law to God, what hee ought to declare, but all men may presume, that, and that onely to be declared, which, by dealing with mn under such or such a profession, hee hath, of his free goodnesse, tied himself to declare. For, it being in the free choice of God, whe∣ther to declare any will concerning mans salvation or none, and that choice be∣ing made, it remaining yet in his choice, whether hee would declare his will by writing, or not, (as it was in his power, for so many years before Moses, to save men without Scripture) it cannot be said, that, either before declaring an intent to save men, hee was bound to declare all that was necessary unto it by writing, or by declaring it. And this I hold enough to demonstrate to all understand∣ings, that the declaring of an intent, to deliver us by writing things concern∣ing our salvation, imports not in God an intent, to declare thereby all things necessary to the salvation of all, clearly to all understandings. Which will yet be clerer, by proving the other part of my proposition, that, by the intent of writing the several Books whereof the Scripture consists, clearly declared, God hath not clearly declared the intent so often said. The proof of this by the particulars, I hold the sufficientest satisfaction that can be tendred here, where the pretense is, to proceed onely upon that which all Christians receive. The particulars consist in the writings of the Prophets, the sayings and doings of our Lord, recorded in the four Gospels, and the writings of the Apostles. For, the Gospels pretending to contain the doings and sayings of our Lord, but to be written by his disciples; It followes, by the nature of the busnesse, that they must contain some thing as from the person of the Writer, and of his sense, o∣ver and above what they pretend to record; Which, properly will belong to the writings of the Apostles, though contained in the Gospels: And thus farre, to avoid cavil, I have thought fit here to distinguish. Now, that all mater of salvation is not clearly contained in the writings of the Prophets, that is, in the Old Testament, written by Moses and his Scholars the Prophets, I prescribe upon that which all Christians suppose, as the ground upon which Christianity is justified against Judaisme; That the Old Testament delivereth but the figure and shadow of the New. For unlesse a man will have the figure and shadow to be all one with the body and substance, hee must con∣fesse, that the substance of Christianity, which is shadowed in the Old Testa∣ment, is not clearly declared by the same, unless he will have, to be shadowed and unshadowed, that is, clear, to be all one. Let mee demand, if Christianity be clearly declared by the Law, to be that profession which God would have all to be saved by, that should be saved, from the time of prescribing it, what need the miracles of our Lord and his Apostles, what need the Resurrection, and so his Sufferings, as to the account of evidencing the truth of his Doctrine? For, the
Law being once received upon necessary reasons, it is impossible to say, why any new reasons should be requiite, to inforce the truth or the obligation of the Gospel, if it were clearly declared by it? Again, it is manifest, that our Lord, being risen again, and giving the Holy Ghost unto his Disciples by breathing on them John XX. 22. gave them also a spiritual grace of understanding the Scri∣ptures, as you finde Luke XXIV. 32, 45. Where first, the Disciples that went to Emmaus confesse with admiration; Did not our hearts burn within us, when hee talked with us on the way, and opened us the Scriptures? declaring unto them, how hee was foretold in the Old Testament, as you have it afore: Then, having per∣swaded them all, that it was even hee that was risen again, it followes; Then opened hee their mindes to understand the Scriptures; which were onely then those of the Old Testament. Surely, Justine the Martyr, in many places of his dispute with Typho the Jew, as truly as manifestly professes, that the understan∣ding of Christianity in the Old Testament was a grace given to the Disciples of Christ, among the rest of distributions of his Spirit, (upon his ascension into heaven) shed forth upon the Church Eph. IV. 8—. which being showed the Jews, their eyes were darkened, as their hearts hardened, that they could not under∣stand the truth in them. Now, it is not my purpose to say, that thereby hee challenges to himself the same miraculous grace of the Spirit, and that the Pro∣phesies that concern Christ are by that grace interpreted by him in his writings, and therefore as truly, as those in the writings of the Apostles. It is enough, that the true meaning of the Scriptures, in that behalf, was first revealed to the Disciples of Christ, by the immediate and extraordinary operation of Gods Spi∣rit; Though Christians, building on that which they received from persons so in∣spired, may have added many things inconsequent to those principles. Now, I suppose it is manifest to all mens reason, that those things are not clear in the Scriptures to all understandings, that could not be discerned in it, without a mira∣culous operation of Gods Spirit. But, nothing can be more manifst, than those particulars of the Law, which, our Lord and his Apostles in the New Testa∣ment, have, by way of allegory, expounded to be meant of his Person, and Gospel, and Kingdome. That the first Adam was to be the figure of the se∣cond, though to a contrary effect, of life by Christ, in stead of death by Adam, and, that hee took our flesh to be the Lord of all things in it, (as to the effect of the Gospel) which the first Adam was made, as to the dominion of the crea∣ture, is clearly declared by the Apostles Rom. V. 12-14. 1 Cor. XV. 45-49. Ebr. II. 6-15. That Noe, and what befell the world hy the deluge under him, was the figure of what befalls the Church under Christ by Baptisme, is no lesse manifestly the doctrine of the Apostle 1 Pet. III. 20, 21, 22. And not onely this particular, but all the rest that befell the Fathers, and Prophets, and Martyrs, under the Old Testament, is evidently made a figure of what befalls the Disci∣ples of Christ under the Gospel, Ebr. XI. As it is also evident, that the pil∣grimages of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their posterity the Israelites, from Aegypt through the Wildernesse into the land of Promise, is there declared, and of all Christians received, for the figure of that Journey which all professe to travail, from sinne wherein it findeth them, to the King∣dome of heaven and happinesse. How else should the argument hold, which the Apostles draw, from that which befell the Children of Israel travailing through the Wildernesse to the land of Canaan, to the duty of Christians in their Journey toward everlasting happinesse? 1 Cor. X. 1-11. Ebr. III. 7.-IV. 11. But, after their coming into the land of Promise, as the persecutions which the Prophets indured Ebr. XI. 36, 37, 38. Mat. XXIII. 34—. evidence them to be the figures of Christs Crosse; as the expiation made by all High Priests, is evi∣dently expounded by the Apostle to the Ebrewes, to shadow the taking away of sinne by Christ; So it is no lesse evident, that all the Judges and Kings and High Priests and Prophets of Gods people, anointed by God, were figures of our Lord, both in regard of his Church, and the enemies of it, than it is evident, that our Lord Jesus is the Christ foretold by the Prophets. Which things, un∣lesse wee say, (as no man in his right senses will say) that they are manifest to
all that reade the Old Testament, though they never heard of Christianity, or the New, wee cannot imagine, that the substance of Christianity, neces∣sary to the salvation of all Christians, is clear to all understandings in the Old Testament. No lesse clear is it, by the sayings and doings of our Lord recorded in the Gospels, that it was not his intent, freely and openly, at least all waies and e∣very where, to declare the truth and substance of it, by the said sayings and do∣ings. Manifest indeed it is, that hee did publickly and freely declare himself, to be that Christ whom the Prophets had foretold, and the Nation expected, and of this no doubt can be made by any man, that with common reason examines all that is written in the Gospels: Though not all times so free in declaring e∣ven this truth; As it is evident by the words of the Jewes to him John X. 24. How long holdest thou our mindes in suspense? If thou be the Christ, freely tell us it. And wee see, Mat. XII. 14, 20. what difference of opinions there were about it in his life time, forbidding his Disciples to declare it till his death. But gran∣ting this to be manifest by the Gospels, neither is it manifest by them, that no∣thing else is requisite to salvation to be believed, concerning his Person and Kingdome, nor, that thereby hee intended to make manifest, what hee knew requisite to be believed of them that should imbrace it, when it was be∣come requisite? This is enough to answer the Leviathan with, pretending, that it is not necessary to the salvarion of a Christian, to believe any more than this, that our Lord Jesus is the Christ. Which if it could appear by the Gospels a∣lone, then would I not dispute any further, that all the truth that is necessary to salvation is clearly delivered by the Gospels. I do for my part believe, that the substance of Christianity, necessary to salvation, is contained in the badge and cognisance which our Lord hath marked it with, by his Commission to his Apostles, Mat. XXVIII. 19, 20. Go, make all nations Disciples, baptizing them in the Name of the Father the Sonne and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. But shall I say it is clearly contained in these words, about the intent and effect whereof, there hath been, and is so much dis∣pute? The Church, it is well enough known, hath alwaies rejected those that acknowledge not the Holy Trinity, Father Sonne and Holy Ghost, subsisting in one and the same Godhead. At this day Socinus and his followers will have us believe, onely, that wee are to professe (whether wee be baptized or not) that our Lord Jesus is a man that was born of a Virgin, by the power of God which is the Holy Ghost. And, for undertaking, or for doing Gods message, tendring reconcilement with God to mankinde, hath, by Gods gift, the same power with God to govern his Kingdome, and is to be honored as God for it. Whether or no they would have us to believe this sense of theirs positively, or would not be tyed to believe positively the sense of the Church, in time perhaps they may de∣clare, I have not hitherto understood. Shall I say, there is not sufficient argu∣ment for the sense of the Church in the Gospels? It is no part of my meaning. Shall I therefore say, it is clear of it selfe in the Gospels, (that is to say, by the sayings and doings of our Lord recorded in the Gospels)? Doth not our Lord plainly make himself equal to the Father, John V. 17-23? Doth hee not an∣swer again, being questioned for this John X. 33, 34, 35. by the words of David spoken of meer men Psal. LXXXIII. 6. I have said yee are Gods? Doth hee not say plainly again; My Father is greater than I, John XIV. 28? Which things, as it is plain by argument, that they may stand with the sense of the Church, so, that those arguments are plain of themselves to all understandings, is as much as to say; That a seeming contradiction argues an intent in our Lord, that, all men should see the resolution of it. Again, that all that will be saved by our Lord Christ must take up his Crosse, and professe him to the death, is plaine by the Gospels: But, so long as the Disciples might and did believe, that they should raigne with our Lord, in his Kingdome over that people, which should destroy their enemies, was the intent of suffering death for Christ to raign with him in heaven plaine by the Gospels? That the Law should stand for ever, is it not plainly delivered by our Lord in the Gospel, and is it not as plainly of
the necessity of salvation, to believe, that wee are saved by the Gospel and not by the Law? I appeal to S. Pauls Epistles; Though I dispute not, whether this be abrogating the Law, as Divines commonly speak, or derogating from it. Certainly, though I know not whether the Socinians would be content, (with the Leviathan) that no thing be thought necessary to salvation to be believed, but that our Lord is the Christ; Yet I know they would be astonished to hear, that hee who believes that, and lives according to the Lawes of his Soveraign, hath done the duty of a Christian, and may challenge his share in the kingdome of heaven for it. But, this I must not dispute further in this place; Onely, here I must answer his reasons out of the Scripture, and show you, upon what a weak pinne hee hath hung all this waight. Christ is the foundation, 1 Cor. III. 11. Mat. XVI. 18. which all the Gospels pretend to induce us to believe, John XX. 31. as also the exhortations of the Apostles, Acts XVII. 2, 3, 6. by this the good thief was saved, believing onely our Lord anointed by God, to his Kingdome, Luke XXIII. 42. Everlasting life is to be had by believing this, and the Scri∣pture, because it witnesseth this John V. 39. and XVII. 3. XI. 26, 27. Which is all blown away with this breath; That hee that admits our Lord to be the Christ, cannot refuse any part of his doctrine. And therefore, salvation is just∣ly imputed to that, which, whoso receiveth, shall be bound to admit and under∣go whatsoever his salvation requireth. This is eternal life, to know thee the onely God, and whom thou hast sent Jesus Christ, John XVII. 3. These things are writ∣ten that yee may believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing yee may have life, John XX. 31. How, have life believing? Because hee that believes will be baptized, and hee that is baptized, must undertake to live as Christ teacheth, professing to believe in the Father Sonne and Holy Ghost, which, believing in Christ, coming from the Father to send the Holy Ghost, implieth; And there∣fore the Eunuch Acts VIII. 36, 37. is baptized upon this Faith, as others into it, Acts II. 38. VIII. 16. XIX. 5. The belief of the Creation of the world, of Providence, the Resurrection and Judgment to come, not being introduced by Christianity, but found in force among the Jewes, when our Lord came. So, that limitation, by which the Leviathan inlargeth his sense of that, which the belie∣ving of our Lord to be the Christ implieth, is not worth a straw. It is not one∣ly necessary to salvation to believe all that the Messias was to be or to do, to be verified, and to have been done by our Lord Jesus; Unlesse we believe, that wee are to believe, and to do whatsoever hee taught us to believe and to do. And that, as I have showed, is not determinable by any means, but that, which Christ, by himself or by his Apostles, hath provided us, neither whether so or not, and much lesse whether necessary to salvation or not. That which hath been alleged to show; That, the substance of Christianity necessary to the salvation of all under the Gospel is not clearly contained in the Old Testament, nor in the sayings and doings of our Lord related by the Evan∣gelists; Holds not in the writings of the Apostles. For, being directed to Chri∣stians already reduced into Churches, constituted upon supposition of the know∣ledge and profession of Christianity, there is no reason why they should be spa∣ring in declaring the truth of it to those to whom they write. True it is, and evident by their writings, that they used great reservation, in declaring to those that were of Jewes become Christians, the discharge of their obligation to Mo∣ses Law. But whatsoever their proceeding was in that case, not onely the reason of the truth, but also the reason of that proceeding, is clearly declared by their writings. But, if all their writings suppose, in them to whom they write, knowledge sufficient for the salvation of all Christians, and none of them pre∣tend to lay down the summe and substance of that, whereof the salvation of all Christians requireth the knowledge, evident it is, that the perfection of none of them, (nor the whole Scriptures, consisting of them and those which wee have spoken of hitherto) requireth, that they clearly contain all that is necessary to the salvation of all Christians. For, the Perfection of every writing consisteth in the sufficience of it, for the purpose to which it is intended: If therefore the occasions of the Apostles writings, and so the purpose of them, evidently
express not an intent to lay down clearly to all understandings, the whole sub∣stance of that which is sufficient to render all Christians capable of salvation, (as, evidently, neither any nor all of them do) then, neither doth the perfection not sufficience nor clearnesse of the Apostles writings require, that all things necessary to the salvation of all, be clear in them to all understandings. For, let no man object; That they were all of them necessary to the salvation of all or most of them to whom they were sent; Unless it could be said; That whatsoever was necessary to the salvation of those to whom the Apostles writ, is necessary to the salvation of all Christians; Which, so long as there is a difference between necessity of means and necessity of precept; (That is, between that which is necessary to the common salvation of all, and that which becomes necessary to the salvation of some, by reason of their particular states and conditions) can∣not be said. The writings of the Apostles are, their Epistles, with their Acts, and S. Johns Revelations, if these may not be referred to the rank of their Epi∣stles. The chief of their Epistles, that to the Romanes, that to the Galatians, that to the Ebrewes, with the greatest part of the rest, are either occasioned by the reservation which they used, in declaring to those that were become Christi∣ans of Jewes, their discharge from the Law, as justified by Christ, or by the se∣cret indeavors of Hereticks, pretending Commission from the Apostles on one side, on the other, practising compliance with the Jewes, to seduce those that inclined to the Law, to the damnable inventions of Simon Magus and his Suc∣cessors. But none of them pretendeth more, than preventing or avoiding those particular disorders, which appeared in the respective Churches. For, what the Apostles did in setling Christianity at Jerusalem, or propagating it by S. Paul, especially so farre as the book of the Acts relates, what S. John saw touching the state of Christianity to come, I suppose, is something else than the summe of all that is necessary to the salvation of all Christians. And though, in discre∣tion, every man may presume, that, upon occasion of the expresse purposes of these writings, there is nothing necessary to the salvation of all, that is not tou∣ched in some place of them, yet it is one thing to be touched upon the by, an∣other thing to be delivered upon expresse purpose. For, those things that are but touched upon occasion, referring to the knowledge which they presuppose, cannot, must not containe the clear understanding of those things, which they onely touch; Unlesse wee will have the Writer so impertinent, as, upon every occasion, to turne aside, and instruct him that hee writes to, in such things, as hee supposes him to know afore. So, the reason why the summe or substance of Christianity is not clear in the Old Testament, and Gospels, is, because it was not then clearly preached; Why not in the writings of the Apostles, is, because it was clearly delivered afore, the clear delivering of it being seen, in the cate∣chizing of them, that came to the profession of the Gospel, and the communion of the Church. Beside this reason, particular to the Apostles writings, there is another that is seen, not onely in the Law and Prophers as well as in them, but in all anci∣ent records of learning, arising from the distance of time between us and the writing of them, and the change which such a succession produceth in the stare of things, necessarily inferting obscurity, answerable to that difference, in the condition of those things which they expresse. There is no record of Learn∣ing so flight, that any man, who knowes what belongs to Learning, can pre∣sume of a cleare understanding of it, till, by comparing it with other writings, nearest to it in nature and time, hee get satisfaction in it. For, such a change of language followes the changes that come to passe, in Times, and Places, and Lawes, and Fashions, and the condition of persons consequent to the same, that, till they be understood by reading, (seeing and hearing not being available in languages out of use) the meaning of Writers is not to be had from their words. How much more in writings of such consideration as the Scriptures are to the Church, of such antiquity, as the Law and Prophets, and the primitive Church of the Apostles, of such difference from the present state of things, as between the Law, either flourishing under the Princes of Gods people, or to∣lerated
by their Soveraignes; between the Gospel, springing up in the midst of the Empire professing Heathenisme, but protecting Judaisme, and the Gospel, professed and protected by Christian powers, and people; So little record remaining otherwise, either of things done under the Law, or under the Apostles, (so farre from priding themselves in writing books.) How much more, I say, must we be in the dark, for the clear meaning of that, whereof every tittle is conderable? That the Apostles writings were no way obscure to those they were directed to, is to mee unquestionable. For, though it is reasonable, that they should, as wee see they do in some passages, rise above the pitch of the common capacity, even of them they were writ to, least they should become subject to neglect; So, that, for the most part, they should not be understood of the most part, would be a manifest inconvenience. But, it is no inconveni∣ence, that, by distance of time, they should become liable to the same difficulty of being understood, which all other ancient writings necessarily become sub∣ject to. And that reason appeareth no lesse, in those things which concern the necessary salvation of all, than in maters of lesse consequence. It will therefore be hard, to reconcile to any capacity of reason, that which is advanced, for the first truth, towards the deciding of all Controversies of Faith, that all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scriptures, to all understandings; Those Scriptures, which onely can be pretended to deliver the truth of Christianity clearly, neither professing to deliver the whole summe and substance of it, and, being directed to those, who are supposed already instructed in all things neces∣sary to the salvation of all Christians. Therefore this unreasonable presumption, is not to create any difficulty, to that reason of deciding Controversies of Faith, which wee proceed to settle upon the premises. I cannot tell whether or no it was requisite to say so much against a presum∣ption meerly voluntary, and which common experience contradicts. For if, all agreeing in the truth of Christianity and the Scriptures, there remain dispute a∣bout things, which some count necessary to salvation; others not; It is enough that the truth of Christianity inferreth means, sufficient to clear the truth of what remaines on dispute. But, first it is manifest, that, what remaines in dis∣pute, is not of it self manifest, to all that acknowledge the Scriptures, but may become manifest, to them that use such means, as the truth of Christianity in∣forceth. Neverthelesse, since, they that are in love with their own presumpti∣ons, though never so dangerous to the supreme Majesty, take whatsoever crosses them for a derogation to the Scriptures, let thus much be said, to show, that, by giving the Scriptures, no man may presume, that God intended to declare in them, whatsoever is necessary to the salvation of all, clearly, to all understand∣ings. But, if this must have been supposed, as a principle or ground, whereupon wee are to resolve all Controversies of Faith, it would have been requisite to have showed us, that this truth is, of all other, so much more clearly laid down in the Scriptures, as, that which concurres to the clearing of all, ought it self to be the most clear. Now, if wee consider, that this privilege, of containing all that is necessary to the salvation of all, belongs not to any part, but to the whole Body of the Scriptures, it would first have been said, what Scripture, speaking of the whole Body of the Scripture, hath established this property or rivilege of it. For my part, upon the best consideration that I can take, I am at a stand to finde any text of Scripture, any letter or syllable of the whole Bible, that sayes any thing at all, good or bad, of the whole Bible. So farre is it from delivering this property or privilege of it. So farre further from delivering it as the first truth, in termes so clear and unquestionable, as to make it a presumpti∣on, to the deciding of all that is or may become questionable concerning the Scripture. The words of S. Paul 2 Tim. III. 16, 17. All Scripture, inspired by God, is also profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect; Being fitted for e∣very good work; Cannot be said of the whole Body of Canonical Scripture, being written before it was: That is, when, evidently, many parts of the New Testament were not written, probably all, and evidently concernes every part
of Gods Word, not the whole Body of the Scriptures. Therefore with Origen I conceive, they are meant of the Scriptures of the Old Testament: To this effect; That, that instruction which is necessary to salvation being had by the Gospel, which the Church teacheth those whom it maketh Christians, the right understanding of the Old Testament, according to the mystery of the Gospel, is that which rendereth him whom God imployeth in the propagation of his Gospel, and the edification of his Church, able to convince those that withstand, to edifie those that admit it. Which, if it be farre short of that which I deny, the rest of those pitifull lame consequences which are usually made from the Scriptures, to prove the same purpose, will easily appeare to come short of it, though I take not in hand to determine at present the full meaning of them, but onely to show that they import not, that all things necessary for the salva∣tion of all Christians, are clear to all Christians in the Scriptures. The fashion is, to allege Deut. IV. 2. XII. 32. Yee shall take heed to do all the Word that I com∣mand you. Yee shall adde nothing to it, nor take any thing from it. And, You shall adde nothing to the Word that I command you, nor take any thing from it. That you may keep the commandement of the Lord your God which I command you. And, that it is threatned for a conclusion to the whole Scripture, Apoc. XXI. 18, 19 If any man adde to the words of the Prophesie contained in this Book, God shall lay upon him the plagues written in this Book. God shall take away his share out of the book of Life and the holy City, and the things that are written in this Book. For, is not all that is requisite sufficiently clear, if nothing may be added or taken from the Scriptures? Therefore is S. Paul also alleged pronouncing anathema, if himself, or an Angel from heaven, or any man should take upon him to preach any other Gospel than that which they had already received, Gal. I. 8, 9. And, that therefore are the Beraeans commended Acts XVII. 11. that they did not admit even those things which S. Paul, so great an Apostle, preached to them, without examining them by the Scriptures, whether so as hee said or not. To the same purpose John XX. 30, 31. Many other miracles did Jesus, which are not written in this book. But, these are written, that yee may believe, that Jesus is the Christ, and that, believing, yee may have life through his Name. Adde hereunto the Psal∣mists commendations of the Law XIX. 7-31. as giving wisedom to the simple, as inlightning the eyes, and instructing the servants of God; which, how should it do, if it be not first to be understood? For the precept is a candle, and the Law light saith Solomon, Prov. VII. 22. And Psalm CXIX. 113. Thy word is a candle to my feet, and a light to my paths. Further; the Scriptures tell us how they come to be obscure, & what makes them clear. They shall be all taught by God saith the Prophet, Isa. LIV. 13. speaking of the times of the Gospel, and the children of the Church. And Jeremy XXXI. 33, 34. promiseth, that God will put his New Covenant in the hearts of his children, and write it in their entrailes, so that they shall have no need to teach one another the knowledge of God, be∣cause they should be all taught by God to know God. And is not this that for which our Lord gives thanks to the Father Mat. XI. 25. because, having concea∣led the mystery of the Gospel from the wise and understanding, hee had revealed it to babes and sucklings. Which the Apostle expoundeth 1 John II. 20, 21, 27. You have an Ʋnctien from God, and know all things. I have not written to you be∣cause yee know not the truth, but because yee know it, and, that no lye is of the truth. And; But as for you, the Ʋnction which yee have received of him remaineth in you, and yee need not that any man teach you. But, as that Ʋnction teacheth you of all things, and is true and not false, and as it hath taught you, so shall you abide in it. Whereupon afterwards IV. 1. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether of God or not; To wit, as those who were possessed of that by which they were to be tryed. Therefore S. Paul 1 Thess. V. 23. Try all things; Hold that which is good: To wit, by that means which hee intimateth 1 Cor. II. 15. The spiritual man is judged by none, but himself judgeth all things. In fine, I must not forget Cart∣wrights argument from the words of the Prophet Jeremy VII. 31. XXXI. 35. where hee reproveth the Jewes Idolatries by this argument, that it never came into Gods minde to command them any such thing. For if the grievousnesse
even of their Idolatries consist in this, that they were done without warrant of Gods word, how can it be questionable that hee hath provided us instruction sufficient to clear us in all that wee are to do, by the Scriptures? But these Scriptures are as easily wiped away as they are alleged, if wee go no further than to show, that they inforce no such principle as is pretended for the ending of all Controversies, that all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians are clear to all Christians in the Scriptures. For what a pitifull incon∣sequence is it to argue, that all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scri∣ptures, because Moses forbideth to adde to or take from his Law? For, if the Gospel be not clearly contained in the Old Testament containing the Law and the Prophets, and therefore much lesse in the Law alone, then is it not lawfull to adde to or take from that Scripture in which all things necessary to salvation are not clear. And surely when they are commanded to stand to the determina∣tions of their Judges in things questionable concerning the Law, Deut. XVII. 8-12. that which was questionable was not clear to all concerned in the Law, and the determining of it was neither adding to nor taking from the Law. In like maner, hee that should adde to or take from the book of S. Johns Revelations (take it if you please, for the complement of the whole Bible, and say as much, either of the whole, or of any part of it) deserves the plagues written there to be added to him, and his part taken away out of the book of Life; For who doubteth that falsifying the Scriptures is a crime of a very high nature? But so it will be, whether all things necessary to salvation be clear in the Scriptures or not. Nay, falsifying the sense of the Scriptures, not altering the words, may de∣serve the very same, because the true sense might and ought to have been clear∣ed in the Scriptures, as not clear to all that are concerned in it. And may not S. Paul bid Anathema to whosoever shall preach another Gospel than that which hee had preached to the Galatians, unlesse all things necessary to salvation be clear in the Scriptures? First let it appear, (which cannot appear, because it is not true) that the Scriptures of the New Testament were written when he preached it: Or, if not, that whatsoever is clear in the Scriptures which wee have, is clear in the Scriptures which they had when S. Paul preached. The Beraeans had rea∣son to examine S. Pauls preaching by the Scriptures, who alleged the Old Te∣stament for it, and demanded to be acknowledged an Apostle of Christ accord∣ing as his preaching agreed therewith. But what needed his preaching, if the means of salvation which hee preached were clearly contained in the Old Scri∣ptures? The miracles related by S. Johns Gospel are written, that believing wee may have life: Why? because there is nothing else requisite to salvation to be believed? Or, as I said to the Leviathan, because, hee that comes to believe, shall be instructed in all things necessary to his salvation, whether by the mira∣cles there related or otherwise? And cannot the Law be a light to the steps of them that walked by the Law, can it not inlighten their eyes, and give wise∣dom to the simple, unlesse all things necessary to salvation be clear in the Scri∣ptures? I do maintain, for a consequence of the grounds of Christianity, that the New Testament is vailed in the Old,, that David and Solomon being Pro∣phets, and the doctrine of the Prophets tending to discover the New Testament under the Old, by degrees, more and more, the Law is called by them a light, because it taught them who discovered the secret of the Gospel in it and under it, the way to that salvation which only the Gospel procureth. And in this con∣sideration it is said, Psalm XXV. 8, 11, 13. Them that be meek shall God guide in judgment, and such as be gentle them shall hee teach his Law. What man is hee that feareth the Lord? Him shall hee teach in the way that hee shall chuse. The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and hee will snow them his Cove∣nant. And, though I cannot here make this good, yet will the exception be of force to infringe a voluntary presumption, that all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scriptures, because the Law, forsooth, is a light to the actions of him that lived under it. Now, to all those Scriptures, whereby it is pretended that the Scriptures are clear to them that have Gods Spirit, but obscure to them that have it not, I conceive I have settled a peremptory exception, by show∣ing
that the believing of all things necessary to salvation, is a condition requi∣site to the attaining of the Grace or gift of Gods Spirit. For, if that be true, then can no presumption of the right understanding of the Scriptures be granted up∣on supposition of Gods Spirit, and the dictate of it. If that exposition of the Scripture, which any man pretendeth, be not evidenced by those reasons which the motives of Faith create and justifie, without supposing it to be made known by Gods Spirit to him that pretends it, in vain will it be to allege, that the Spi∣rit of God is in him that sets it forth. Neither do wee finde, that they who pre∣tend Gods Spirit do rest in that pretense, least they should be laught at for their paines. But do allege reasons for their pretense, as much as they, who pretend the Church to be Infallible, do allege reasons whereby they know that which they decree to be true. Which were a disparagement to the Spirit of God, if the dictate thereof were to passe for evidence. I grant therefore, that true Chri∣stians have Gods Spirit, and that thereby they do try and condemne all things that agree not with our common Christianity, and that this is the Unction whereof S. John speaketh. But, not because the gift of the Holy Ghost import∣eth a promise of understanding the Scriptures, in all Christians, but because it supposeth the knowledge of that which is necessary to salvation, which is our common Christianity, and therefore inableth to condemne all that agreeth not with it. If there were over and above, a grace of understanding the Scriptures, & of discovering the Gospel in the Law, extant in the Church under the Apostles, (to which our Lord opened their hearts Luke XXIV. 45. and which Justine the Martyr Dial. cum Tryph. affirmeth that the Church of his time was indowed with) first, it was given in consideration of their professing Christianity; Then it tended onely to discover those grounds upon which the Church now proceeds, in the use of ordinary reason, to exponnd the Old Testament according to the New. As for Cartwrights argument, I relate it not because I think it worth the an∣swering, but that you may see how prejudice is able to transport even learned men from their senses. It had been easie for one lesse a Scholar than hee to have said, that when Jeremy saith it never came in Gods minde to command their Idolatries, hee meanta great deal more, that hee had forbidden them under the greatest penalties of the Law: Which, all that know the Law, know to be true. When hee forgetteth such an obvious figure, you may see hee had a minde to in∣ferre more than the words of the Prophet will prove. It is to be observed in this place, that there is no mention of things necessa∣ry to salvation in all these Scriptures: Nor can it be said, that this limitation of the sufficience and clearnesse of the Scriptures, is as clearly grounded upon the Scriptures, as it were requisite, that things necessary to salvation should be clear to all that seek to be saved. And this shall serve for my answer, if any man should be so confident, as to undertake to prove the sufficience and clearnesse of them so limited, by the consent of the Church. For it is manifest, that, hitherto, the authorities of Church Writers cannot be considered any otherwise, than as the opinions of particular persons, which no wayes import the consent of the whole Church. For, whereas hitherto, there is nothing to oblige the Faith of any Christian, but that which is plaine by the Scriptures and the consent of the Church; It no wayes appears as yet, how the authorities of Church Wri∣ters can evidence the consent of Church. I will not therefore be curious here to heap up the sayings of the Fathers, commending the sufficience and clearness of the Scriptures: One or two I will take notice of, because they are all I can remember, in which, the limitation thereof, to things which our salvation requires us to believe, is expressed. S. Augustine de doctr. Christian II. 9. In eis quae aperte in Scripturis posita sunt, inveiuntr illa omnia qnae continent fide moresq vivendi. In those things which are plainty set down in the Scriptures, is found whatsoever that Faith or maners by which wee live doth containe. S. Chryso∣stome in II. ad. Thessal. Hom. III.  All things are plain and plain and straight in the Scri∣ptures, all things that are necessary are mnifest. Whereunto wee may add the words of Constantine to the Council of Na, in. Theodore. Eclef. Hist.
l. 7. . For the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, and the Oracles of the ancient Prophets plainly teach us what wee are to think of God. But I will also take notice, that the same S. Augustine de doctr. Christ. III. 2. saith, that the Rule of Faith, (which hee had set forth in the first book) is had, from the plainer places of the Scripture and the authority of the Church. And the same S. Chrysostome in the same Homily sayes, . Those things (which the Apostles writ) and those (which they delivered by word of mouth) are equally credible. Therefore let us think the Tradition of the Church deserves credit. It is a Tradition, seek no more. And Vincentius in the beginning of his Commnitorium, or Remem∣brance, confessing the Canon of the Scriptures to be every way perfect and suf∣ficient, requires neverthelesse the Tradition of the Church for the steddy under∣standing of it. And therefore I have just ground to say, that all that is necessa∣ry to salvation is not clear in the Scriptures to all that can reade, in the opinion of S. Chrysostome and S. Augustine: But to all that reade, supposing the Rule of Faith received from the Church, to bound and limit the sense and exposition of the Scriptures. And therefore may more justly suppose the same limitation, whn they speak of the perfection and sufficience and clearnesse of the Scripture at large, without confining their speech to that which the necessity of salvation requires us to believe. And this is already a sufficient barr to any man, that shall pretend the consent of the Church, which concurreth to evidence the truth of the Scripture, for the perspicuity thereof in things necessary to be believed, to all whom they may concerne. For so long as Tradition may be requisite be∣sides Scripture, that cannot appear. When it shall appear, whether requisite or not, then will it appear how farr the sufficience and perspicuity of the Scripture reacheth. And this I come now to inquire. CHAP. VI. All interpretation of Scripture is to be confined within the Tradition of the Church. This supposeth that the Church is a Communion instituted by God. What means there is to make evidence of Gods Charter, upon which the Cor∣poration of the Church subsisteth. The name of the Church, in the Scri∣ptures, often signifieth the Whole or Cathelick Church. THis presumption then, which is able to prejudice the truth, by disparaging the means God hath given to discover it; And that, by possessing men, that, things pretended to be necessary to salvation would have been clear of them∣selves to all men in the Scriptures, if they were true; But, nothing conducing to clear the doubtfull meaning of any Scripture, that is never so true; This presumption I say being removed, and the authority of the Church, as the rea∣son of believing, taken away, it remaines that wee affirm, whatsoever the whole Church, from the beginning, hath received and practised for the Rule of Faith and maners, all that to be evidently true, by the same reason, for which wee be∣lieve the very Scriptures; And therefore, that the meaning of them is necessa∣rily to be confined within those bounds, so that nothing must be admitted for the truth of them, which contradicteth the same. Wee saw before, that the Scripture consisteth of motives to Faith, and mater of Faith; That, in the mo∣tives of Faith, supposing them sufficient, when admitted for true, a difficulty may be made, upon what evidence they are admitted for true; That the convi∣ction of this truth, consisteth in the profession and conversation of all those, who, from the beginning receiving Christianity, have transmitted it to their suc∣cessors for a Law and Rule to their beliefs and conversations: Wherefore, there can remain no further question concerning the truth of that, which stands re∣commended to us by those same means, that evidence the truth of those  for which wee receive Christianity. Had there been no  Christianity
to have been read, in the profession and practice of all that call themselves Chri∣stians, it would not have been possible, to convince the enemies of Christiani∣ty, that wee are obliged to believe the Scriptures. If the professing and practi∣sing things so contrary to the interest of flesh and bloud, be an vidence that they are delivered and received from them, who first showed reasons to believe; It must first remain evident, that there are certain things, that were so professed and practised from the beginning, before it can be evident, that the motives upon which they are said to be received, were indeed tendred to the world for that purpose. This is that common stock of Christianity, which, in the first place, after receiving the Scriptures, is to be admitted for the next principle, to∣ward the settling of truth controverted concerning the meaning of them, as flowing immediately from the reason for which they are received, and immedi∣ately flowing into the evidence, that can be made, of any thing questionable in the same. It is that sound ingredient of nature, which, by due application, must either cure all distempers in the Church, or leave them incurable and everlast∣ing. And truly, if it were as easie to make evidence what those things are, which have been received, professed, and practised from the beginning by the whole Church, as it is necessary to admit all such for truth, I suppose there would re∣main no great difficulty in admitting this principle. But, in regard it is so easie to show, what contradiction hath been made within the pale of the Church, to that which elsewhere, otherwhiles, hath been received; I cannot tell whether men despaire to finde any thing generally received from the beginning, and therefore lay aside this principle, not as false, but as uselesse, and not to be put in practice. Wherein, that men mistake not themselves, they must take notice; That it will not concerne my position; (That all original Catholick Traditi∣on is to be supposed for unquestionable truth, in deciding what is questionable concerning the truth of the Scripture) that, concerning most maters, there is no Catholick Tradition, or consent of the Church. For I do professe, that, were not the Church, or had it not been one Society, one visible Body, Communion, or Corporation of men from the beginning, the communion whereof alwaies confined the profession and conversation of Christians to some certain visible▪ Rule; I should think it impossible to make evidence, of any common truth re∣ceived of all Christians. But, if it can be made to appear, that the Church was from the beginning such a Society, then may such Rules as reasonably appear to be original and Catholick, as it can appear reasonable to any man, that hee ought to be a Christian. Here I must note, that, concerning the State of the Church, whether it be such a Society as I have said, distinct from all Civil Societies of Christian Kingdomes and Common-wealths, there may be two questions made; The one of Fact, whether indeed the Church hath been such a Society, since the first being of it, and the conversion of believers to Christianity; The other of Right, whether by the appointment of God, or by humane consent of such, who, being converted to Christianity, agreed to live in communion, by whatso∣ever Rule it may appear they have admitted. But these two are so near one an∣other, that, if the question of Fact can be voided, and it appear, that such was the Church from the beginning, it will be a presumption in a maner peremtory, of the Churches Title by divine right; Though there is difference made be∣tween them, as appers by the opinion related afore, that the power of Ex∣communication was settled in the Church afore Constantine, by humane consent, not by Gods appointment. Which, by consequence of like reason, extends to all other points wherein the power of the Church consists. For my present pur∣pose it were enough, to make it appear, that the Church was, de Facto, such a Society from the beginning. But, the proving of the point of Right, will be on∣ly making the same inference, which hath been alwaies concluded, out of that e∣vidence which resolveth the point of Fact. And the conclusion thus inferred, will be both necessary and effectual, to clare the positive right of the Church in deciding Controversies of Faith, which will be the best satisfaction, why, nega∣tively, it cannot extend to create the ground upon which wee are to believe.
I will therefore wrap them up both together, in the processe of my dis∣course. In which I finde that difficulty, which S. Augustine observeth in proving any of those things which are most manifest to common reason and sense; For, it shall be hard to bring arguments, that are much clearer, than that which they intend to prove. That the Church had been from the beginning one outwardly, by visible Communion, as well as one inwardly, by invisible Faith and love, could not be questioned so long as it prevailed. Neither was it foreseen, at dissolving the Unity of the Western Church, for the Reformation, that it would ever come to this dispute, whether there had been alwaies, and ought to be one Ca∣tholick and Apostolick Church; For, each party hoped well to be so themselves, as being perswaded that their adversaries ought to unite themselves unto them, upon acknowledgment, that the truth was on their side. And truly I acknow∣ledge, that there is no clear mention of a precrpt of God, commanding all Christians to hold the unity of the Catholick Church, by outward communion with it. For, the intent of God to call the Gentiles to Christianity, seemeth to be the utmost of that which is clearly declared by the Scriptures. That his in∣tent was to unite all Christians in one visible communion of the Church, there is evidence by consequence to be had from the Scriptures. But, what the form should be, before the materials were prepared, it were as strange to think, that the stones and timber, particular Christians ought to know, as, that the Surveyors, the Apostles and their fellowes should not know. That therefore the Church was from the beginning, and ought to be one visible Communion, must be showed, by the ingredients, and principles, or elements of all visible Societies; Which, in the Society of the Church, will appear proportionable to the nature and pretense of it. Supposing from common sense and experience, that all Civil Societies or Common-wealthes, (unto which the name of Societies or Communities principally, because most visibly, belongeth) are constituted and founded upon certain Rights of Soveraigne Power, which some call in Latine Jura Majestatis, being indeed, the particulars, wherein the Right and Power of Soveraignty consisteth. For, when it is once resolved, in what hands that Power is to remaine, then is the State and Form of Government constituted, and thereby distinguished from other formes of Common-wealth, according to the qualitie of those persons in whom this Power is established. That, being ruled by certain Lawes, acknowledging certain Governors, being subject to the Power of the Sword, by which those Governors execute those Lawes, are the effects of Soveraigne Power, being the principal of the said ingredients or particulars, the certain and necessary marks of a distinct Common-wealth, is that which I sup∣pose from common experience. There are Societies which subsist by the Law of Nature and Nations; As that which Aristotle observes, among those that are im∣barked in the same bottome for the same voyage; That which the Jewes Law supposes among the Caravans of the East, consisting of subjects and members of several Common-wealthes. There are Communities and Corporations which subsist by the Act of Soveraigne Power in each Common-wealth, allow∣ing that Power over the Members, to the whole, (ihat is, such persons as are al∣lowed to act for the whole) as they think fit. If the whole Church, from the be∣ginning, have acknowledged certain Lawes, by which they were governed in those things wherein the Communion of the Church consisteth, certain Gover∣nors, to whom they ought to give respect according to those Lawes, a Power of putting out of the Church, (answerable to the Power of putting to death by the sword) into which the coctive Power of Common-wealths is resolved, then is the Church and alwaies was such a Society, wherein the same Rule of Faith might be, and was alwaies from the beginning, preserved by Tradition and Custome, which is my present businesse to show. And if the Church alwaies was so, de Facto, then is it so alwaies de Jure; If it did alwaies hold unity in the Faith, and communion in the service of God, by the meanes of certain Lawes, certaine Rulers, certaine Power of granting or refusing this Communion; Then was there a precept of God delivered to the Church, by the Apostles, commanding
them so to live. For, that which was as difficult, as impossible to have been intro∣duced, without conviction of the will of God, as the rest of Christianity, of ne∣cessity must go for a part of it. But, that, in such variety of mens fannies, rea∣sons, and inclinations, the Church, consisting from the beginning of all Nati∣ons, and dispersed all over the world, should of their own inclination, not swayed by any information of Gods will received with Christianity, agree in the same Lawes and Rulers, submitting to the exercise of the same Power upon themselves, is as impossible, as that the world should consist of the casual con∣curse of atomes, according to Democritus and Epicurus. The name of the Church, without peradventure, was first used, to signifie the whole body of Gods people in the Wildernesse, when they might be, and were called together and assembled, upon their common occasions, which the word  or  signifies. After which time, the people continuing still one and the same, by virtue of the same Lawes then received, and the Pow∣ers placed in their Ruler; Not onely the whole people, but such parts of it, as resorted to the same Government, have still born and do bear the same name; The Synagogue of Libertines, Cyrenaeans, Alexandrians, Cilicians and Asians by example; Acts VI. 9. which name first belongs to the respective Bodies of Jewes, that subsisted at Rome, Cyrene, or Alexandria, in Cilicia or Asia; And consequently, by Metonymy, to the Places, where such of those Bodies as chan∣ced to be at Jerusalem might assemble themselves; And, to so many of those Bodies, as, being at Jerusalem, did assemble at those Places. Now, no Christi∣an can doubt, that the Body of Christians succeeds in the stead of Gods anci∣ent people. And therefore, the name of Gods Church, when it stands without limitation, signifies no lesse. As, when our Lord saith, Mat. XVI. 18. Ʋpon this rock will I found my Church. Whatsoever the Disciples then conceived the Church should be, our Lord, that knew all, by the name of it, meant all that duly beares the name. And therefore, when hee saith once again; Mat. XVIII. 17. Tell it to the Church; It is strange there should be Christians, that should think hee means the Jewes and their Rulers; And, that the precept concernes Christians no longer, now they have left the Jewes. Though it is true, a man cannot tell his cause to the whole Church, but to that part of it to which hee can resort, which is called by the name of the Whole, as I said even now of the Synagogue. S. Paul to the Colossians II. 24, 25. calling the Church the Bo∣dy of Christ, saith; That hee, by the dispensation of God towards them, which hee is trusted with, is become the minister of the Church; to wit, as Angels are ministers of the Church, because ministers of God towards it. And there∣fore minister of the whole Church, which is the Body of Christ, not of any par∣ticular Church, as if an Apostle could be bound to execute his office according to the discretion of any Church, which, for Gods cause hee attends; As all Ministers are bound to execute their Office, according to the will of them whose Ministers they are. It is therefore the whole Church in which God hath set Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, and the use of the Graces rehearsed 1 Cor. XII. 28. Eph. IV. 11. Because the Office of these Graces can by no means be confined, either to any particular Church, or to any part of the whole Church. The name of the Church signifies the same thing again Eph. I. 22. III. 21. V. 23-32. While all Christendome was contained in the Church at Jeru∣salem, the name of the Church is so used, Acts II. 47. V. 11. VIII. 1, 3. that it is no mater whether wee understand by it the whole Church, or the Church of Jerusalem. The reason; Because all right and power, that can at any time be found vested in the whole Church, was then as fully in the Church at Jerusalem, as it can be at any time in the whole Church, though in respect of a Body never so much greater than it: As a childe is as much a man the day of his birth, as the day of his death, and a tree as much as a tree when it growes one, as when it is come to the height. But, Christianity being propagated among Jewes and Gen∣tiles, as wee reade of the Churches of Judaea, Samaria and Galilee, Acts IX, 31. and must needs understand the Epistles to the Ebrewes to have been written to Churches consisting onely of Ebrewes, as those of S. Peter, and that of S.
James, which mentions the Elders of the Church James V. 14. So the Churches of the Gentiles in S. Paul Rom. XVI. 4. wee easily understand to be the Churches of Asia 1 Cor. XVI. 9. Apoc. I. 11. the Churches of Galia 1 Cor. XVI. 1. the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. VIII. 1. and the rest that were visible in S. Pals time. Now, suppose for the present, that these Churches mentioned by the A∣postles were no more than so many Congregations, as our Independents would have it; Seeing they deny not so many Churches to be so many Bodies, what reason can they give, why the name of the Church, when it stands for the whole Church, should not signifie the like? There is a prerogative attributed to the whole Church by S. Paul, 1 Tim. III. 25. when hee calls it the base and pillar of Truth. For, that this should be said of any particular Church, it were too ridi∣culous to imagine. Can the Church bear this attribute, if it be not capable of doing any act that may verifie it? And, if it be not a Body, what act can it do? In fine, the correspondence between Gods ancient people, and his new Israel according to his Spirit, seems to require; That, as the Religion of the Jewes, and not any Civil Power of the Nation, makes them all one Body at this day, in point of fact, by sufferance of Soveraignes, because they were once so in point of right; So the Religion of Christians should make them one Bo∣dy in point of right, how many Bodies soever they are burst into, in point of fact, by their own wantonnesse. For, the Independents exception which I spoke of can be of no force, unlesse they will make it appear, that all those Churches that are mentioned in the wri∣tings of the Apostles did assemble in one place. Not that if this could be made to appear, they had done their businesse. But because, if it do not appear, their plea is peremptorily barred. Wee reade then of M M M soules added in one day to CXX. of the Church at Jerusalem, Acts I. 15. II. 41. To these were ad∣ded, or with these they became VM Acts IV. 4. To whom were added multi∣tudes of men and women, Acts II. 47. V. 14. These assembled daily in private to serve God as Christians, as well as in the Temple, to serve God with his then people, Acts II. 42, 44, 46. V. 13. VI. 1, 4. And shall wee think that all the Christians in Corinth, where God had said to S. Paul that hee had many people Acts XVIII. 10. could meet in one room, because S. Paul sayes 1 Cor. XI. 20. when yee meet together in one place—? For they must not onely meet together, but sup together, as the Apostle showes, which would require a great room if God had many people there. And all the believers at Jerusalem met together, and supped together Acts II. 44, 46. VI. 1. but not VIM. in one room, as I suppoe. Therefore at Corinth also there might be more Congregations than one, where the Church was but one, and all might meet together, though in se∣veral places several assemblies. In the mean time, I do not hear what they say to that which I have alleged, in my book of the Right of a Church in a Christian State pag. 44-50. to show, that wee never read of more Churches than one in one City, but every where of more than one in one Province, in the writings of the Apostles. And therefore I will here plead further; That, from the time of the Apostles, to the Reformation, (which, wherein it consisteth, my businesse is to inquire, and therefore not to suppose that it consisteth in every thing that hath been done) all the Independents in the world shall never be able to show mee any thing called a Church, but the Body of Christians that lived in one City and the territory of it. Indeed, at the first preaching of Christianity, it must needs come to passe, that the number of Christians in a very great City might be so little, that they might meet all at once. And the name of Cities might be exten∣ded to Townes and Villages that could make but few Congregations, when the question was made, whether they should make several Churches, or resort to one; As I have instanced there. But because wee have yet extant antient lists of all the Churches of the Romane Empire, and the Soveraignties into which it is dissol∣ved, punctually agreeing with the records of all Church Writers, in comprising the whole summe of Christians within and under one City in one Church. It may perhaps be found that all the Christians in a whole Nation might resort to one Church, which was the Church of the Head City. But that ever there were
any Christians, that took it for a Law, that every Congregation is to be a Church, before the Reformation, it can by no means appear, whatsoever hath been done since. And therefore I challenge, that all reasonable men must allow, all Chri∣stians that succeeded the Apostles, understood the meaning of their writings by their acts, when they cast all the Christians in & under one City every where into one Church, then those, who now challenge for a Law of God, that all Congre∣gations are to be Churches. And thus farre it appears, by the same evidence upon which wee accept of our common Christianity, that is, by the Scriptures, and by the consent of all Christians, that the Apostles so founded the Churches of their planting, that they might be fit to concurre to the constitution of one whole Church. CHAP. VII. That the Apostles delivered to the Church a Summary of Christianity, which, all should be baptized were to profess. Evidence out of the Scriptures. Evidence out of the Scriptures for Tradition regulating the Communion of the Church, and the Order of it. Evidence for the Rule of Faith, out of the records of the Church. For the Canons of the Church, and the pedegree of them from the Or∣der established in the Church by the Apostles. That the profession of Christianity, and that by being baptized, is necessary to the salvation of a Christian. BUt I will grant, that this were not evidence enough out of the Scriptures, for a point of such consequence, as it will appear to be of, when it apeares to be true, were it not for the general inference that I made afore. Here I chal∣lenge; having proved against the Leviathan, that, whosoever acknowledges our Lord Jesus to be the Christ, must acknowledge, whatsoever hee teaches and de∣livers, either by himself or the Apostles his Deputies, to be Law to the Church; That, whatsoever it may appear any way, that the Aposlhs delivered to the Church to be observed in it, is of that nature. I say further, it is evident by their writings, that they delivered to the Church, a certain Summary of Christi∣anity, which, whosoever was admitted into the Church, by Batisme, under∣to professe and practise. Indeed this is the main point now in hand, that all interpretation of Scripture is to be confined within this Summary, as the Rule of our common Christianity. And therefore it may seem, that I go about first to prove the Corporation of the Church by this Rule; And then to prove the Rule by the consent of the Church, whereby I pretend to evidence, what the Apostles delivered to the Church for the Rule of our common Christianity. But I can easily answer, that it is one thing to question, whether the Apostles did deliver any such Rule to the Church from the beginning or not; Another, what it containes, and, what belongs to it as part of it, what not. If it may appear, by the writings of the Apostles that delivered it, and by the acknow∣ledgment of the Church that received it, (for what othr meane can there be to make it appear?) that such a sense the Apostles did deliver to the Church, it will be a great part of the evidence, that they did found the Church, for a Corporati∣on, wherein the profession of it might be preserved, and wherein God mt be served according to the profession of it. And if this may appear, then, the con∣sent of this Corporation will be as good evidence as the subject mater allowes, whether any thing questionable be part of it or not. Let us then heare the Apostles: Thanks be to God (saith S. Paul Rom. VI. 17.) that, being once slaves to sinne, yee have obeyed from your heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you. Had hee onely said, it was dlivered, they had not ac∣knowledged themselves obliged, but when hee sayes, they obeyed it, hee shows they were under the obligation that God cast on them by delivering it. 2 Pet. II. 21. It had been better for them not to have owned the way of righteousnesse, than, having owned it, to return from the holy commandement delivered. What is this holy commandement, what is this way of righteousnesse, but in one word Christi∣anity? Which when hee saith it was delivered, hee means, by Metonymy, that
it was received, because hee saith further, that they had owned it. The same is called by another Apostle Jude 3. the Faith once delivered to the Saints. And S. Paul 2 Tim. I. 13, 14. Hold fast the form of wholesom words, which thou hast heard of mee, in faith, and love which is through Christ Jesus. Keep that good thing which was deposited in trust with thee, through the Holy Ghost that dwelleth in us. II. 2. And those things which thou hast heard of mee under many witnesses, deposite with trusty persons, who may alsobe able to teach others. Would you have any thing plainer than this, to show, that the Summe of Christianity was delivered for a Rule by the Apostles, by which, their Successors were to examine all Do∣ctrines? Therefore 1 Tim. II. 20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane novelties of termes, and oppositions of knowledge falsly so cal∣led, which some professing, have failed of the Faith. By the Rule of Faith, which he had deposited in his trust, he will have him exclude the pretenses of the Gno∣sticks, which, every man might see, were inconsistent with it. Whereupon S. John calls it the Unction 1 John II. 20-24, 27. by which they knew all things; (To wit, that belong to the common Faith of Christians; And therefore the inconsistence of it with the pretenses of the Antichristian) They continuing in that which they had heard from the beginning, when they turned Christians. And you, saith the Apostle, have an unction from the Holy One, and know all things. I write not to you because you know not the truth, but because you know it, and that no lye is of the Truth. Therefore, let that which you have heard from the beginning abide in you. If that which you have heard from the beginning abide in you, then shall you also abide in the Sonne and in the Father. It is plaine enough why this truth which they have heard from the beginning of their Christianity is called the Unction, because the anointing of the Holy Ghost, (the gift whereof, as I have showed you, presupposeth Christianity) is granted upon consideration of being baptized into the profession of Christianity. Wherefore it followeth in S. John; As for you, the Ʋnction which you have received of him abideth in you: And yee need not that any man teach you: But as the same Ʋnction teacheth you of all things, and is true and no lye, and as it hath taught you, abide in it. The Uncti∣on teacheth all things that a Christian is to avoid, because it teacheth to avoid all that agreeth not with the truth which the same Unction had taught him afore; When, according to that which hath been said, being moved by the Holy Ghost to become a Christian, hee was taught that truth, upon profession whereof hee received the gift of the Holy Ghost for an habitual indowment. And the same is the Apostles meaning, when hee saith again; 1 John III. 9. Whosoever is born of God, doth not commit sinne, for his seed abideth in him. The seed of which a Christian is born, is the Word of the Gospel, which begetteth children to God, when it prevaileth with sinners to become Christians. This Word, obliging Chri∣stians upon their salvation not to sinne, abideth not in him that sinneth, neither sinneth hee in whom it abideth. So, whether you call it Ʋnction or Seed; In regard it is the Rule of our conversation as well as of our belief, as hee that a∣bideth in the truth, must needs reject Heresies contrary to it, so, in whom the seed which hee is born of abideth, hee cannot sinne. And in his second Epi∣stle 6, 7, 9. with S. Paul, hee calls it the commandement which they had received from the same beginning, to preserve them from the impostures of that time, in∣ticing to transgresse it. In fine, that this Tradition is the Law whereupon our Christianity standeth, you may see by the Apostle 1 Pet. III. 20. when hee saith; that Baptisme saveth us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the examina∣tion of a good conscience to God. That is to say, the answer that is made out of a good conscience, to the interrogatories, that were even then propounded to them that were baptized, by which answer, they tied themselves to professe the Faith, and to live according to it; Which S. Paul therefore calls that good profes∣sion which Timothy had made before many witnesses, 1 Tim. VI. 12, 13, 14. to wit, when hee was baptized; and therefore conjures him by the good profession which our Lord made before Pilate, of his Kingdome, for which hee suffered death, to preserve it unspotted. Which if it be so, then must no Christian imagine, that the receiving of this Tradition, or Rule of Faith, upon which men
were admitted to Baptisme, and made Christians, consisted onely, in professing to believe that which is necessary for the salvation of all Christians to be belie∣ved, but also, in undertaking to live as Christianity requireth. Therefore S. Paul sometimes, in his writings, referres himself to the precepts, not onely which hee had delivered them, but also which they had received of him, charging his flock, not onely with their duty, but also with their engagement, 1 Thess. IV. 1, 2, 11. 2 Thess. III. 6. But, besides the Rule of Faith, there is another sort of Traditions, concerning the outward order in the Church, (by which Unity is preserved, in the commu∣nion of those Offices, which God is to be served with by Christians) which Christians come to be subject to, by receiving their Baptisme from the Church, and, consequently undertaking to serve God with the Church. For, it is mani∣fest, that this communion cannot be maintained without certain Rules, limiting the maner and circumstances of Gods service, for time and place and the per∣sons, both which are admitted to communion with the Church, and which are inabled to minister the Offices of the same. Baptisme is the door to all Gods Ordinances that Christians are obliged to serve God with. The praising of God, the reading and hearing of the Scriptures, and the expounding of them, the common prayers of Christian Assemblies, are all Offices, which, no Christian doubts that God is to be served with under the Gospel, though there be no ex∣presse precept of the New Testament, what Offices the publick service of God is to consist of; because, before the Gospel, they were alwaies in use among Gods people. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, being instituted by Christ to be frequented by the Church, at their Assemblies for the service of God, must be reckoned among the positive Laws of God to his Church, obliging only because commanded. Hee that supposeth the Church a Corporation founded by God, to maintaine the communion of those that believe, in these Offices, must conse∣quently maintain a Power of settling good order in the exercise of them, as for all other circumstances, so especially, for the qualities of persons concurring to the celebrating of them. Hee that shows by the Scripture, that this order was provided for by the Apostles, in the Churches of their founding, shows that they intended the Church for a Body, indowed with Power of limiting the like Rules for the future. And this is to be showed by many passages of S. Pauls Epistles. 1 Cor. XI. 2, 3-16. 20-34. having commended them, for observing his Traditions as hee had delivered them, hee is fain to argue very hard, that their women ought, their men ought not to be vailed at divine Service; Conclu∣ding, that, if his reasons would not prevail, the contentious must rest in this; That wee have no such custome, neither the Churches of God. Why so, if parti∣cular Churches be not tied to keep unity with the whole? And by and by, pro∣posing another disorder, in that they received not the Eucharist in commune poore and rich, hee reproveth it, as contrary to that which hee had delivered to them from the beginning; Concluding, that; The rest will I set in order when I come. So 2 Thess. II. 25. Stand therefore, brethren, and hold fast the Traditions which yee have been taught, either by word of mouth, or by any letter of ours. Nei∣ther can it be imagined, that all Christians should be bound to heare the Apo∣stles, and not be bound to hold those things, for Lawes to their conversation in maters of Religion, which the Apostles should teach them to that purpose. Of this nature is the decree at Jerusalem, Acts XV. 20, 28. that the then Churches of the Gentiles should abstain from things strangled and bloud, as well as from fornication, and the pollution of Idols. For, what is the ground or the purpose of it, but to preserve them in unity, with the Churches of Jews become Christians? Of this nature is that blessing or Thanksgiving mentioned by S. Paul 1 Cor. XIV. 16, 17. 1 Tim. II. 1. being, as I have showed in a Discourse of the Service of God at the Assemblies of the Church pag. 350-370. a form of Prayer or Thanksgiving delivered in substance by the Apostles, for which the Sacrament of our Lords Supper hath been alwaies called the Eucharist, because it is to be celebrated with it. Of the same nature is tha order which S. James gives, of praying for the sick, anointing them with oile; aswell for the forgivenesse of their sins, as for
the recovery of their bodily health; James V. 14, 15. Which, I suppose, no man will deny, that it concernes all Churches alike. If there be this evidence in the Scriptures, for the beginnings of Church Law, the practice of the Church, from this beginning, will afford much more. Hee that would deny the Tradition of the Rule of Faith, what will hee say to the Creed of the Apostles? Not that I would have the words and syllables of it to containe whatsoever it is necessary for the salvation of a Christian to believe; But because the Creed is not the words of the Creed, but the sense and meaning of them, together with that coherence and dependence of the parts thereof one upon and with another, which the reasons and grounds of them inforce. But first let it be understood, that I make a difference between the Rule of Faith, and the substance of Christianity: Supposing Christianity to consist partly in mater of Faith, partly in mater of maners; Partly in things to be believed, partly in things to be done, though the Creed extend onely to mater of Faith. There is nothing more evident in the practice of the whole Church, before the world had admitted the profession of Christianity, than this; That there was a time allowed and required by the Church for those that professed themselves converted to believe the truth of Christianity, to give trial of their conversati∣on, before they were admitted to Baptisme. The Constitutions of the Apostles VIII. 32. name three years, but with this limitation, that if any man demonstrate extraordinary zele to Christianity, hee be received without so long trial. There∣fore if Clemens Alexandrinus require five, it makes no difference. For what marvail if several Churches at several times had several customes, when as upon extraordinary occasions they were dispensable? The Constitutions require ex∣traordinary trial of those that had practised any sort of Magick, judging by the experience of the times, that it was hard to part with such superstitions. It is enough for my purpose, that, during this time, they might learn to behave themselves as Christians, by conversing among Christians, by coming to Church, and bearing a part in the praises of God, and hearing the Scriptures read and expounded. And what is more notorious in the practice of the ancient Church, than the difference between Missa Catechumenorum and Missa Fidelium; Be∣tween that part of the Office of the Church, which Pretenders to Christianity were admitted to, (or Hearers, that is, Scholars and Learners of it) and that which was peculiar to Believers, that is; those that were Baptized and made Christians? It is the designe of Clemens Alexandrinus his Paedagogus, to show, how the Word, (whether our Lord Christ or his Gospel) is the Pedagogue of mankinde, in bringing them to be Christians. Not as wee mistake that word to signifie the Master of a School, but as the fashion was then, for men of qua∣lity to appoint a sonne a Governor, to conduct him to School and home againe, to attend on him at his exercises, and upon all occasions, to put him in minde how it might become him to behave himself, and to report to his Father if hee proved untractable. Thus hee maketh Pretenders to Christianity to be condu∣cted by our Lord Christ and his Gospel, in the conversation of Christians, till they come to demand their Baptisme of the Church: As it is manifest by the end of the Book, where this Governor, conducting his charge to the Church, gives him up into his own hands (so hee saith expresly) as no more Governor of children, but Master of men in the School of his Church. Supposing then the point of maners and godly life to be part of the substance of Christianity, it is evident, that the Church alwaies acknowledged a certain Rule of Faith, in that those who were thus prepared, were alwaies taught their Creed, that is, required to repete it, and heare it expounded by those whom the Church trusted for that purpose. It is not my intent here to insist, that the words of the Creed were delivered by the Apostles themselves, or, that the Rule of Baptisme delivered by our Lord, in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, is not a sufficient Symbole or cognizance for a Christian. For what is there necessary to the salva∣tion of all Christians that is not contained in the profession of him, that desires to be baptized into this Faith? But it is enough for my present purpose, that it was alwaies requisite, that whosoever is baptized, should be instructed upon what
termes hee is to expect to be saved by Christ, and, that which all were required to professe for that purpose, to be the Rule of Faith. For, whether it may appeare that this or that is of that nature must come to trial, though the question be on∣ly of the sense of the Creed, supposing that the very words were delivered by the Apostles themselves. For example: It is not possible to render a reason of the coming of Christ, not mentioning the fall of Adam; nor of that, not mentioning the Devil and his Angels; nor of that, not mentioning the creation of Angels. The knowledge then requisite to save a Christian containeth the Apostasy of the evil Angels, whether it be in the Creed or not, because neither the Creed as it is, nor Baptisme in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, can be understood to have any sense, without supposing it. And therefore I∣renaeus I. 2. could not deliver this Rule without mentioning the Devil and his Angels, though I intend not thereupon to argue, that it was contained in the words of the Creed at that time. By S. Cyrils Catechises you shall understand, that those who pretended to Baptisme at Easter, were to be instructed in the sense and grounds of their Creed during the Lent. And S. Augustine in his book de Catechizandis rudibus, where hee acquaints his friend that had writ to him a∣bout something of that office, with the form that hee was wont to use, instructs him to begin with the beginning of Genesis, and, setting forth what course God had taken with mankinde before and under the Law, to bring down his discourse to the coming of Christ, and from thence to his second coming to Judgment. Which is to the very same purpose, onely taking opportunity to mixe the mo∣tives of Faith, which the Old Testament containeth with the mater of Faith which the New Testament requireth. Whatsoever then is said of the Rule of Faith in the writings of the Fathers, is to be understood of the Creed; Whereof, though it be not maintained, that the words which Pretenders were required to render by heart were the same, yet the substance of it, & the reasons and grounds which make every point necessary to be believed, were alwaies the same in all Churches, and remaine unchangeable. I would not have any hereupon to think, that the mater of this Rule is not, in my conceit, contained in the Scriptures. For I finde S. Cyril Catech. V. protesting, that it containes nothing but that which concerned our salvation the most, selected out of the Scriptures. And therefore in other places, he tenders his Scholars evidence out of the Scriptures, and wishes them not to believe that whereof there is no such evidence. And to the same effect, Eucherius in Symb. Hom. I. Paschasius de Sp. S. in Praef. and af∣ter them Thomas Aquinas secunda II. Quest. I. Art. IX. all agree, that the form of the Creed was made up out of the Scriptures; Giving such reasons as no reasonable Christian can refuse. Not onely because all they whose salvation is concerned have not leisure to study the Scriptures, but because they that have, cannot easily or safely discern wherein the substance of Faith, upon the profes∣sion whereof our salvation depends, consisteth; Supposing that they were able to discern between true and false, in the meaning of the Scriptures. To which I will adde onely that which Trtullian and others of the Fathers observe of the ancient Hereticks, that their fashion was to take occasion, upon one or two texts, to overthrow and deny the main substance and scope of the whole Scriptures. Which, whether it be seen in the Sects of our time, or not, I will not say here, (because I will not take any thing for granted, which I have not yet principles to prove) but supposing it onely a thing possible, I will think I give a sufficient reason why God should provide Tradition as well as Scripture, to bound the sense of it; As S. Cyril also cautioneth in the place aforenamed, where hee so li∣berally acknowledgeth the Creed to be taken out of the Scripture; . For (saith hee) the Faith was not framed as it pleased men, but the most substantial maters collected out of the Scripture do make up one doctrine of the Faith. For, I beseech you, what had they, whosoever they were that first framed the Creed, but Tradition, where∣by to distinguish that which is substantial from that which is not? Heare Origen in the Preface to his books . Cùm multi sum qui sentire se putent quae
Christi sunt, & nonnulii eorum diversa à prioribus sentiant, servetur verò Ecclesia∣stica praedicatio per successionis ordinem ab Apostolis tradita, & usque ad praesens in Ecclesiis permanens; Illa sola credenda est veritas, quae in nullo ab Ecclesiasticâ dis∣cordat traditione. Illud tamen scire opor tet, quoniam sancti Apostoli, fidem Christi praedicantes, de quibusdam quidem, quaecun{que} necessaria crediderunt, omnibus cre∣dentibus, etiam his qui erga inquisitionem divinae scientiae pigriores videbantur, ma∣nifestissimê tradiderunt; Rationem scilicet assertionis relinquentes eis inquirendam, qui Spiritûs dona excellentia, & praecipuè, sermonis, sapientiae, & scientiae, per ipsum Spiritum Sanctum percipere merebantur. De aliis verò, dixerunt quidem quia sint, quomodo autem aut unde sint siluerunt, profectò, ut studiosiores quoque (l. quique) ex posteris suis, amatores sapientiae & scientiae, exercitium habere possent, in quo in∣genii sui fructum ostendere valerent; Hi videlicet, qui dignos se & capaces sa∣pientiae praepararent. Species verò eorum quae per praedicationem Apostolicam mani∣festè traduntur, hae sunt. There being many, that think their sense to be Christian, and yet the sense of some differs from their predecessors; But, that which the Church preaches, as delivered by order of succession from the Apostles, being pre∣served and remaining the same in the Churches; That onely is to be believed for truth, which nothing differs from the Tradition of the Church. This, notwithstand∣ing, wee must know; That the holy Apostles, preaching the Faith of Christ, delive∣red some things, (as many as they held necessary) most manifestly to all believers, e∣ven those whom they found the duller in the search of divine knowledge; Leaving the reason why they affirmed them to the search of those, that goe to receive the emi∣nent gifts of the Holy Ghost, especially of utterance, wisedom, and knowledge by the Holy Ghost. Of other things, they said that they are, but how, or whereupon they are, they said not. Forsooth, that the more studious of their Successors, loving wise∣dom and knowledge, might have some exercise, wherein to show the fruit of their wit; To wit, those that should prepare themselves to be worthy and capable of wise∣dom. Now, the particulars of that which is manifestly delivered, by the preaching of the Apostles, are these; Which hee proceedeth to set down. But Vincentius Lerinensis hath writ a Discourse on purpose, to show, that, this Rule of Faith, be∣ing delivered by succession to the principal, as S. Paul requires Timothy to do, and by them to those that were baptized, was the ground, upon which all Here∣sies, attempting upon the Faith, were condemned. So that, so many Heresies, as historical truth will evidence, to have been excluded the Church from the A∣postles time, for mater of belief, so many convictions of this Rule; Which, because all agreed that they transgressed, therefore they were excluded the Church. But, Vincentius besides this, advanceth another mark to discern what belongs to the Rule, that is, what the ground and scope of our Creed requires. For it might be said, that perhaps something may come in question whether con∣sistent with the Rule of Faith or not, in which there hath passed no decree of the primitive Church, because never questioned by that time; Wherein, there∣fore, wee shall be to seek, notwithstanding the decrees past by the Church upon ancient Heresies. Which to meet with, Vincentius saith further, that whatsoever hath been unanimously taught in the Church by writing, that is, alwaies, by all, every where, to that, no contradiction is ever to be admitted in the Church. Here the stile changes. For, whereas Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others of former time, appeal onely to that which was visible in the practice of all Churches; By the time of the Council at Ephesus, (the dare of Vincentius his book) so much had been written upon all points of Faith, and upon the Scriptures, that hee presumeth, evidence may be made of it all, what may stand with that which the whole Church had taught, what may not. I know this proposition satisfieth not now, because I know Vincentius proceedeth upon supposition, that the Church was and ought to be alwaies one Body, in which, that which agreeth with the Faith might be taught, that which agreeth not might not; Which is the question now in dispute. For, upon other termes, it had been madnesse in him to allege and maintain the Council of Ephesus, condemning Nestorius as infringing the Rule of Faith, upon this presumption, because ten received. Doctors of the Church had formerly delivered the contrary of his doctrine. It is well enough
known, that there are many questions, in which, though there may be ten Fathers alleged on one side, yet there may be more alleged on the other side. And it were a piteous case, if Vincentius or I could tell you no wiser a way for the end∣ing of Controversies in Religion, than by counting noses. The presumption lies in this; That the witnesles that depose being of such credit in the Church, as the quality which they beare in it presupposeth, it cannot reasonably be i∣magined, that they could teach that for truth, which is inconsistent with Christi∣anity, but they must be contradicted in it, and their quality and degree in the Church questioned upon it. And that the Church having been alwaies one and the same Body from Christ, whosoever should undertake to teach that for the Christian Faith, which from the beginning had been counted false, hee would have been questioned for contradicting that profession, which qualified him for that rank which hee held in the Church. It is the case of Nestorius, who, vent∣ing his Heresie in the Church, gave the people occasion to check at it, and the Council of Ephesus to condemn it. Now Vincentius his discourse presupposeth, that the doctrine of those ten whom hee allegeth had not been contradicted. A thing which must needs be presupposed by him, that supposed the Great Council of Nicaea had decreed no more than that which had alwaies been taught in the Church. For it is plain, that without questioning the Faith setled at Ni∣caea, there is no room for the opinion of Nestorius. But otherwise, should ten of that quality which hee allegeth be so considerably contradicted, that it must be presumed, their doctrine was suffered to passe, not as not taken notice of, but as not contradicting the common profession of Christians, it will appear a presum∣ption, that neither part is of the substance of Faith, but both allowed to be taught in the Church. And if it appear further, that the fewer in number, and the lesse in rank and quality in the Church hold that which dependeth more ne∣cessarily upon the Rule of Faith, which containeth the substance of the Scri∣ptures, it will be no way prejudicial to the Unity and authority of the Church, as a Corporation founded by God, that a private man as I am should conclude it for truth, against the greater authority, in maters depending upon the founda∣tion of the Church. If it be said, that this evidence supposeth the necessity of Baptisme to the ma∣king of a Christian; Which, not onely the Leviatha is farr from granting, who professeth himself bound to renounce Christ at the command of his Soveraign; But the Socinians also, and some of our Sectaries hold indifferent to salvation, whether baptized or not; I answer; That the question here is not, what be∣longs or belongs not to the Rule of Faith and Christian conversation, necessary to the salvation of all Christians, but, whether there be any such Rule or not. That the original and universal custome of Carechizing all Christians evidenceth such a Rule, by the consent of all Christians, as you have seen it evidenced by the frequent mention thereof in Scriptures. That therefore it stands recom∣mended to us by the same means, and upon the same grounds, for which wee re∣ceive the holy Scriptures. And that, though, when the World was come into the Church, and many more were baptized infants then afore, it cannot be said that this order of Catechizing was so substantially performed as afore; Yet the mater and theme of it remaining in the Tradition of the Creed, and the sense of it, in the writings of the Fathers and the decrees of the Church against He∣reticks, it remains still visible what belongs to it, what not, as I shall make ap∣pear, in that which is questioned within the subject of this book. Onely this is the place, where I am to allege against the Leviathan, why the profession of Christianity is necessary to the salvation of all Christians: Whereupon it will follow without further proof, that it is necessary to salvation, to believe more than that Jesus is the Christ; To wit, whatsoever this Rule of Christianity con∣taineth, the profession whereof is requisite to Christianity. Heare our Lord, Mat. X. 32, 33. Luke XII. 8, 9. Whosoever shall renounce mee before men, him will I renounce before my Father which is in heaven. And, whosoever shall acknowledge mee before men, him will I acknowledge before my Father which is in heaven. And S. Paul Rom. X. 9, 10. If thou confesse with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lard, and
believe with thy heat that God raised him from the dead, that shalt be saved. For with the heart a man believes to righteousnesse, and with the mouth hee professeth to salvation. And a Tim. II. 12. If wee deny him, hee will deny us. Our Lords Commission to his Apostles is, Mat. XXVIII. 19. Go make disciples all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. Who are then Christs Disciples? That wee may know, what the Apostles are to make them whom they make Christs Disciples. Ye are my Disciples (saith our Lord) if yee do whatsoever I command you. And John. XV. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that yee heart  fruit: And yee shall be my Disciples. And Luke XIV. 26, 27. Whoso cometh to , and hatth not father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers and sisters, yea and himself, cannot be my Disciple. And whose taketh not up his Crosse and followeth ee, cannot be my Disciple. To the same purpose M. X, 38. XVI. 24. Mark VIII. 34. X. 21. Luke IX. 23. And S. Paul plainly declareth the Galaians fallen from all benefit of the Gospel, if, to avoid the Crosse of Christ, they should alk the profession of their Chri∣stianity to be circumcised Gl. V. 11. VI. 12, 14. S. John charges the Churches of Pergamus and Thyatira Apoc. II. 14, 15, 20. to have some that hold the doctrine of Balam, who taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel, of things offered to Idols and Whrdome; which is the doctrine of the Nicolai∣tanes. And, to suffer the woman Jzabel calling her self a Prophetesse, to teach and lead the servants of God into the error of whoredome, and eating things sacri∣ficed to Idols. S. Peter 1 Pet. II. 15. and S. Jude 11. charge the Gnosticks, whom they write against in those places, that they go the way of Balaams, that brought the Israelites to joyn with Bl Per, taking the invitation of their mistresses to the sacrifices of their Idols; Whom Ireneus, Justin the Martyr, Origen, Clmons Alexandrius and Tertulli witnesse, to have made the outward act of Idolatry, in eating things sacrificed to Idols an indifferent thing, that they might avoid persecution, by complying with the Gentiles in that, as with the Jewes in be∣ing circumcised. And now, after sixteen hundred yeares, Wee are told, that all that ever suffered for Christianity since the Apostles, (who were to witnesse what they saw our Lord doe, and heard him say) were mutinous sooles, in laying down their lives to testifie that which they were not obliged to witnesse. or rather, which they were obliged not to witnesse, the secular power requi∣ting them not to witnesse it. Wee have found one that calls himself a Christi∣an, wiser than our Lord and his Apostles, (as they called themselves Gnosticks, because they pretended to know more than the Apostles) that can tell Christi∣ans a way to escape the Crosse of Christ by renouncing Christianity, and not fail of the promises thereof, by believing the truth of it. But they were the Disciples of Simon Magus and not of Christ that did so, nor did they expect salvation by the Christianity which they counterseited, but by that secret know∣ledg which they pretended to have discovered, beyond that which all Christians had learned from the Apostles; Though they went for Christians among the Gentiles, who knew not what Christians were, so that the Name of God was blasphemed because of them, as the Apostle saith 1 Pet. II. 2. because their mon∣strous abominations were thought to be the practices of Christians. Whether any man besides, before this new Dogmatist, pretending to be a Christian, pro∣fessed a freedom to renounce Christ in any case, I am yet to learn. Sure I am, the Jewes under Antiochus Epiphanes died freely rather than eat Swines flesh, or give any occasion to think, that they fell from their Law, and from God that gave it, as the Prophet Daniel and his Fellowes had left them example to do. And therefore, by the same means, and upon the same grounds, for which wee receive our Christianity, it stands evidenced to us, that wee are bound to profess it, that is to say, by the Scriptures, and the consent of all Christians that receive the Scriptures. As for Traditions regulating the order to be observed in the communion of the Church, there is so little question to be made of the consent of all Church writers, that it shall serve my turn, to produce the noted words of Trtullian, de Cor. cap. III. Pla ngabimus (traditionem) recipiendam, si nulla example pre∣judicent
aliarum observationum, quas, sine ullius Scripturae instrumento, solius tra∣ditionis titulo; & exinde consuetudinis patrocinio vindicamus. Denique, ut à baptis∣mate ingrediar; Aquam aditnri, ibidem, sed & prius, in Ecclesiâ, sub Antistitis. manu; contest amur, nos renunciare Diabolo, & pompae, & angelis ejus; dehinc ter niergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes, quàm Domintes in Evangelio determina∣vit. Indè suscepti, lactis & mellis concordiam praegustamus. Ex{que} eâ die lavacro quotidiano per totam hebdomadam abstinemus. Eucharistiae sacramentum, & in tempore victlus, & omnibus mandatum à Domino, etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu quàm praesidentium sumimus. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis, annuâ die facimus. Die dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adora∣re. Eâdem immunitate, à die Paschae ad Pentecosten usque gaudemus. Calicis, aut panis etiam nostri aliquid in terram decuti, anxiè patimur. Ad omnem progressum atque promotum, ad omnem aditum & exitum, ad vestitum, ad calceatum, ad la∣vacra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quaecunque nos conversatio ex∣ercet, frontem crucis signaculo terimus. Plainly wee must deny to receive this Tradition, if there be no examples of other observations for a prejudice, which, without any instrument in writing, the onely title of Tradition and plea of Custome from it, maintaineth. In fine, to begin with baptisme; Going into the water, not onely there, but somewhat afore, in the Church, under the hand of our President, wee take witnesse, that wee renounce the Devil, his pomp and Angels. Then wee are drenched thrice, answering somewhat more, than our Lord in the Gospel hath limi∣ted. Being taken up from thence, wee fore-taste a mixture of milk and honey. And from that day, wee forbear our daily bathing all the week. The Sacrament of the Eu∣charist, which our Lord commanded at the time of meat, and all, wee take also at our assemblies before day, but at no mans hand but our Presidents. Wee offer for those that dye, and again, upon the anniversary of their birth. Wee count it unlawfull to fast, or worship kneeling upon the Lords day. The same privilege wee injoy from Ea∣ster to Whitsuntide. Wee are troubled to have any thing, even of our ordinary cup or bread, scattered upon the earth. At all going forth or advancing, at all coming in and going out, at putting on clothes or shooes, at watching, at lying or sitting down, or to table, at bringing in light, whatsoever conversation wee exercise, wee rub our fore∣heads with the sign of the Crosse. I must here take notice of an exception to this authority of Tertullian, that hee was a Montanist, or inclining to the Montanists when hee writ it; And marvail, that prejudice in Religion should transport learned Christians so farre, as to deny the records of the Church that credit, which common sense allowes all records of hi∣storical truth, and which all Learning allowes the writings of Mahume∣tans, Jewes and Pagans. And this consideration I interpose the rather here, to prevent the objection that may be made, that I ground my selfe upon the authority of men, when I allege the testimonies of Church Writers. For, those that may abuse themselves with such a fond imagination as this, are to consider, that I claime as yet no other credit, not onely for Tertullian, who af∣ter hee turned Montanist, was not of the Church, but, for the Fathers of the Church, but that which common sense allowes men of common sense, in wit∣nessing maters of historical truth. To wit, that they who published writings that are come to posterity, would not have alleged things for true, which every man might see to be false, in point of fact; Because, by so doing, common sense must needs tell them, that they must of necessity utterly discredit the cause which they meant to promote. As in the case in hand. If wee say that Tertullian, be∣ing a Montanist, alleged against the Church things so notoriously false, that all the world might see and know them to be false, wee refuse him the credit of a man in his right senses. For what were hee but a mad man, that would tell the Church, that such or such Customes, you know, are practised among Christians, knowing that they were not practised by the Catholick Church, though they might be, among the Montanists? Therefore, though I put a great deal of diffe∣rence between the authority of Tertullian and S. Basil in regulating the Church, yet, in witneshng mater of fact, I can ascribe no more to S. Basils testimony, in his book de Sp. S. cap. XXVII. than I do to this of Tertullian. His words are these.
; Of things decreed and preached that are kept in the Church, some wee have from written doctrine, some wee have received as delivered in secret down to us from the Tradition of the Apostles, both of the same force to godlinesse. And this will no man contradict, that hath but a little experience in the rules of the Church. For if wee go about to refuse unwritten customes as of no great effect, wee shall, unawares, wound the Gospel in the dangerous part, or rather turn the Faith preached into a bare name. As, first to mention the first and com∣monest; Who taught us by writing, to mark with the figure of the Crosse those that have hoped in the name of our Lord Christ Jesus? What Scripture taught us to turn to the East when wee pray? Which of the Saints left us by writing the words of invocation, upon discovering the bread of Thanksgiving and the cup of Blessing? For wee are not content with those which the Apostle or the Gospel menti∣ons, but promote and inferre others as of great force toward the Sacrament, which wee have received by unwritten doctrine? Wee also blesse the water of Baptisme, and the oile of anointing, and besides, the man himself that is baptized, from what Scri∣pture, and not from silent and secret Tradition? And indeed what written word taught the very anointing of oile? And that a man is drenched thrice, whence comes it? And other things about Baptisme, renouncing Satan and his Angels, from what Scri∣pture come they? And not from this unpublished and secret doctrine? I will not here dispute the saying of S. Basil, that these orders are of the same force, toward Chri∣stian piety, as the Scriptures; And, that Christianity would be but a bare name, were it not for these unwritten customes; how the truth of it holds. Nay, it were easie to instance against him, as well as against Tertullian, that, among the particulars which they name, there are those which never were in force through the whole Church, but onely in some parts of it. My present purpose demands onely this, that Christians had rules which they observed for Lawes in the ex∣ercise of their communion; And therefore, by the intent of those who inforced those rules, do constitute a Society or Corporation by the name of the Church. Which Corporation, Tertullian, whether a Montanist or not when hee writ the book which I quote, claimeth to belong to, in reckoning himself among those that observed the Rules of the Catholick Church. If wee suppose the Church to be one Body, consisting of all Churches, which are all of them several Bo∣dies, it will be not onely reasonable, but absolutely necessary by consequence to grant, that some orders there must be, which shall have the force of the whole, others onely in some parts of it. And though S. Basil or Tertullian mistake local customes for general, yet had there not alwaies been a Body, capable of being tied by general customes, there had been no room for this mistake. No prejudice shall hinder mee, to name here the Canons and Constitutions of the Apostles; Not as if I meant to maintain, that the writings so called, were indeed pen∣ned
by them: But because they contain such limitations, of customes delivered the Church by the Apostles, as were received and in use, at such times and in such parts of the Church, where those who penned those writings writ. For, though I should grant, that those limitations are not agreeable to that which was brought in by the Apostles, no man would be so ridiculous as to demand, that there were never any orders or customes delivered the Church by the Apostles, which succeeding times did limit otherwise. The book of Canons which was acknowledged by the representatives of the whole Church, in the Council of Chalcedon, if it be survayed, shall be found to contain, onely, particular limita∣tions of general orders, held by the Church, before those Canons were made by the several Councils, either the same with those in the Canons and Constituti∣ons of the Apostles, or differing onely according to several times and places. For, wee have yet extant a book of Canons made out of the Africane Councils, containing the like limitations of the same customes and orders, which, though not the same, yet served to preserve the Churches of Africk in unity with the rest of the Church. This Code, wee finde added to the former, by Dionysius Exguus, in his translation of the Canons, together with the Canons of the Council at Sardica. And Cassiodore, who lived the same time with Dionysius, af∣firmes, that this collection was in use in the Church of Rome at that time, Divin. lect. cap. XXIII. But there is extant a later Collection of Canons, under the ti∣tle of the Church of Rome, consisting of the same Canons, together with some of the Rescripts of Popes, which were come into use and authority in the We∣stern Church, at such time as the said Collection was made. Of the same Ca∣nons consisteth another Greek collection, printed by du Tillet, and commented by Balsamon, which addeth hereunto the Canons of the sixth and seventh Sy∣nod, in use in the Greek Church, but not acknowledged by the Latine. Where, instead thereof, the collections of Martinus Braccarensis, and Isidorus Mercator, of Burchardns Bishop of Wormes, and Ives of Chartres; where, last of all, the collection of Gratiane the Dominican Monk was in use, till the Rescripts of the Pope took place, and excluded the Canons of the whole Church. The succession of which Law is so visible, that hee that may say, that, the order pre∣sently in force, can no way agree with that, which was established by the Apo∣stles, shall not have the face to asfirm, that there never was any order establish∣ed by the Apostles instead of it, so visible shall the impressions be, of that cor∣ruption, by which it declines from the order first established by the Apostles. And therefore, I allege here in the last place, the consent of those of the Reformation, who, in answering this objection, (when it is argued, that, there∣fore Tradition is necessary as well as Scripture) do not deny, that there was a Rule of Faith, that there were Orders delivered the Church by the Apostles, to preserve the Unity of the Church. But, to answer for themselves, why they stand not to the present Church of Rome in them, do allege; That the Rule of Faith, delivered the Church by word of mouth, is also delivered by writing, and contained in the Scriptures: Tnat the Rules of good order, which the A∣postles delivered, were never intended, to be unchangeable, as you may heare Tertullian say de Velandis Virginibus cap. I. For, in making this answer, they do acknowledge, that the Church had a Rule of Faith, which it had received for a Law from the Apostles, and therefore delivered for a Law to all that became Christians. But, whether this Rule be contained in the Scriptures or not, con∣cernes not my present purpose, seeing it will be as much the cognizance of Christians, and foundation of the Society and Corporation of the Church, (ten∣ding to maintain unity in the profession and exercise of Christianity) whether so or otherwise. Onely no man will deny, that it may be not so easie to discern by the Scriptures alone what belongs to it, what not, as it may appear to be, by the Churches delivering of it. Nor do I pretend here, that the orders delivered by the Apostles are all unchangeable. For who knoweth not, that the Lawes of every Common-wealth do change from age to age, the state of Government re∣maining the same, because those rights in which Soveraignty consisteth remain the same? And therefore, it is enough for my purpose, that the Church had
certain orders, regulating the proceeding thereof, in maters wherein it is to com∣municate, as well under the Apostles, as in succeeding ages. Nor requiring, that they should be alwaies the same, but, that they should come alway from the same power, which they left in the Church, that so the Body may appear to con∣tinue alwaies one and the same. And, that I proceed to prove, by showing, that the power of those publick persons, which did alwaies act in behalf of the Church, in admitting into and excluding out of the Church (whereby those Laws were in force, and wherein the Unity of the Church consisteth) is derived from our Lord, by the act of his Apostles. CHAP. VIII. That the Power of Governing the whole Church was in the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, and those whom they took to assist them in the parts of it. The Power of their Successors must needs be derived from those. Why that Succession which appeares in one Church, necessarily holdeth all Churches. The holding of Coun∣cils evidenceth the Ʋnity of the Church. FOr, this I must presume of, in the first place; That, as the Church is, and was to be, the true spiritual Israel of God, when his ancient people depar∣ted from him, by refusing the Gospel; So, to signifie this, did our Lord chuse out XII. Apostles and LXX Disciples, answerable to the XII Princes of Tribes, and the LXX Elders, which, with Moses, were to govern Gods ancient people. Neither do I mervail, that wee finde in the Scriptures no further use made of these LXX, no further power exercised by them, under that title; The diffe∣rence between Gods ancient and new people appearing straight after our Lords Ascension, and making that order uselesse for the future. For Israel, dwelling all in one Land, might easily be governed by one Soveraign Court, in maters of the Law, answerable in power to that of Moses and his LXX Elders: But Chri∣stianity, being to be dispersed all over the world, those LXX with our Lord chose for his present service, could not serve for the like purpose, in time to come. It is therefore enough, that the number of them signifies unto us the foresaid pur∣pose, their office, for the time to come, being swallowed up in the offices of the rest of our Lords Disciples, besides the XII Apostles, remaining alwaies the Judges of the XII Tribes of Israel, here and in the world to come. I am sen∣sible that some, both of our Presbyterians and Independents, have been nib∣bling at this point, as if they had a minde, if they durst, to say; That the A∣postles had no authority in the Church but as writers of Scriptures: As for the Goverment of the Church, that the people, or their buckram Elders were to give them checkmate in it. But, having met with this pretense in another place, and heard no man open his mouth to maintain it, I shall, at present, rest con∣tent to have showed afore, that their authority is the ground of the authority of their writings, & here, that their Traditions were Law to the Church, and that by their writings, which mention not so much as what the Traditions were. Where∣by it appears, that they took place, as acts of their perpetual authority over the Church, not as revelations of Gods will, sent by those Epistles, wherein some∣times they are not so much as named. Besides the Apostles then, at such time as the Church of Jerusalem contained all Christendome, as I observed afore, you have mention of the Elders at Jeru∣salem, Acts XI. 30. XV. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23. And again, after the propagation of Chri∣stianity, XXI. 18. Of leading men also among the brethren, who were also Pro∣phets, Doctors and Evangelists, XV. 22, 32, 35. These then had not their com∣mission from the Apostles because other disciples, as well as the XII, received at our Lords own hands the power of remitting sins, by the Holy Ghost, John XX. 18-23. But there was never yet any doubt made, that their authority was limitable by the Apostles, because of the eminence of the XII among the Disci∣ples. And therefore, hee that would say, that the LXX were contained in the number of those Elders and Leaders, could no more be contradicted, then some
of the Ancient Fathers can be contradicted, in reporting, that some of them were of the number of the VII that were chosen to assist the Apostles, Acts VI. S. Paul, further, rehearsing the graces that our Lord hath granted for the edification of his Church, reckoneth Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Doctors Eph. IV. 11. 1 Cor. XII. 28. Now, it is the whole Church that the Apostle speaks of here, as I observed afore, and therefore, the authority here mentioned extendeth to the whole Church. But it is manifest, that the authori∣ty which S. Paul giveth Timothy and Titus, as his Epistles to them evidence, is respective to the Churches of Ephesus and Creet, or at the most, those Churches which resorted to them; Yet are they inabled thereby to constitute Bishops for the service of the said Churches, as also their Deacons, and to govern the same 1 Tim. II. 5. Titus I. 6-9. The Elders of the Church which S. Paul sent for to Ephesus, had authority respective to the Church there meant, but received from S. Paul, as his directions and exhortations intimate Acts XX. 17, 28-21. So did the Elders which hee and Barnabas ordained in the Churches Acts XIV. 28. The like wee finde in the Churches of the Jewes Heb. XIII. 7, 17. James V. 14. 1 Pet. V. 1-5. and of the Thessalonians and Philippians, 1 Thess. V. 12, 13. Phil. I. 1. And the seven Churches of Asia have their seven Angels, which, the Epi∣stles which the Spirit directs S. John to write them do show, that they were to acknowledge his authority, Apoc. I. 20. II. III. So, as long as the Scriptures last, it is evident, that there was a common authority, whether derived from, or concurrent with the authority of the Apostles, which must needs make the Church one Body during that time, whatsoever privilege can be challenged on behalf of the people, and their concurrence to the acts either of each particular Church, or of the whole. And for the continuance of this authority after the Apostles, I see no cause why I should seek farr for evidence. It shall susfice mee to allege the Heads of the Churches of Rome, Alexandira, Antiochia and Jerusalem, recorded by Eu∣sebius in his Ecclesiastical Histories, from the time of the Apostles. Adding thereunto thereunto the protestations of Irenaeus III. 3. that hee could reckon those rhat received their authority from the Apostles, in all Churches, though, for brevities sake, hee insist onely in the Church of Rome; And of Tertullian de Praescript. cap. XXXII. who also allegeth, the very Chaires which the Apostles sate upon, possessed by those that succeeded them in his time, as well as the Ori∣ginals of those Epistles which they sent to such Churches, extant in his time. I will also remember S. Augustine Epistolâ CLXV, and Optatus lib. II. alleging the same succession in the Church of Rome, to confound the Donatists with, for departing from the comminion thereof, and of all Churches that then commu∣nicated with it. For what will any man in his right senses say to this? That this authority came not from the Apostles? Or that it argues every one of these Churches to be a Body by it self, but not all of them to make one Body which is the Catholick Church? Hee that sayes this, must answer Irenaeus, alleging, for a reason, why hee instances onely in the Church of Rome; Ad hanc enim Ec∣clesiam, propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique sideles. For, to this Church, it is necessary that all Churches, that is, the Christians that are on all sides, should resort, because of the more powerfull principality. What is the reason why it is enough for Irenaeus to instance in the Church of Rome but this; That all Churches do communicate with the Church of Rome, when they resort to Rome, and all resort thither be∣cause it is the sear of the Empire? So, that which is said of the Faith of the Church of Rome, is said of the Faith of all Churches: And potentior principali∣tas is not command of the Church over other Churches, but the power of the Empire, which forces the Christians of all sides to resort to Rome. Again, the cause of the Church against the Donarists stands upon this ground; that, the Church of Rome, which the Churches of Africk did communicate with, communica∣ted with all Churches besides those of Africk: But, that Church of Rome which the Donatists communicated with, (for they also had set up a Church of their own at Rome) the rest of the Church did not communicate with. How
this came to passe, you may see by the cause of the Novatians, being the same in effect with that of the Donatists. By the IV Canon of Nicaea it is provided, that every Bishop be made by all the Bishops of the Province, some of them, (as ma∣ny as can) meeting, the rest allowing the proceedings under their hand. This provision might be made, when there were Churches in all Cities of all Provin∣ces, but the I Canon of the Apostles onely requireth, that a Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops. For, when Christianity was thinner sowed, if two or three should take the care of providing a Pastor for a Church that was void, their proceeding was not like to be disowned by the rest of the neighbouring Churches, nor, in particular, by that of the chief City, to which the Cities of the rest resorted for justice. The Churches of these chief Cities holding intelli∣gence, correspondence, and communion with other Churches of other princi∣pal Cities, those Churches which they owned, together with their Rulers, (or whosoever they were that acted on behalf of them) must needs be owned by them in the same unity and correspondence. The Bishop of Rome being dead while the question depended, whether those that had fallen away in the perse∣cution of Decius should be readmitted to communion or not; And the neigh∣bour Bishops being assembled, sixteen of them ordain Cornelius, three of them Novatianus, who stood strictly upon rejecting them, whatsoever satisfaction they tendered the Church. Whether of these should be received, was for a time que∣stionable, especially in the Church of Antiochia, and those Churches which ad∣heered to it. Untill, by the intercession of Dionysius of Alexandria, they were induced to admit of Cornelius without dispute. All this, and much more, you have in Eusebius Eccl. Hist. VI. 42-46. Which being done, there remained no further question, that those who held with Cornelius were to be admitted, those that held with Novatianus remaining excommunicate. Whereby it appeares, that, by the communication which passed between the greatest Churches, and the adherence of the lesse unto them, whatsoever Church communicated with any Church communicated with the whole: And in what quality soever a man was known in his own Church, in the same hee was acknowledged by all Chur∣ches. And therefore, the succession of the Rulers of any Church from the Apo∣stles is enough, to evidence the unity of the Catholick Church, as a visible Cor∣poration consisting of all Churches. I must not here omit to allege the authority of Councils, and to maintain the right and power of holding them, and the obligation which the decrees of them regularly made is able to create, to stand by the same authority of the Apostles. Which if I do, there can no further question remain, whether the Church was founded for a Corporation by our Lord and his Apostles, when wee see the parts ruled by the acts of the whole; That is to say, when wee see persons authori∣zed in behalf of their particular Churches, do an act which shall oblige those respective Churches. For by the same reason, persons authorized on behalf of all Churches, shall be able to do an act that shall oblige all Churches; Which is all that I claim, when I maintain, that, by Gods Law, all Churches are to make one Church. When Matthias was Ordained an Apostle in stead of Ju∣das, I demand, why that Assembly of Apostles and Disciples at which this was done, should not be counted a General Council; having showed, that this Church of Jerusalem was then the whole Church, and the creating of an A∣postle, whom all were to acknowledge in that quality for the future, being an act concerning the Whole. I will not say, that the act of creating the seven, Acts VI. concerned the whole Church, being content that it remaine in question, whether the intent of it were such or not. But in as much as those that do not allow, that they intended to create an Order of Deacons which all Churches were to make use of afterwards, do not question, that, if they did intend it, the whole Church must needs stand obliged by it, I am not afraid, to reckon this Assembly also in the rank of General Councils. As for that of Acts XV. it appeareth sufficiently, that, those who founded the Church of Antiochia, had their first commission from the Apostles, not onely by the first preaching of the Gospel there, and the sending of Barnabas Acts XI. 19-26. but chiefly, in that
those which taught the necessity of observing Moses Law are disowned, as ha∣ving no commission so to teach Acts XV. 24. For, as for S. Paul, who challen∣geth an immediate commission from our Lord, Gal. I. 1. it is easily granted, be∣cause hee was made an Apostle; Yet, in that hee allegeth the verifying of it to S. Peter and S. James, and the Churches of Judaea, (who, having never seen his face, glorified God for him Gal. I. 18-24.) in that hee is brought by Barnabas (who acted by commission from the Apostles) to Antiochia, and upon this be∣ginning was sent by the Holy Ghost, that is, by Prophesie, to do the office of an Apostle with Barnabas Acts XII. 1, 2, 3. in that hee is owned by the Apostles afterwards Acts XV. 12. Gal. II. 1, 7-10. (which makes it more than probable, that both these Texts speak of one and the same time of S. Pauls coming to Jerusalem) in these regards, I say, it appeares sufficiently, that the Church was to own him for an Apostle, upon the owning his immediate calling from hea∣ven, by the rest of the Apostles. Wherefore; when wee see those that were trusted on behalf of the Church of Antiochia, and those Churches which had been founded by those that were sent by the Holy Ghost from thence, resort to the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem, for an end of the difference in debate, well may I, with those that have gone afore mee, reckon this meeting among the General Councils, the cause of it concerning the whole; & no part concern∣ed that it obliged not. I will not say so much of the meeting of S. Paul with S. James Acts XXI. 18. (though the Elders there mentioned are thought to be those, that had the chief authority in the neighbouring Churches, as well as in that of Jerusalem; And though S. Paul, by this time, was become rhe Head of many more Churches of his own foundation than afore) Because of the dispersion of the rest of the Apostles, and the founding of other Churches by this time, which could not be tied by the result of this meeting, further than the mater of it was inforced by the decree formerly made, of which, among the Apostles, there ought no doubt to be made. Let no man expect that I inferre upon these premises, that the Church is bound by a positive Law of God to call Councils, and to decide all emergencies by the vote of them, much lesse, that it is not able to do this otherwise. I that pretend the Church to be a Corporation, founded by God, upon a privilege of holding visible Assemblies for the common service of God, notwithstanding any secular force prohibiting the same, must needes maintain by consequence, that the Church hath power in it self to hold all such Assemblies, as shall be requisite to maintain the common service of God, and the unity in it, and the order of all Assemblies that exercise it, but especially, that profession which it supposeth. But I intend not therefore to tye the Church to inflame persecution, by holding such Assemblies, as may give occasion of sinister suspicions, to secular Powers that protect not Christianity, when the effect of such Assemblies is to be obtained without assembling. For, whosoever they be, that ought to be authorized in behalf of particular Churches, to constitute a Council, they can have no other authority than their respective Churches do chal∣lenge. It cannot be imagined, that, being present in one place together, and seeing one anothers faces, can purchase them that authority which they cannot have at home, to conclude the whole by the consent of the Council. The pre∣sence of Representatives affords infinite opportunities, of better information, one from another, by debate one with another, which distance of place allowes not otherwise. But yet, in maters concerning the state of the Whole, or any great part of it, means of information, for the maintenance of that confede∣racy, wherein I maintain the Society of the Church to stand, is to be had, by daily intercourse, intelligence, and correspondence between Churches, without those Assemblies of Representatives which wee call Councils. A thing so visibly practised by the Catholick Church from the beginning, that, thereupon, I con∣ceive, it may be called a standing Council, in regard of the continual settling of troubles, arising in some part, and tending to question the peace of the whole, by the consent of other Churches concerned, had and obtained by means of this mutual intelligence and correspondence. The holding of Councils is a way of farre greater dispatch, but the expresse consent of Churches obtained
upon the place, is a more certain foundation of peace, in regard of the many questions that may arise, as well in the discharge of that trust which Repre∣sentatives are charged with, as in the respect allowed their votes by the Council; As it may easily appear, by the difficulties that have risen about exe∣cuting the decrees of Councils. And therefore the power of them is meerly de∣rivtive from their respective Churches, tending to supply those difficulties of bringing the whole to agreement, which distance of place createth. That there∣fore which I allege here is this; That the succession of Pastors alleged by Ire∣naeus and Tertullian, to convince the Hereticks of their time, by S. Augustine and Optatus, to convince the Donatists to be Schismaticks, proceed wholey upon supposition of daily intercourse and correspondence between Churches, as of force to conclude particular Churches by consent of the whole. Which is the true reason of the visibility of the Church, and the assurance that every particu∣lar Christian might have, during this intelligence and correspondence, that, hold∣ing communion with his own Pastor, hee held the true Faith, together with the Unity of the Catholick Church; Neither putting trust in man, which God cur∣seth, nor in his own understanding for the sense of the Scriptures, but trusting his own common sense, as well for the means of conveying to him the mater, as the motives of Christianity. For why is it enough for Irenaeus and Tertullian, for S. Augustine and Optatus, to allege the Church of Rome, and the succession from the Apostles, for evidence, that the Faith of those Hereticks was contri∣ved by themselves, that the Donatists were out of communion with the Church? Because, supposing that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord all communicated in the same Faith which they taught the Churches of their own founding, other Churches founded, and the Pastors of them constituted by the authority of those Churches, must needs be founded and settled upon condition of maintaining and professing the same Faith. So that if any Christian or Pastor should attempt the unsettling of any part thereof, the people to stand bound, rather to follow the original consent of the whole, from whence they received their Christianity, than any man that should forfeit his ingagement to the whole, in the judgment of the whole. This, being the true ground for the au∣thority of Councils, might and did take effect without assembling of Councils. S. Cyprian directs his leters to Steven Bishop of Rome, to write to the Churches of Gaule, to ordain a new Bishop in stead of Marcianus in the Church of Arles, because hee had joyned with the Novatians. To the Spanish Bishops, owning the Deposing of Basilides and Martialis, and the Ordaining of those whom they had put in their places, notwithstanding that, upon false suggestions; they had gained Steven Bishop of Rome to maintain them, Epist. LXV, LXVI. Could any man in his right senses have attempted this, had it not been received among Christi∣ans which hee alleges, that the people of particular Churches are bound not to acknowledge those for their Pastors, whom the communion of the Church dis∣owneth, whether assembled in Council or not? The acts of Councils them∣selves, (such are the creation of a Bishop of Arles in stead of Marcianus, of Spanish Bishops in stead of Basilides and Martialis) depending upon the autho∣rity of the Churches of Rome and Carthage, that concurred not to them in pre∣sence. If this be imputed to any mistake of Gods appointment in the ancient Church, it will be easie for mee to allege Tertullians reason to as good purpose against our Independent Congregations, as hee used it against the Hereticks of his time. For, if the chief Power of the Church be vested in those that assemble to serve God at once, without any obligation to the resolution of other Con∣gregations, then is the trust that a Christian can repose in the Church resolved into that confidence which hee hath of those seven, with whom hee joyneth to make a Congregation, that the ruling part of them cannot faile. Or rathr, into that which hee hath of himself, and of the Spirit of God, guiding his choice to those that shall not faile. They, presuming themselves to have the Spirit of God, without declaring, what Christianity they professe, for the condition upon which they obtain it; need no provision of a Catholick Church to preserve that Faith,
which the Gift of the Holy Ghost supposeth. God, who requireth the profession of a true Faith, in them upon whom hee bestoweth his Spirit, hath provided the communion of his Church, for a means to assure us of that which it preserveth. That it is presumption in them to oversee this, no imposture in the Church to challenge it, Tertullians reason determines; The Hereticks pleaded that the Churches had departed from the Faith which the Apostles had left them: To this, after other allegations, hee sets his rest up on this one, that error is infi∣nite, truth one and the same; That no common sense will allow that to be a mistake, in which all Christians agree. They all agreed in the same Faith against those Hereticks, because they all agreed in acknowledging the Catholick Church, provided by God to preserve and propagate it, against our Independent Congre∣gations. Thus Tertullian, de Praescript. XXVIII. There have been some Dispu∣ters of Controversies that have claimed the benefit of Tertullians exception a∣gainst the Hereticks of his time in behalf of the Church of Rome. Hee plead∣eth, not that the Catholicks ought not, but that they are not bound to admit them to dispute upon the Scriptures, being able to condemne them without the Scriptures. And they plead, that, the Reformation not standing to those Pa∣stors, whom they acknowledge to possesse the place of those that derived their authority by succession from the Apostles, may be condemned without Scri∣pture, as not holding the truth, who hold not that which is taught by the said Pastors. Which is to demand of those of the Reformation, for an end of all de∣bates, first to acknowledge those Pastors, and that which they teach, then to take that for the true meaning of the Scripture, which, that which they reach allow∣eth or requireth. But this supposes the sentence of the Church to be an infalli∣ble ground for the truth of that which it determineth; And therefore to be ac∣cepted with the same Faith as our common Christianity, or the Scriptures: Which I showed you already to be false. It shall therefore suffice mee to say, that those men consider not the difference, between the plea of the Reformation, and that of those Hereticks. For they, acknowledging our Lord Christ and his Apostles, no otherwise than the Alcoran and Mahomet doth, where they served their turn; made no scruple to say, when it was for their purpose, that they knew not the depth of Gods minde, which themselves, by some secret way having attained to know, were therefore called Gnosticks; That they im∣parted not the utmost of their knowledge to all alike, when that served their turne; That therefore the Scriptures were unperfect, and revealed not that se∣cret, whereby they promised their salvation, but by incklings. These things you shall finde in Tertullian de Praescript. XXII. and Irenaeus, III. 1. as well as that plea which I mentioned afore, that the Churches were fallen from that which they had received of the Apostles. Whereas, those of the Reformation allege against the Church of Rome, that those Hereticks pretended Tradition as they do. Without cause indeed; For, what is Tradition pretended to be delivered in secret, to them, and by them who tender no evidence for it, to that which the visibility of Christianity, and the grounds upon which it is settled justifieth? But so as to make it appear that they no way disown the Apostles, or their wri∣tings, nor can expect salvation by any other meanes. And therefore are mani∣festly to be tryed by the Scriptures acknowledged on both sides, provided the trial may have an issue, which, I pretend, requires the Tradition of the Church, and that, the communion and Corporation of the Church, as the onely meanes to maintain and propagate Tradition in it. This our Independent Congregati∣ons cannot allow, but must stand upon the other plea of those Hereticks, that it came in beside, if not against Gods appointment; which the Donatists questio∣ned not. And therefore you shall finde S. Austine, in the place aforenamed, al∣lege against them the Scriptures, fore-telling the calling of all Nations, which hee supposeth fulfilled in the Catholick Church then visible; and therefore sup∣poseth the communion to be ordained by God, wherein the visibility thereof consisteth. Otherwise it had been strange to tell the Donatists, that they, commu∣nicating with the Catholick Bishop of Rome, communicated with all the Church that acknowledged him, but the Donatists, acknowledging the Donatist Bishop
whom they had set up at Rome, were therefore disowned by all the Church be∣side. I do not deny, that those of the Reformation are to give account of those things which the Donatists are charged with; Nor do I imagine, that their account cannot be sufficient, because that of the Donatists was not. But I say, that, the trial must be by the Scriptures which both parts acknowledge. And I say further, that the rest of the Reformation may and ought to admit the Unity of the Church in visible communion as the Donatists did, because otherwise they can∣not pretend that others are bound to b what they are: But our Independent Congregations cannot, because if all were as they, there could be no one Church obliged to that communion which makes it visible. Now I must here caution, that I intend not here to inferre, that these Rulers succeeded the Apostles by a title of Divine Right, as if it were Gods Law that this succession should alwaies continue. For I demand, for the present, upon the exception of those of the Reformation, that, succession of Faith and doctrine is of more consequence than succession of persons; And therefore, that there can be no Law of God, whereby the right which men hold by personal succes∣sion can or ought to hinder the Reformation of Faith and doctrine of Christia∣nity, if it may appear, that the succession of persons hath not been effectual to preserve the succession of Faith. That which I demand from the premises is this; That no man in his right senses can imagine, that all Christendome should agree, in acknowledging those for lawfull Rulers of the Church in the times next the Apostles, that had usurped their places contrary to the will of the A∣postles, and those Disciples which concurred to the work of the Apostles, and those who derived their authority from either of both, during the time of the Scriptures which I spoke of afore. For, those of the Reformation that make this exception, by making it, do acknowledge, that there was such a visible suc∣cession of Pastors, the correspondence of whom, as here I argue, maintained the unity of a visible Corporation in the Catholick Church. And, how many re∣cords of historical truth, undeniable of all that would not be thought to re∣nounce their common sense, do testifie unto us visible acts of the Apostles, gi∣ving power to them whom they left behinde them, as those whom they gave it to have transmitted the like power to their successors? But, when it once ap∣peares, that they were owned by the consent of all Christians, communicating with them in that quality which they held in their own Churches, it can no more be imagined, that they could attain those qualities by deceit or violence, con∣trary to the will of their predecessors, than it can be imagined, that the com∣mon Christianity, which wee all acknowledge, could prevail over all, by impo∣sing upon their belief, such motives to believe, as never were seen, because ne∣ver done. And therefore, whatsoever change may have succeeded in those qualities, from that which the Apostles instituted from the beginning, or, by abuse of the same, in the Faith which they were trusted to propagate without adding or taking away, (which changes may be the subject of Reformation in the Church and the belief of it) yet that this point is not of that nature; That all lawfull authority in the Church is derived from that which was in the Apostles, propagated by some visible act of theirs; I will presume upon as proved by the premises.
CHAP. IX. The Keyes of the Church given the Apostles, and exercised by Excommu∣nication under the Apostles. The ground thereof is that profession, which, all that are baptized are to make. That Penance and abatemeut of Pe∣nance hath been in force ever since and under the Apostles. In particular, of excluding Hereticks. IN the last place, the right of Excommunication consists in the power of re∣mitting and retaining sins, given by our Lord to his Church with the Keyes of it. First to S. Peter alone our Lord saith; Mat. XVI. 19. I will give thee the Keyes of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt binde on earth shall be bound in heaven, whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed there; But af∣terwards, to the Body of his Disciples; Mat. XVIII. 17, 18. If hee heare thee not, tell the Church: If he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publicane. Verily I say unto you; Whatsoever yet binde—as afore. And to the XII. breathing upon them; John XX. 22, 23. Receive yee the Holy Ghost. Whose sins soever yee remit they are remitted, and whose sins soever yee retaine they are re∣tained. By virtue of this Commission S. Peter saith to Simon Magus, discover∣ed a counterfeit Christian, Acts VIII. 20-24. Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought to purchase the gift of God with money. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this Word, for thy heart is not right before God. Repent thorefore of this thy malice, and pray God, that, if possible, this device of thine heart may be forgi∣ven thee. For I see thou art in the gall of bitternesse, and the bond of unrighteous∣nesse. And Simon answering said; Pray you to the Lord for mee, that nothing come upon mee of that which you have said. Where, having excluded him from the benefit of Christianity, what hee is to expect, hee leaves to the trial of fu∣ture time. But most manifestly S. Paul 1 Cor. V. commandeth them to deliver the incestuous person to Satan, adding directions and reasons why they are to abstaine from the conversation of such Christians. And pursueth this discourse with a charge, of ending the sutes of their Christians, within the Church, 1 Cor. VI. which either signifies nothing, or inforces the power of Excommunication to oblige the parties to stand to the sentence. But, the case of the incestuous person is made still more manifest, by the reason of the sentence in joyned upon his repentance, and the sorrow testified by the Church 2 Cor. II. 4-11. VII. 8-11. In the Epistle to the Ebrewes VI. 4-8. X. 26-29. the Apostle, de∣claring, that they who fall away in time of persecution, are not to expect to be restored by Penance, makes their Excommunication without release, which therefore hee granteth may be released ù on repentance, in the case of other sins. To which purpose the Apostle, 1 John V. 16, 17. If a man see his brother sin a sin not unto death, let him ask, and hee shall give him life; To such as sin not to death. There is a sin to death, I say not that yee pray for it: All unrighteousnesse is sin, but there is a sin not to death. The meaning of these Scriptures, I have ar∣gued, and cleared more at large, in my book of the Right of the Church in a Christian State pag. 17-40. by such reasons as have not been disputed, by those that have questioned this power of the Church, since the publishing of it. But I will remember, in this place, that which I have also pleaded there pag. 13-16. that all this power is grounded upon the power of baptizing to for∣givenesse of sins, because of the evidence lately produced for the interrogato∣ries of baptisme, and the profession of Christianity, which the Church did in∣joyn, and all that were baptized undergo; The promise of everlasting life in the world to come, and the gift of the Holy Ghost inabling to performe so great an undertaking, depending upon it, according to such termes as the preaching of the Gospel importeth. For if the Church be trusted by God, first to induce men to believe Christianity, then to instruct them wherein it consisteth, is it not proper∣ly said to forgive the sins of them, who, upon that instruction, undertake that profession, with a good conscience and a heart unfained, which God requireth of
those that seek his promises? And this is the ground of that which is there ar∣gued, that the power of the Keyes is first seen in granting baptisme, though not in ministering of it, other acts of the same power depending upon this. I will not here omit S. Cyprian Ep. LXXIII. Manifestum autem est ubi & per quos re∣missa peccatorum detur, quae in baptismo, scilicet, datur. Nam Petro primum Do∣minus, super quem aedificavi Ecclesiam, & unde unitatis originem instituit & osten∣dit, potestatem dedit, ut id solvereur in coelis quod ipse solvisset in terris. Et, post resurrectionem quoque ad Apostolos loquitur, dicens; Sicut misit me Pater & ego mitto vos: Hae cum, dixisset, inspiravit, & ait eis; Accipite Sp. Sanctum. Si cujus remiseritis peccata remittentur illi: Si cujus tenueritis, tenebuntur. Ʋnde intelligimus, non nisi in Ecclesia praepositis, & in Evangelicâ Lege ac dominicâ ordi∣natione fundatis licere baptizare, & remissam peccatorum dare: Foris autem, nec ligari posse nec solvi, ubi non sit qui ant ligare possit aut solvere. Here, it is plain, that the Keyes of the Church, and the power of remitting sins is exercised in baptizing, according to S. Cyprian: For thus hee writeth. Now it is manifest, where and by whom remission of sins is given, which, forsooth, is given in baptisme. For first our Lord gave power to Peter, (upon whom hee built his Church, and in whom hee settled and declared the original of Unity) that it should be loosed in hea∣ven, which hee should loose on earth. And after his resurrection, hee speaketh also to his Apostles, saying; As my Father sent mee, so I also send you. And having said so, hee breathed on them, and said; Receive the Holy Ghost: Whose sins yee re∣mit, they shall be remitted, whose sins yee retain, they shall be retained. Whence wee understand, that it is not lawfull, but for those that are set over the Church, and foun∣ded upon the Evangelical Law, and the Ordinance of our Lord, to baptize and give remission of sins: But, that without, nothing can be either bound or loosed, where there is no body that can either binde or loose. This is then the ground of Excom∣municating out of the Church. The profession of Christianity is as necessary to obtain the promises of the Gospel at Gods hands, as baptisme at the Churches. The Church is trusted to allow or to refuse the profession tendered, and accord∣ingly to receive into the Church or exclude out of it. And, shall not hee that transgresses the profession of a Christian, as visibly as hee made it, (which not onely Hereticks and Schismaticks, but Adulterers, Murtherers, Apostates, and the like do) shall hee not forfeit the communion of the Church, which hee attained by it? Adde hereunto the consideration of that which I observed afore out of the Constitutions of the Apostles VIII. 32. specifying what professions and trades of life there were, which then were refused Baptisme, unlesse they would pro∣fesse to leave them, as inconsistent with Christianity. For example, all that li∣ved by the Stewes, by the Stage, by the Games and by the Races of the Pa∣gans, all Soothsayers, Diviners and Fortune-tellers, all that kept Concubines, and refused to conforme themselves. For, let no man think this book the onely witnesse of this truth. You have it in many other writers of the Church; But especially in S. Austines book de Fide & Operibus. The subject whereof con∣cernes those, who, having put away wives or husbands and married others, were refused Baptisme for it. This, some plain Christians marvelled at, and thought it reason, that all should be baptized that would, & then taught their duty; Which, whoso regarded not, might neverthelesse, as they thought, be saved so as through fir, according to S. Paul. And this is that which S. Austine disputes from the be∣ginning to the XIV Chapter of that book, that no man is to be baptized till hee undertake to live like a Christian, marvailing afterwards, cap. XVIII where those Christians had lived and spent their time, who, seeing every day before their eyes, Whores, Players, Fencers, Panders, and the like refused Baptism, found it strange, that those adulteries, which Christianity no lesse condemned, never to inherit the kingdome of heaven, should not be admitted into the Church, without a pro∣mise to leave them for the future. Certainly, if the Church have power not to admit those who undertake not this, then is the power of excluding those who undertake it and perform it not well grounded. I shall not repeat here the reasons that I have elswhere, to show that Pe∣nance,
and by consequence Excommunication is to be counted in the number of Traditions introduced with the force of Lawes into the Church by the Apo∣sles. It is enough, that they remaine intire. I confesse they inferre an opinion th is not so common; That, under the Apostles, some sins of the deepest dye were not admitted to Penance, nor to regain the Communion of the Church by the same: But referred to the mercy of God, whereof, it was not alwaies thought fit that the Church should become surety or warrant. And this brings in an in∣terpretation of some very difficult texts of Scripture which is not received. But hee that complaineth of that will be bound to advance some other meaning of those texts, which may be free from contradiction, both to the Rule of Faith, and to Historical truth which common sense justifieth; And yet admit no men∣tion of publick Penance in the Church, no intent to speak of it; in all the Scri∣ptures there alleged: Which perhaps will be too hard to do. Further I labor not. I will suppose no man so wilfull, as to dispute the right of excluding from the Communion of the Church, granting a power of limit∣ing the conditions, upon which it is to be restored to them who forfeited it. And this is visible. It was but a mater of LXX years after the decease of S. John, according to Eusebius his Chronicle, that Montamis appeared to demand, that Adulterers might not be readmitted to the communion of the Church upon Penance. That those that had married the second time might not communicate. That the rule of Fasting might be stricter than was in use. That it might not be lawfull to fly from persecution for the Faith. It is manifest that these were his pretenses, by Tertullian that maintaines them, being seduced with the opinion of inspirations and revelations granted him and his partizans to that purpose. These pretenses were afterwards in part revived at Rome by Novatianus, to get himself the Bishoprick there, by excluding from Penance and reconciliation, those that had fallen away in the persecution of Decius. It appeareth also that those men alleged for themselves the very passages of the Apostles which I al∣lege to my intent. Neither can it appear, that ever any son of the Church did contradict them, by saying, that the Apostles meant nothing of Penance, as they imagined. And now let all men judge, whether the Church have reason to hold this evidence of Penance, and by consequence of its own being a Church. Was Epiphanius, and all that writ against the Novatians troubled to no purpose at the VI of the Ebrews, when those Schismaticks, alleging it for themselves, might have been silenced, by denying that it concerned Penance? Why did not the Church allege, that, the sin unto death 1 John V. 17. is no such thing as Apostasy from Christianity, when the Novatians alleged it to prove, that Apostates were not to be reconciled to the Church? How came it to passe, that there was so much doubt made in the Church of Rome of admitting the Epistle to the Ebrews for Canonical Scripture, (witnesse S. Jerome Epist. ad Dar∣danum) as thinking that it did absolutely contradict the re-admitting of Apo∣states, which had been practised in that Church before Montanus? Tertullian, of all men, was troubled without cause, that the incestuous person, whom hee supposes to be excommunicated at Corinth by S. Pauls Order, 1 Cor. V. should be re-admitted by his Indulgence 1 Cor. VII. De Pudicitiâ, cap. XIII, XIV, XV. because hee saw this was a peremptory exception against Montanus, that a crime equal to Adultery should by S. Paul be admitted to Penance. How easie a thing it had been for him to say, that there is nothing of Penance, nothing of Excommunication (which Penance presupposes, and therefore inferres) in deli∣vering to Satan the incestuous person, in commanding them, not so much as to eat with those that are called brethren, that is Christians, but are indeed such as the incestuous? But hee, being some fourteen hundred years nearer the begin∣ning of Christianity than wee, and being satisfied by his five senses, of those things, which new Heresies and Schismes oblige us to argue by consequences, found that his Patriarch Montanus could not answer so: And therefore, thinking that the Church could not answer their arguments, forces an answer to this, by saying, it was not the same man that is excommunicated by the Apostles Order 1 Cor. V. and restored by his Indulgence 2 Cor. VII. Because hee saw the recon∣ciling
of a sinner to the Church by Penance as lively described and signified by S. Pauls Indulgence there, as by any record of the Church, at such time as it was most in use. And can there remain any doubt of this Excommunication, because the Church cannot now deliver to Satan for destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus? Surely, all the writings of the Apostles do bear witnesse, that the miraculous graces of the Holy Ghost (which they had then, but all Christians see the Church hath not now) served not onely to witnesse the truth of Christianity, but the authority of the Apo∣stles in behalf of it. This authority having taken effect, by those Ordinances which the Church hath received at their hands; It is no longer requisite, that God should bear witnesse to his own Ordinances, by such miraculous effects, seeing hee doth no longer bear witnesse to the truth of Christianity by the like. Hee that believes, that, whosoever is not in the Church, is in the power of Sa∣tan, needs no reason, why hee is delivered to Satan, that is put out of the Church. Hee that believes it not, is not to be perswaded, that there is a power of Excommunication granted the Church; But, that the Christian saith which the Church preacheth is true, for that, without peradventure, preached the Church. At least, till some body show us that this reason is insufficient, hee must not demand, that wee give an Article of our Creed, and all the help to salvati∣on which the communion of the Catholick Church pretendeth, for such an ob∣jection as this. Chuse now whether you will say as I say; That, under the Apostles, difficulty was made of re-admitting some sorts of sins, but never any peremptory order against it, (and, so, that Montanus and Novatianus were Schis∣maticks, for seperating from the Church, when the whole Church was agreed that there was a necessity of it) or look about for a more reasonable sense, to assoile the great difficulties of these passages; Provided, that you offer not vio∣lence to common sense and historical truth, by imagining, that, so near the A∣postles time, there could be so much question about Penance, they having neither meant nor ordained any thing about it. To this argument, all the most an∣cient records of the Church, wheresoever mention is made of reconciling by Penance, all the Penitential Canons of later ages will bear witnesse. For, who can undertake to answer, or rather to obscure the evidence made in the place a∣forenamed, that, some sins were refused Penance and reconcilement in the first ages of the Church; When wee have a whole book of Tertullian, contending, with Montannus, to impose a Law upon it, of re-admitting no Adulterers? When wee know a whole sect of Novatians, that left the Church, that they might re∣admit no Apostates? As for the Penitential Canons of later ages, it is mani∣fest to any man, that shall peruse and compare them with that which hath been said of the primitive times, that they are nothing else, but the abatement of that rigor of Discipline, which, during the primitive heat and zele of Christiani∣ty, was in force; And therefore as visibly derive themselves fromt the Apostles, as the corrupt Christianity of this time can derive it self from that which they planted pure from the fountain. But there can be no such evidence of this point, or of the whole mater in hand concerning the Corporation of the Church, as the excluding of Hereticks and Schismaticks out of it. S. Paul 2 Thess. III. 6-14. orders them to withdraw from every brother that walkes disorderly, and not according to the Tradition, which (saith hee) yee have received from us: To mark them, and not to converse with them, that they may be ashamed. But with the excommunicate, not so much as to eat: 1 Cor. V. 11. So likewise, having exhorted the Romanes XVI. 12. to mark those that cause divisions and scandals beside the doctrine, which (saith hee) yee have received of us, & to avoid them; hee hath thereby given us to understand that hee would have Christians abhorr all conversation with those that declare them∣selves Hereticks. I have in another place allowed S. Jeromes exposition of that Text of S. Paul, Titus III. 9. A man that is an Heretick after the first and second admonition avoid; Understanding it of Schismaticks, who, as it followes, do condemne themselves, when they voluntarily forsake the communion of the Church, which other sinners are excluded from whether they will or not. But,
considering there is no admonition against Schisme, which is declared as soon as it is done, as there may be against Heresie, which may lurk before it is profes∣sed; I count is as properly said that Hereticks condemn themselves, whenoever they professe to believe the contrary of that which they professed when they were made Christians, as Schismaticks, when they excommunicate themselves. The Apostle indeed seems to use a moderate term, when hee saith, A man that is an Heretick after the first and second admonition avoid: So the original  is to be translated, according to Cyrils Glosses, where wee reade,  ex∣cuso, recuso, evito, which last sounds in English, to avoid. But, in Vulcanius his Glosses, evito signifies , To have in horror, as well as, to take heed, and to avoid. And it is to be understood, that S. Paul prescribes that to Tius which hee intends all his flock should practise; Supposing that, being Christians, they would be carefull to avoid the infection of those whom their Pastors should avoid, because they counted them dangerous, not to themselves, but to their flock. To this purpose S. Jude 22, 23. ; (the Copy at S. James reades, , reproue some that preferre themselves before others; But nothing so pertinently to the opposition between pity and terror that followes) And some truly take pity on, putting a difference, (or behaving your selves with a difference towards them) others save through feare (of the judgment of God, or of the Church) hating even the gar∣ment that is spotted with sin. It appeares, that the Gnosticks, whom hee writes against, could counterfeit themselves Christians, to seduce the simple from the Faith to their Heresies. Therefore, Jude 11, 12. They perished in the contradi∣ction of Core. They are spots in your Feasts of love, banqueting with you, and feed∣ing themselves without feare. And 1 Pet. II. 14, 18. they are said to bait unstable soules: And, They bait with fleshly concupiscences, through wantonnesse, those that had truly escaped from them that live in error. They were not afraid to commu∣nicate with Christians at their Feasts of love, (where the Sacrament of the Eu∣charist was also celebrated) that they might get means and opportunity of se∣ducing the simple to separate with them from the Church. And therefore S. Jude 19. These are they who separate themselves, as S. Peter saith, that they perish in the contradiction of Core. So then, those that are curable, either by pity, or by terror, hee exhorts them to save: But, when hee charges them to hate even the garmn tht is spotted with sin; hee charges them much more to abhorre the communion of those that were discovered to be uncurable. For, with what zele they taught to avoid the Hereticks of that time, let S. John be Judge John II. 10, 11. If any man come to you that brings not this doctrine, (but transgresses it, and abides not in it, as hee said just afore) take him not into your house, (as you do them who bring testimony that they hold the Christian faith) neither salute him, for hee that salutes him is accessory to his evil works. Certainly, hee requires great demonstration of a minde detesting Heresie, that affirmes those, who af∣ford them the ordinary civility of salutation, to be accessory to their evil works. But it is to be considered, that the Apostle speaks of the Heresies which Simon Magus and Cerinthus had then set on foot, when hee sayes there II John 7. Ma∣ny impostors are gone out into the world, who professe not Jesus Christ come in the flesh. For, though they wore the name of Christians, yet they professed not, that Jesus of Nazareth then come in the flesh, was the Christ; But, Simon Magus, and his disciple Menander both pretended themselves to be the Christ: Saturni∣nus and Basilides some of their invisible principles; Valentinus one of his Aeo∣nes: and likewise Marcus; Cerinthus, the power that came upon Jesus of Naza∣reth at his Baptisme, and left him at his Crosse: So the rest untill Cerdon and Marcion, who, pretending that Jesus of Nazareth was not Son of the God of Israel, denied, by consequence, that Christ was come in the flesh. S. Cyprian Epist. LXXIII. having disputed that these Heresies do not hold the same Father, the same Son, the same Holy Ghost with the Church, comes down to the Marcionites, strongly arguing, that, they who made one God of Israel, another̄ the Father of our Lord Christ, and his Manhood onely in appearance, cannot be said to believe in Christ as Christians do. Adding very plainly, that
they are those of whom the Apostle speaketh, 1 John IV. 2. that they are of the Spirit of Antichrist, and that the Spirit of Antichrist hath possessed their breasts. But there is no such commentary upon S. ohns words as that which is related of hi by Irenaeus III. 3. from the mouth of Polycarpus, that hee would not indure to be in the bath with Cerinthus, the enemy of Gods truth. And of Polycarpus, that, being desired by Marcion to own him, hee answered, that hee did own him for he first-born of Satan. Which actions Irenaeus thus construeth; Tantum A∣postoli & horum, discipuli habuerunt timorem, ut neque verbo tenus communicarent alicui eorum qui adulteraverunt veritatem: Quemadmodum & Paulus ait; Hae∣reticum hominem post unam & alteram correptionem devita: Sciens quoniam per∣versus est qui est talis, & à seipso damnatus. So great fear had the Apostles and Disciples not to communicate so farr as in words, with any of those who corrupted the truth: As Paul also saith; A man that is an Heretick, after one reproof, and a second, avoid: Knowing that such a one is perverted, & condemned by himself. Where you see, it is not I, but Irenaeus that expoundeth those words of S. Paul to this purpose. The same Irenaeus III. 4. Cerdon autem qui ante Marcionem, & hic sub Hygino, qui fuit octavus Episcopus, saepe in Ecclesiam veniens & exomologesim faciens, sic consummavit; Modò quidem latenter docens, modò verò exomologesim faciens, modò verò ab aliquibus traductus in his quae docebat malè, & abstentus est religiosorum hominum conventu. But this same Cerdon also that was before Marci∣on under Hyginus who was the eight Bishop, many times addressing to the Church, and confessing, ended accordingly; Sometimes covertly teaching his Heresie; some∣times confessing: And sometimes, being detected by some in those bad things which hee taught, was excluded the assembly of the Religious. Tertullian de praescript. cap. XXX. informes us, that Marcion though hee was at the first refused Pe∣nance by the Church of Rome, (as I shall show you out of Epiphanius) yet after∣wards was cast out of the Church there, (which supposeth him admitted afore) with Valentinus the Father of another Heresie, and, having been received once & again, at the last, for good and all. For, having obtained to be re-admitted upon this condition, that hee should reduce with himself all that hee had seduced, at length hee died before hee was able to accomplish the same. These things coming to passe so soon after the Apostles as they did, and the same course being held, in separating those Heresies from the Church, which sprung up in their several ages afterwards, there is no room left for any pretense, that the Church never had power to do that, which, there never was any time that shee did not do. For, it is to be noted, that these Heads of Heresies, being condemned and cast out of the Church in which they first appeared, and which they attempted to di∣vide, were thenceforth disowned by all Churches, being certified of the proceed∣ing that had passed against them upon the place. And therefore Vincentius Le∣rinensis Commentario I. expounding S. Pauls words Gal. I. 8, 9. Let him be Ana∣thema; Anathema sit, inquit, id est separatui, exclusus, nè unius ovis dirum con∣tagium innoxium gregem Christi, venenatâ permistione contaminet. That is, saith hee, let him be separated, set aside, shut out, least the direfull contagion of one sheep with any mixture of poison stain the innocent flock of Christ. And again after∣wards, handling the words of S. Paul 1 Tim. VI. 20. Keep that which is commit∣ted to thy trust, avoiding profane novelties of words; What is it to avoid? With such one not so much as to eat. What is avoid? If any come to you, saith hee, and bringeth not this doctrine, receive him not home nor bid him God speed. Where you see these are none of my collections gathered out of the Apostles words, but that exposition of them which the practice of the Catholick Church infer∣reth.
CHAP. X. Evidence of the Apostles act from the effect of it, in preserving the Ʋnity of the Church. Of the businesse of Marcion and Montanus. That about keeping Easter. That of the Novations, of rebaptizing Hereticks, of Paulus Samo∣satenus, of Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Arius. Of communicatory leters, and the intercourse of the Church under and after the Apostles. THis is indeed the true demonstration and evidence from the effect, that the will of God and not the consent of men is the ground upon which the Corporation of the Church subsisteth. The whole number of Christians, dispersed over all the Empire, and beyond the bounds of it, continued for divers hundred years, in one communion, and in the unity of one Church; Those that indeavoured to alter the Rule of Faith, or to impose such Lawes, as were found by the greatest part, not to stand with the end for which the Church was found∣ed, being, by the consent of the whole, excluded the communion of it for He∣reticks and Schismaticks. Hee that sayes this was not the work of God, or, the means of effecting it none of his declared will, why should not hee say the like of Christianity? Indeed since the Council of Ephesus, the Churches of Mesopota∣mia and Assyria are fallen from the Unity of the whole, since the Council of Chalcedon, those of Aegypt and Aethiopia. Since that, the Eastern Churches, under the Patriarch of Constantinople, have been divided from the Western, under the Pope of Rome. And these from one another, into so many parties, since the Reformation, that wee are now come to dispute, whether they ought to be united or not. That ever they will be, is so hopelesse, that no man would under∣take to dispute that they should be, were it possible, to preserve that little of Christianity that remaines, without re-uniting the Church. I allege here the most eminent passages that fell out in the Church, from the Apostles to Constan∣tine, to show, that it is a question whether the evidence be more; That, by Gods appointment, there was from the beginning, and ought to be alwaies one Ca∣tholick Church; Or the hope lesse that ever it will be so again. I cannot be∣gin with a better evidence than that of Irenaeus, because it containes the effect of the aforesaid ordinances of the Apostles, for the separating of the Heresies set on foot by Simon Magus and Cerinthus, from the Communion of the Church, that the Unity thereof might be preserved, by remaining distinct from them. Wee understand by reading his first book, that Basilides at Alexandria, Saturni∣nus at Antiochia, Valentinus, first in Aegypt, then in Cyprus, afterwards at Rome, Cerintbus in Asia and elsewhere, others in several parts of the World, indeavo∣red to adulterate that Christianity which the Apostles had delivered. That they were so unanimously rejected and excluded out of the society of the Church from East to West, that hee is able to affirm, I. 3. that, though dispersed all over the world, yet it preserves the doctrine once preached, as if it dwelt all in one house, believing the same faith, as if it had the same soul and heart, and preach∣ing and teaching the same, as if it had but one mouth. And can common sense imagine, that the remotest parts of the world could remaine united to one ano∣ther, separated from Heresies sprung in the remotest parts of it, (which they could not have intelligence of but by communication of it with those parts of it where they sprung) without that continual correspondence wherein the actual communion of the Church consisteth? But the words of Irenaeus are so vigo∣rous, that I cannot leave them out here, as they stand in his original Greek.
. The Unity therefore of the Church was visible; Otherwise it had been senslesse for Irenaeus to assume it, as an evidence of the truth of that Faith, the unity whereof became visible, by the unity of the Church which pro∣fessed it. Thus then writeth Irenaeus. This preaching, and this faith the Church having received, as I said afore, though dispersed all over the world, carefully keep∣eth, as if it inhabited one house: And believeth these things alike, as if it had one soule and one heart; And harmoniously preacheth and teacheth and delivereth them, as if it had but one mouth. For there be divers languages in the world, but the Tra∣dition signifies the same. Nor do the Churches seated in the Germanies believe or deliver otherwise, nor those in the Spaines, nor among the Gaules, nor in the East, nor in Aegypt, nor in Africk, nor those that are seated in the middle parts of the world. But as the Creature of God the Sun is one and the same in all the world, so shineth the preaching of the truth every where, inlightning all men that will come to the knowledge of the truth. And neither will any of those that Rule in the Chur∣ches, though powerfull in speaking, say things diverse from these, (for the Disciple is not above his Master) nor hee that is weak in speech abate of that which is delive∣red. For to the same Faith, neither hee that is able to say much of it addeth, nor hee that is able to say little abateth of it. Hee that acknowledges this to be Gods doing, must of necessity acknowledge the means of it, (the concurrence of all Churches to the maintainance of unity in the same Faith, by disowning those that pretended to break it) not left to mans will, but injoyned by Gods. And Irenaeus his instance in the Church of Rome serves to good purpose, to make out this evidence. For all Churches, (that is, as Irenaeus sayes, Christians of all Chur∣ches) having necessarily recourse to Rome for all occasions, because it was the seat of the Empire, might there inform themselves, and their Churches, of the perverse doctrines that might be on foot, and of the consent of the Churches in refusing the same. In the next place, I will not forget the relation of Epiphanius concerning Marcion, in the beginning of his Heresie, because it is next in time, and of great consequence. Hee, being put out of the Church by his Father Bishop of Sinope in Pontus, and making sure to be admitted by the Church of Rome, received this answer; That they could not do it without his Fathers consent, because the Faith is one, and the Unity the same. Compare herewith the proceeding of Synesius against Andronicus Ep. LVIII. & LXXIX. (though so much distant in time) which in the first book de Synedriis Judaeorum, pag. 304. is said to be of a high strain. Hee saith, that if any Church, neglecting his Church of Ptolomais, as a poor Church, being the Church of a small City, shall receive to communion those whom it had excommunicated, hee shall be thereby guilty of dividing the Church, which Christ will have to be one; And tell mee how this proceeding differs from that which, in Marcions case, Epiphanius sayes was done at Rome, so near the Apostles. Certainly, if one Church should receive into communi∣on those whom another Church excommunicates, there could remaine no unity in the whole Church, because no distinction from those that are not of the Church. When therefore it appears, that the Church held it for a Rule from the begin∣ning, not to do so, shall not this be evidence, that the reason is that which was alleged to Marcion at Rome, which Synesius alleges; To wit, the Unity of the Church? For the same reason, Montanus, having, as it seems, by pretended revelations and inspirations, (such as, at that time, there can be no question but the Church was graced with) brought the Churches of Phrygia to his intent, but being re∣jected by the Churches of Asia, went or sent to Rome, to induce that Church, to undertake and prescribe the same Rules to all that adheered unto it. For why
otherwise should hee labor for the consent of that Church, before others, but in hope, that, having induced it to receive his Rules, the authority thereof might in∣duce other Churches to do the like, because they found it necessary for them to hold correspondence with the Church of Rome. Now, I beseech you, were all Christians utterly out of their five senses, to contend about the communion of the Church, if there were no such thing in point of fact? Were they all from the beginning possest with a frenzy, that they were bound to maintain it, by voiding all questions that might impeach it, if there were no such obligation in point of right? Is it not plain, that the issue of such questions was this, whether the Unity of the Church, or the advantage of such Rules to the common cause of Christianity wayed most? How is Tertullian otherwise counted a Montanist, that is, as I suppose, a Schismatick? Wee may believe Tertullian, in a mater which all Christians at Rome then might know, when hee tells us, that Zephyrinus, then Bishop of Rome, was about to admit unto his communion, the Churches of Asia and Phrygia that had acknowledged Montarus and his Prophets and Pro∣phesies. Contr. Prax. cap. I. Though Pope Soter afore Zephyrinus, had writ against Montanus, as well as Apollonius Bishop of Ephesus, if wee believe Sirmondus his Praedestinatus Haer. XXVI. When hee sayes, that afterwards the contrary was resolved, upon informations brought from Asia by Praxeas an Heretick; That which appears, that the Montanists were disclaimed, wee must admit; That which appears not, upon what information it was done, wee need not dispute. Tertullian hereupon drawes after him a company which called themselves a Church at Carthage, and subsisted there after Tertullian, till they were reduced by S. Augustine, as wee learn by Sirmondus his Praedestinatus Haer. XCVII. and S. Augustine de Haeresibus. This makes Tertullian a Schismatick; That, rather than rest content with those Rules, which the rest of the Church satisfied them∣selves with, hee departed from the Unity of it. Otherwise, those blasphemies, for which the followers of Montanus are counted Hereticks, preferring their own revelations above and against those of the Apostles, hee is not chargable with. Proceed wee now to the businesse of keeping Easter, and the debate about it, between Victor Bishop of Rome and the Churches of Asia; These resolutely adheering to the custome, which, in all appearance, they had received from their founder S. John, to keep the Passion when the Jewes kept it, that is, upon the fifteenth day of the Moon that was the next equinoctial, and the Resurrecti∣on the third after that; The Church of Rome, and almost all Churches beside, keeping thc Passion on the Friday, the Resurrection on the Ladies day follow∣ing. The one aiming at winning the Jewes, when it was first set on foot, the other, to protest against them as incorrigible. It is well enough known, how Victor, intending to withdraw his Communion from the Churches of Asia, was reduced to tolerate them by the perswasions of Irenaeus then Bishop of Lions. Certainly, had not the Communion of the Church been in possession, and pra∣ctice at that time, the Bishop of Rome had been a mad man to think, that refu∣sing it would be the means to reduce those of Asia to his judgment and practice. If this possession and practice had no ground of right, is it possible that none of either party should discover the sandy foundation of the dispute, and perswade the parties (which were so much in love with their own way on both sides) to give no heed to other Churches, the Communion of the Church having no ground, and therefore being of no consequence? What meant Irenaeus so to trouble himself, to perswade Victor, to hold communion with those of Asia, though not condescending to keep Easter by the same Rule, but that hee saw, if the Church of Rome should break with the Churches of Asia, that hee must break, either with the one or the other of them, who desired to hold commu∣nion with both? Were the Disciples of the Apostles, or at least of their Disci∣ples, cousened into a humane Tradition of the Unity of the Catholick and A∣postolick Church, when hee so earnestly labored, that, holding with the Church of Rome, hee might not be constrained to forbear the intercourse, which, for the advancement of Christianity hee held with the Churches of Asia?
But S. Cyprians time affordes divers passages of great consequence; The Schisme of the Novatians in the first place. It is a thing manifest by Eusebius his Histories VI. 44, 46. VII. 4, 5. that the Church of Antiochia, together with the Churches of Pontus, (which then seem to have either resorted to Antiochia, or in consideration of neighborhood to have held great correspondence with that Church) and Cilicia, made very great difficulty in admitting the election of Cornelius, and condemning the Novatians, for refusing to receive into commu∣nion those, who, in time of persecution had sacrificed to Idols, and so renoun∣ced the Christian Faith. In time, by the intercession of Dionysius of Alexan∣dria, moved, it seems, with the consent of the rest of the Church, they were also induced to disclaime the Novatians, and to concurr to restore the Unity of the Church, which, for the time had remained in suspense. And it is a thing very much to be observed, which the Council at Antiochia in Encoeniis Dominicae aureae pleads to the Church of Rome, in the dispute they had with Pope Julius, about admitting the Acts of it, in Sozomenus III. 8. and Socrates II. 5. They had taken upon them to make a new provision, in that which the great Council at Nicaea had taken order in afore. Which was in effect to make void the acts of that Council. The Pope, I suppose, had reason to except, that this could not be done without his consent, (including in it the consent of the Churches which adheered to him) unlesse wee imagine, that the Synod of Antiochia, being but a part of those who had decreed at the Council of Nicaea, had power to dissolve the acts of the whole. What is it then toat this Synod allege for themselves? Even this; That, having preserved or restored the Unity of the Church of Rome, by disclaiming the Novatians, they expected the like compliance from them, in the present businesse. Whereby it appeareth, that the consent of the whole Church did make, and was to make good the acts of part of it, though not assembled with them in Council, no lesse than if they were. And indeed, what made the second general Council of Constantinople under Theodosius to be general, (none having appeared at it for the Western Churches) but the consent of Damasus and his Synod ex postfacto, the rest of the West adheering to the same. Which if it be so, I do not think I need any other evidence, that, from S. Cyprians time, all Christians did believe, that they are bound to maintain themselves in commu∣nion with the Church, when they believe, that the consent thereof is able to do such acts as these. I cannot here omit the words of Dionysius of Alexan∣dria, out of a leter to Novatianus, recorded by Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. VII. 45. . If you were carried away against your will, as you say, you may show that, by returning with your will. For you should have indured any thing, rather than smite asunder the Church of God. And to suffer martyrdome, rather than divide the Church, had been no lesse glory, than, rather than commit Idolatry, but greater in my judgmene. For there, a man suffers martyrdome for his own soul alone, but here, for the whole Church. And now, if you can perswade or constraine the brethren to return to concord, your fall will not be so great as that exploit. But, if they will not be ruled, and you cannot, by all means save your own soul. It is easie, to observe, that the same Churches, which had made so much diffi∣culty in disclaiming the Novatians, were they, who joyned with S. Cyprian, in standing upon the rebaptizing of those, that had been baptized by Hereticks. As appeares, not only by Firmilianus his Epistle to S. Cyprian, but also by Dio∣nysius of Alexandria, de bapt. III. (alleged by Euscbius VII. 7.) even before S. Cyprian. Whereby wee see, how much Eusebius contradicts himself, when hee sayes, VII. 3. that S. Cyprian was the first that called in question the Tradi∣tion received in that case. In this businesse, the XIX Canon of the Council of Nicaea makes it evident, that neither S. Cyprians party, nor their adversaries
altogether prevailed. For it is there inacted; That those who had been bapti∣zed by the Samosatenians should be baptized again. And must not the same needs hold much more of the Gnosticks, and of almost all the rest of those Heresies which S. Cyprian nameth in his LXX. Epistle? Besides, it is manifest by the second Council at Arles, can. XVII. that of Laodicea, can. VII, & VIII. Gen∣nadius de dogm. Eccl. cap. LII. and others, that the practice of the Churches, af∣ter this dispute was ended, was not every where the same. And, which is most remarkable; Not onely the great Council at Arles Can. VIII. makes a Rule for the Africane Churches (which the first Council at Carthage followeth) to the like purpose with that of the Council of Nicaea; But also Optatus lib. I. demon∣strates, that hee rebaptized the Sabellians, which the foresaid Rule alloweth not. Whereby it appeareth, that the extream opinions, held by Steven of Rome, that none were to be rebaptized; and by S. Cyprian, that all; were moderated by the succeeding practice of the Churches, though diverse in divers parts of the Church. Now let mee ask, by what means this moderation came to prevaile over that vehemence of contention, which you may see the parties transported with, in S. Cyprians Epistles. What could it be, but the conscience of that obli∣gation which both parties owned, to preserve the Unity of the Church, and the respect of those other Churches that were not ingaged in the dispute as they were? The businesse of Paulus Samosatenus is of the same time. Was the Synod of Antiochia mad when they writ the Leter which you may reade in Eusebius VII. 30. in the name of the Churches represented by that Synod, to the rest of the Churches in Christendome, signifying the sentence of deposition pronounced a∣gainst Samosatenus, and requiring them to joyn with it? If it be madnesse to think them so mad, as to summon the rest of the Churches, upon an obligation which they did not acknowledge, what shall it be to think, that this obligation was but imaginary, or at least voluntarily contracted, not inacted by the will of our Lord declared by his Apostles? The Emperor Aurelian being appealed by the Council, to cause Samosatenus to be put our of his Bishops house by force, who maintained himself in it by force, against the sentence of the Synod; de∣creed, that possession should be given to him, whom the Christian Bishops of I∣taly and Rome should acknowledge for Bishop, by writing to him under that ti∣tle. Certainly this Heathen Emperor, in referring the execution of the Sy∣nods decree, to the consent of those remarkable parts of the Church, (where∣upon the consent of the rest might reasonably be presumed) understood the con∣stitution of the Church by his five senses, better than those learned Christians of our time, who argue seriously, that this Paulus Samosatenus was not excom∣municated by the Synod of Antiochia, but by the Emperor Aurelian. For this is the course by which all the acts of the whole Church ever came in force, those parts of the Church, which were not present at the doing of them, concurring, ex postfacto, to inact them, and the civil power, to grant the execution of them by secular power. Perhaps it will not be fit here to let passe that which Athanasius relates, libro de sontentiâ Dionysii Alexandrini; That this Dionysius, writing against Sabellius, gave occasion to the Bishops of Pentapolis, (who resorted to the Church of A∣lexandria, as wee see by the VI Canon of Nicaea) to suspect him of that which afterwards was the Heresie of Arius. And that, Dionysius of Rome being made acquainted by them, with a mater of that consequence to the whole Church, this Dionysius writ him an Apology, on purpose to give satisfaction of his Faith, wherein S. Athanasius hath great cause to triumph, that the Heresie of Arius, which arose afterwards, is no lesse condemned, than that of Sabellius presently on foot. Grant wee, that it was an office of Christian charity, to tender this sa∣tisfaction, where it was become so requisite; The example of Samosatenus shows, that their addresse tended to question, if not to displace their Bishop, by the authority of the rest of the Church, ingaging the consent of his own, had hee been discovered to harbor the contrary Heresie to that of Sabellius. And indeed what was the rise of all those contentions about Arius, that succeeded in
the Church after the Council of Nicaea, but this question, whether Arius should be re-admitted one of the Presbyters of the Church at Alexandria, or remaine excommunicate? And those truly, that do not believe there is any Church, but a Congregation that assembles together for the service of God, must needs think all Christendome stark mad for so many years together, as they labored, by so many Synods, to attain an agreement through the Church, in this, and in the cause of Athanasius that depended upon it. But those, who believe the power of the Church to eschere to the State, when it declares it selfe Christian, must think the Emperors Constantius and Valens mad, when they put themselves to that trouble and chare of so many Synods, to obtain that consent of the Church, which, in point of right, their own power might have commanded, without all that ado. In the decrees of divers of those many Synods that were held about this businesse, you shall finde, that those Churches which the said decrees are sent to are charged, not to write to the Bishops whom they depoe. That is to say; Not to give them the stile of Bishops, not to deal with them about any thing concerning the Church, but to hold them as cut off from the Church. Just as the Emperor Aurelian, afore, commanded possession to be delivered to him, whom the Bishops of Italy and Rome should write to as Bishop. This little circumstance expresses the means by which the communion of the Church was maintained. To wit, by continual intercourse of leters, and messengers, from Churches to Churches, whereby the one understood the proceedings of the o∣ther, and, being satisfied of the reason of them, gave force and execution to them within their own Bodies. And this course, being visibly derived from the practice of the Apostles, suffi∣ceth to evidence the Unity of the Church established, by the exercise of that communication which maintained it. When wee see the Apostles, from the Churches upon which they were for the time resident, dare Leters to other Churches, signifying the Communion of those Churches one with another, by the communion of all with the Apostles, (who taught, and brought into force the termes and conditions, upon which they were to communicate one with an∣other) have wee not the pattern of that intercourse and communion between several Churches, by which, common sense showeth all them that look into the records of the Church, that the Unity and Communion of the whole was conti∣nued to after ages? The words of Tertullian de praescript▪ haeret. cap. XX. must not be omitted here. Itaque tot ac tantae Ecclesiae una est illa ab Apostolis prima, ex qua omnes, Sic omnes prima, & Apostolicae, du unà omnes probant veritatem: Dum est illis communicatio pacis, & appellatio fraternitatis, & contesseratio hospi∣talitatis. Quae jura, non alia ratio regit, quam ejusdem Sacramenti una traditio. Therefore so many and so great Churches are all that one primitive Church from the Apostles, out of which all come. So, all are the primitive, and Apostolical, while all agree in proving the truth: While they have the communication of peace, the title of brotherhood, the common mark of hospitality. Which rights, nothing but the same tradition of the same mystery ruleth. It is to be known, that, among the Greeks and Romans, if a man had made acquaintance and friendship in a forrain City, the fashion was, to leave a mark, for a pledge of it, with one ano∣ther, (which was called tessexa) upon recognisance whereof, hee that should come to the place where the other dwelt, was not onely to be intertained by him, (whereupon these friends are called hospites, signifying both hosts and guests) but also assiisted in any businesse which hee might have in that place. Such a kinde of right as this Tertullian saith there was between Christians and Christians, between Churches and Churches. Hee that produced the cognisance of the Church from whence hee came, found not onely accesse to the communi∣on of the Church to which hee came, but assistance in his necessities and business in the name of a Christian. Thus S. Paul calleth Gaius his host and of the whole Church Rom. XVI. 23. signifying, that, as hee intertained him S. Paul, so hee was ready to intertaine any Christian as a Christian. And addeth to that E∣pistle a recommendation, whereby Phaebe might be acknowledged and received as a Deaconesse of the Church at Cenchreae Rom. XVI. 1. Whereas otherwise, le∣ter
were written expresse to that purpose, which S. Paul himself calls  or commendatory, 2 Cor. III. 1. The termes in which S. Paul recommends Phabe are these; That yee receive her in the Lord as it becometh the Saints, and stand by her in any businesse where shee may stand in need: For shee also hath stood by ma∣ny, and by mee. , saith S. Paul;  at Athens was stran∣gers patrone. For, at Athens, a stranger that came to live there could not act for himself, but by his patrone. The same S. Paul thus chargeth Titus, III. 22. Send away Zenas the Lawyer and Apollos with care that they want nothing. That is, put money in their purse, as their journey shall require; As the Aegyptians sent away the Israelites with care, when they furnished them with all that they demanded, Wisedome XIX. 2. But the passage of S. Johns Epistle III. 5-10. is very remarkable. You saw, how, in his second Epistle, hee forbids them so much as to salute Hereticks, much lesse to intertaine them, or any that should not bring with him the true Faith; That is, a cognisance that they professed it. Here hee commends Gaius, for assisting some Christian strangers, that travailed for the name of Christ, that is, upon the businesse of the Church, taking no∣thing of the Gentiles, because themselves were Jewes turned Christians. These, hee saith, had born witnesse to Gaius his love before the Church, by writing le∣ters, to acquaint the Church from whence they came, with their intertainment: Wishing him so to dispatch them as may be fitting towards God, because by so doing, a man assists the truth. And whereas Diotrephes had prevailed with the Church, not to receive them, and did labor particular men to that purpose, (up∣on pretense, it seemes, of some strangenesse between the Jewes and Gentiles that were turned Christians) forbids him to be ruled by his factiousnesse. Wee heare S. Paul, in the end of his Epistles, relate the saluations of the brethren, (that is, of the Church from whence hee dates) and also of particular persons eminent there, to the Body of the Church hee writes to. What ground had there been for this intercourse, had not the Apostle taught them, that they were all of one Body, and so ought to preserve themselves? How often do they charge them to salute one another with a holy kisse, or the kisse of love, Rom. XVI. 16. 2 Cor. XIII. 12. 1 Thess. V. 14. 1 Pet. V. 14. which the Constitutions of the Apostles showes was done before the Consecration of the Eucharist, to signifie the love of one another in Christ and for Christ, wherewith they professed to rceive the same. Though Origen upon Rom. XVI. sayes it came after Prayer. And Tertullian therefore calls it signaculum orationis, de Orat. XIV. the seal of prayer. To wit, of that prayer which the Eucharist was celebrated with. There∣fore chose salutations, joyned with the charge of saluting one another in token of this love, signifie no lesse, than the expression of the same love from for∣rain Churches, which they professed among themselves, in the communion of the same mysteries. That is, that they who absent, thus saluted them, did no less communicate with them in the same Sacrament, than they did with one ano∣ther, who saw one another communicate with one another face to face. This is then that communication of peace, that title of brotherhood, that re∣cognisance of the marks of hospitality which Tertullian allegeth, for the means, whereby all Churches make one Church, the same with that primitive and origi∣nal Church, which was first founded by the Apostles; The unity whereof, be∣ing grounded upon the same Faith, delivered and received at the Sacrament of Baptisme, is able to make evidence of the same Faith. Do not all the re∣cords of the Church, from the Apostles time, justifie the same visible com∣munion in Christianity, by the same intercourse and communion of coun∣sailes and businesse, which were trouble to no purpose, were not the in∣tent of it to maintain the Unity of the Church? Look upon the Epistles of Ig∣natius, and observe in them two things for the present purpose. The first, that Ignatius, being carried in bands from Rome to Antiochia, the Churches by which hee passed, (not onely those hee writes his Epistles to, but divers others) send de∣putations of the principal persons among them, to conferre with him about their present estate: Which are the occasions of the leters hee directs to them. The second, that hee desires them to depute and ordaine certain persons to go to
Antiochia, to his Church there, to congratulate with them, that, since hee was taken from them, they were returned, from persecution, into their wonted bo∣dy; The preservation whereof, I suppose, every man will imagine, this confe∣rence, advice, and comfort of so many Churches, was the means to advance. The same is to be seen by that of Clemens, (or rather of the Church of Rome, in whose name hee writes it) to the Church of Corinth, divided within it self in∣to factions, to reduce them to peace and unity. For, I suppose, the premises will show the reason, that must oblige the parties to respect the advice of the Church of Rome; To wit, the obligation of communicating with the whole Church: Seeing reason requires, that the party which should refuse to return to unity, must be refused the communion of the Church of Rome, and those Churches, (by consequence) that should adhere to it. Look now upon S. Cypri∣ans leters, look upon the leters of Dionysius of Alexandria, out of which, for the greatest part, Eusebius hath compiled the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical Histories, look upon the rest of the intercourse, by which the unity and commu∣nion of the Church was maintained distinct from all Heresies and Schisms, from the Apostles time till Constantine, and let mee know, what probable reason can be assigned, to move forrain Churches, to give that respect to strafigers, which was effectual to the purpose intended, had not all sides been perswaded, that this was the end with the Apostles, after our Lord, had ordained, this the meanes to procure it. Take for an instance the leter of tha Synod at Antiochia about Paulus Samosatenus, in the place afore quoted. There, showing, that, having deposed him, they had made a new Bishop in his stead, they write further: . This wee have given you notice of, that you may write to him, and receive from him communicatory leters. But let him that is deposed write to Artemon, and let them of Artemons sect communicate with him. These leters then were a mark and cognisance, that they acknowledged him that was ordained, true Bishop of An∣tiochia. And; the sending of them from the Bishops of Italy and Rome, the Emperor Aurelian maketh the condition, upon which the decree of the Synod was to be executed by secular force. In like maner Optatus lib. II. having brought down his Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome to Damasus; Damaso Syricius hodie, saith hee, cum quo nobis totus orbis, commercio Formatarum, in unâ commu∣uionis societate concordat. To Damasus succeeds this day Syricious, with whom, the whole world together agreeth with us, in one fellowship of communion, by the in∣tercourse of leters of mark. These leters of mark, which wee speak of, con∣cerned not onely the publick businesse of Churches, but were usually given to private Christians, whether of the Clergy or people, that, when they travailed into forrain Countries, they might certifie, of what rank rhey were at home, and to be received and communicate accordingly; whatsoever Church they came to, all over the world. A thing so manifest by all records of the Church, that it were injury for the Reader to go about to evidence it. I said nothing afore, in order of time, concerning the sect of the Dohatists. The reason was, because they broke out of the Unity of the Church, upon that quarrel which had been debated before in S. Cyprians time, concerning the baptizing of Hereticks, and, by the Christian moderation of that time, had been appeased without dissolving the Unity of the Church. But I showed you before, that S. Augustines refutati∣on of them proceeds very much upon supposition of that Unity of the Church, which wee are now put to prove. Neither said I any thing of the Schisme of Meletius in Aegypt, because it proceeded upon the same ground with that of the Novatians, that those who had fallen away in the persecution of Diocletian ought not to be re-admitted to communion with the Church again. But hee that shall consider the decree of the Council of Nicaea, for the uniting of them to the Church again, shall finde, that they held themselves obliged to abate of their right, to regain the Unity of the Church; So farre they were from imagining, that God had not commanded it. For, to incourage them to return, they allow∣ed those, who had been ordained under Meletius , the
title, rank and ministery competent to their respective orders, and, to succeed in∣to the places as those that should die: In the mean time, not to act in Ordina∣tions of those of the Clergy should do. This you have in Theodoret and Socra∣tes, Eccl. Hist. I. 9. in Sozomenus, I. 24. And thus, I conceive, I have demon∣strated the Unity of the Church, by the same reasons for which wee hold our Christianity; That is, by the Scriptures interpreted by the consent of all Chri∣stians: Having showed by the proceedings in the Arian persecutions under Constantius and Valens, that this Union was of force to defeat all the designes of those Apostates, who, having the power of the Empire on their side, sought the way to introduce their own Faith. For what appearance is there, that succeed∣ing Emperors should not acknowledge that, which had preserved their Faith in despite of their predecessors? Or that Constantine, from the beginning of his Christianity, did not acknowledge the Church in that quality, which manifestly defeated the degnes of his successors to poison Christianity? But the Lawes of the Empire are extant, and so are the Lawes of most of those Soveraignties in∣to which the Empire stands divided, and I shall have occasion to say something of them in the processe of my discourse, where I shall finde something objected for mee to dissolve. Which when I have answered, then shall I make account to have completely demonstrated my purpose. In the mean time, I desire those that have seen what hath been alleged for and against the Infallibility of the Church, to tell mee, whether ever they found it alleged, that there never was any such thing as the Church, in the nature of a Corporation of Gods found∣ing; Which, had it been the ground of Reformation, as now Erastians and Independents are founded upon it, there had been no such barre to all pretense of Infallibility in the Church, as to say, that there is no such thing as a Church in the quality of a Corporation, that is, with power in some to oblige the whole. On the other side, having demonstrated, that all things necessary to the salvation of Christians are not clear in the Scriptures to all whom they concern, I have also showed, how necessary it was, that the Corporation of the Church should be provided, as well to preserve that Faith, upon the profession whereof I have showed it was founded, as to maintaine that service of God in unity, which is the end for which it subsisteth. CHAP. XI. Ʋpon what grounds the first book de Synedriis holds that the Church cannot excommunicate. Before the Law there was no such Power, nor by it. Christians went for Jewes under the Apostles. His sense of some Scri∣ptures. What the Leviatha saith in general concerning the Power of the Church. Both suppose that Ecclesiastical Power includeth Temporal, which is not true. Of the Oxford Doctors Paraenesis. TO much of this great opposition is made by the first and second book de Synedriis Judorum, and the Author of the Leviathan; The first preten∣ding to maintain the position of Erastus that Excōmunication may be a temporal punishment, if secular Powers think fit to use it, but, that the Church hath nothing to do, to exclude from the communion of the Eucharist those, who, professing Christianity, live not according to it. To this purpose hee produces all the evi∣dence that can be made, to show, that, under the Law of Nature, as Ecclesiasti∣cal Writers call it, (that is, from the beginning of the world to the Law of Moses) there was no precept, no practice of Excommunication, for the Jewes, under the Law, to receive it from thence. No precept of the Law, upon which it can be thought to have been established by divine Right, so as to take place under the Gospel upon that Title. Here hee showes at large; That, when the precept of Circumcision is inacted by this sanction; That the male childe which shall not be circumcised on the eight day, shall be cut off from his people; When many precepts of Moses Law have this penalty, of being cut off, annexed to the transgression of them, the intent is not, that they shall
be excommunicate; But, that their lives shall be forfeited to Gods vengeance in case hee please to exercise it. Inferring, that, when the Soveraign Power was taken away from that people in their captivity and dispersions, being neverthe∣lesse privileged to live by their own Lawes; By their own consent they submit∣ted to this penalty, as the means to inforce the sentences of their own Gover∣nors, by whom their Lawes were dispensed. This being that Excommunication, whereof wee have remembrance in Esdras and in the Gospels; As it appears, by the original, to have been a meer humane Law, so did it no way concern the service of God, which the Excommunicate, among the Jewes, were not exclu∣ded from by it: But was a meer civil punishment, tending to change and abate the estate and condition of him that was under it, in his freedom and intercourse with his own peole. By all this hee seemes to fortifie the argument which Era∣stus had made, showing, that there is no such thing as Excommunication com∣manded or established by that Law, and therefore that there is no such power in the Church. But further, seeing that there was no other company of men extant in the world, for the Apostles to understand by the name of the Church, when our Lord commanded him that was offended among his Disciples; Tell it to the Church, Mat. XVIII. 16-20. hee insists strongly, that neither the Church of Christ, nor any Consistory or Assembly of men, or particular person, claiming or acting in behalf and under the title of the Church can be understood by those words of our Lord: But that the name of the Church must necessarily sig∣nifie the Body of Jewes, as well as Christians as unbelievers, or, that Consistory which was able to act in behalf of them, in their respective times and places; such as wee must also understand the witnesses there mentioned to be. For it is manifest, that, at the beginning of Christianity, onely Jewes were admitted to be Christians, in so much that, the dispute was hot about Cornelius and his com∣pany, Acts XI. 1. being no Jewes in Religion, but yet, such as believed in the true God, and had renounced the worship of Idols. Whereby it seemes, the command of our Lord to baptize all Nations Mat. XXVIII. 19. was then under∣stood to concern onely those of all Nations, that had made themselves Jewes by being circumcised, afore. Accordingly, wee see, that, by virtue of Claudius his Edict, commanding all Jewes to depart from Rome, Aquila and Priscilla, be∣ing Christians, came to Corinth, Acts XVIII. 2. to show, that Christians at that time must needs use the Jewes fashions, who were therefore reputed Jewes by the Law of the Romanes, and injoyed the benefit of their Religion by the Jewes privileges, granted, or confirmed by the same Claudius, in Josephus, An∣tiq. XIX. 4. Whereupon it seems necessarily to follow, that the Excommuni∣cation then in force was that, which the Jewes had introduced by humane Law, confirmed by the Law of the Empire. Though, it is to be thought, that the Christians, upon particular agreement among themselves, (such as wee finde they had, by Pliny, Epist. X. 97. Tertul. Apolog. cap. II. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. III. 33. S. Hierome Chron. 2123. Orig. contr. Celsum I. pag. 4.) had limited the use of it, to such causes and termes as their profession required. Therefore, when our Lord in the next words commands, that hee which will not heare the Church, be ac∣counted as an Heathen or a Publicane; As it is manifest, that hee gives the Church no power, but onely prescribes what hee would have the party offended to do; So, neither Heathen nor Publicane being in the condition of an excom∣municate person among the Jewes, how can it be understood, that our Lord would have him to be excommunicate, whom hee commands to be held as a Heathen man or as a Publicane? The effect then of this precept of our Lord will consist, in limiting the precept of the Law Levit. XIX. 17. to the publishing of those offenses between parties, the private complaint whereof should be neglected; So that, if the opinion of Gods people should be no more esteem∣ed by the osfeuder, the party offended freely to return his scorn, by avoiding his familiarity, as Jewes were wont to avoid the familiarity of Heathen men and Publicanes. Now, when our Lord adds in the next words; Whatsoever yee binde on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever yee loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; The sense must either be general, to signifie the
obligation of all Law, and the right and Power which one man may have, by the act of his will to tye and limit another mans; Or particular to the Law of Moses: Whereby, what was declared unlawfull by the Doctors and Professors of it, was said in their language to be held or bound, that which was permitted, loose: Which signification our Lord also uses, Mat. XXIII. 4. Luc. XI. 46. This later sense, concerning things and not persons, will be farre from signifying, that any man should be excommunicate. And though Excommunication be a bond, and was so among the Jewes, yet, how should wee understand, that the Church is inabled to tye this bond by a commission, the termes whereof containe all that superiors may do to oblige their inferiors? This Author then acknowledges, that S. Paul threatens Excommunication, Gal. I. 8, 9. 1 Cor. XVI. 22. and that hee wishes himself that estate which it imports, Rom. IX. 3. Not, as it hath been falsly imagined among Christians, to be cut off from the communion of the Eu∣charist, and other offices of Christianity; But as it was used among the Jewes, to inferre the abridgment of a mans freedome in publick conversation, as vile and subject to the curses of the Church. But when the same Apostle gives or∣der that the incestuous person be delivered to Satan, 1 Cor. V. 5. As also when hee saith, that hee had delivered Hymenaeus and Philetus, 1 Tim. I. 20. when hee ordereth them not to converse with such persons, 1 Cor. V. 11. this hee takes no more to concerne Excommunication, than those verses of the Psalms; Blessed is the man that bath not walked in the counsail of the ungodly; Or, I have not sate with vain persons, nor will have fellowship with the deceitfull; That is to say, that it is bad counsail towards God, but neither ground nor signe of any commission to excommunicate, in the body of the Church. Whereas the Leviathan, (to show here, out of order, his sense of that place) though hee acknowledge, that both ancient and modern writers have understood it, as if, by the extraordinary graces which the Apostles then had, to evidence the presence of God in his Church; the excommunicate became subject to plagues and diseases inflicted by evil An∣gels, (to show, that they came under the power of Satan, when they were put out of the Church) yet hee satisfies himself by saying, that other learned men finde nothing like the excommunication of Christians in it, pag. 209. and, that it depended upon the singular privilege of the Apostles. These are the grounds upon which the power of the Keyes, and by conse∣quence, the charter and corporation of the Church, and all Ecclesiastical right and power grounded thereupon, are taken away, in the first book de Synedriis, to the same effect, as in Erastus his positions. But the Leviathan comes up close to the point in general, and, following the supposition which I have refuted; That the Gospel, or Christianity, and the Scriptures that contain it, are not Law, till the secular Power that is Soveraign inact it; By consequence must needs deny, that any Act of the Apostles could be Law to the Church, whose office was one∣ly to publish the newes of the coming and rising again of Christ, and to induce men to submit themselves to his kingdome of the world to come. Much lesse can there be any Power to give Lawes to the Church, but that which is in the Soveraigne of each State, which therefore, when it is Christian, is called the Church of such a Kingdome. Though hee acknowledge also, that, before the Em∣pire was Christian, the Body of Christians in every City is called in the Scri∣ptures the Church of such or such a City, pag. 275; But denying, that there can be upon earth any such universal Church as all Christians are tied to obey, because they are lyable to other Powers of this world, according to the States of which they are, pag. 248. and before, pag. 206. As for the Power of bunding and loo∣sing, very properly hee understands it to be a consequence of the Apostles commission to baptize unto forgivenesse of sins. But so, that, supposing they have nothing to do either to loose them that repent not, or to binde them that do, and that no mans repentance is visible but by our outward signes, there must be some Power to judge of the truth of those fignes, because they may be counterfeit. And this Power, as it is expresly given by our Lord to the Church, Mat. XVIII. 16. when hee saith, Tell the Church; So doth S. Paul 1 Cor. V. 11, 12; and, 3, 4, 5. acknowledge the power of casting out the in∣cestuous
persons and other finners to be in the Congregation, reserving to himself onely the pronouncing of the sentence. Supposing this Church to be now the Soveraign Power that representeth the people, but when S. Paul writ, the Body of Christians in such or such a City, pag. 275. In like maner, the ap∣pointing of Persons, either to officiate the Service of God, or to wait upon the necessities of the Church, hee also gives unto the Church, that is, then, to the re∣spective Bodies of Christians, but now, to the Soveraign Power into which all Rights of the People resolve by the establishment of it. But, the consecrating of them by Imposition of hands, as to the Apostles for their time, so, to the worlds end, to their Successors. For thus were Mathias, Paul and Barnabas made A∣postles Act. I. 15, 23. XIV. 1, 2, 3. XIV. 14. Thus the seven Deacons, thus the Elders of Churches were constituted, Acts VI. 3. XIV. 23. the Congregation chusing, the Apostles declaring the choice, as in binding and loosing. As for the maintenance of Persons thus appointed, it is no marvail if hee make it meer almes and benevolence, without any Law of God to make the purses of Christians lyable to it, who acknowledgeth not Christianity to be any Law; For, how shall hee be bound to contribute towards the maintenance of such persons, that is not bound to be a Christian? But, that Tithes, under the Law, were due onely by the Civil Power which God had upon the people, having made God their Soveraign, by their Covenant with him, in which right Moses and Aaeron, and the High Priests that succeeded him, were but his Lieutenants, (so that, when this Power was translated and settled upon their Kings, it held meerly by their sufferance) this is an imagination that no mans brain ever teemed with till now. And truly in the point of giving Law to the Church, by determining Controversies of Faith, and by interpreting difficulties of Scripture (call it what you please) as also by deciding that which becomes questionable in any thing that concerns the community of Christians; It had been a necessary con∣sequence of this opinion, that, as hee owneth the Soveraign Powers right to de∣cree, so hee should assign the Persons thereby appointed for the Church, a Right to declare, publish or pronounce the same, as in Excommunicating and Ordain∣ing hee doth; For which hee hath found no ground, no pretense in the Scri∣ptures. Besides, whereas, by the Act of the Apostles, laying a burden upon be∣lievers, Acts XV. 28. and by the practice of their successors, practising the hold∣ing of Councils, (which common sense would make ridiculous, if they had no ef∣fect upon the Church) hee is convinced to acknowledge that they were able to binde themselves, though not the Church; It will be impossible for him to render a reason, either why this power should cease, or how it should continue when the Soveraign Power becomes Christian, and all right in the Church is resolved into it. I must not leave this point, before I have taken notice of one presumption, wherein both these Authors seem to agree. For the Leviathan, in several places pag. 285 286, 282, 205, 206, 322. taketh for granted, that there is no Law in the world, but the Law of Nature, and the Civil Lawes of Commonwealths. And therefore, that hee which makes Ecclesiastical Power not to depend upon the Civil, must indow it both with right and means, to constrain men to obey it; and thereupon inferrs all the inconvenience which hee so much aggravates; That then all Civil Power must of necessity be swallowed up and resolved into the Power of the Church, in as much as all Christians, even Soveraignes are members of it. Which to avoid, it is necessary to grant, that the Church is no∣thing else but a Christian Commonwealth, and the Clergy ministers of the So∣veraign Power, deriving all their authority from it, pag. 209, 249, 296. In like maner, the first book de Synedriis Ebraeorum, in defining Excommunication, pag. 105. takes it for granted, that those who challenge the power of it in behalf of the Church, would have the Civil estate and condition of him that is excommu∣nicate, in regard of his reputation of freedom, changed and abated by it. Which must needs inferre the Church to be indowed with such a power, as is a∣ble, by outward force to constrain obedience. For otherwise, the estate of no man, that is protected in all right by the Civil Power, could be changed or aba∣ted
by it. Accordingly, in several places hee presumes, that those who maintain the Power of the Church, and the right of Excommunicating, which is a prime part of it, to stand by Gods Law, are obliged by consequence to maintain the Power of the Church in maters of the world, in Ordine ad spiritualia. And hereupon follow the reasons, whereby these Authors have disputed, the one à priori, that this constitution of the Church is destructive to the peace and safety of all States, Kingdomes, and Commonwealthes, (in as much as a Power not depending upon them, may lawfully be used against them, by giving the people a title of executing the commands of it by force) The other à posteriori, from the practice of all Christian States, Kingdomes, and Commonwealthes; Who, by limiting the exercise and effect of all kindes of acts which the Church hath done, or pretended to inforce by Excommunication, have sufficiently demon∣strated, that they grant the Church no Title to any part of the Power it chal∣lengeth, but their own grant, thinking fit to execute their will in Church ma∣ters by Church men, no otherwise than they execute their will in military ma∣ters by souldiers, in maters of publick or private right by Judges and Lawyers. As you may see at large in the first book de Synedriis cap. X. By which it may appear, that I do this Author no wrong, when I inferre; That the Church is no Corporation, nor hath any Power but from the State, according to his opinion, because it hath no Power to excommunicate. For, if those diferences of per∣sons, whereby, some are qualified to act in behalf of the Church, are grounded originally upon the act and will of the State imploying them to that purpose, then can no act that they do be referred to any Power estated upon the Corpo∣ration of the Church, founded by God upon any charter of divine right. Now, it is well enough known, that there is such an opinion maintained in the Church of Rome; And it is manifest, to him that shall peruse what hath passed in the Scottish Presbyteries, that the effect of the same position hath been practised by them, when the ground of it hath been disclaimed; which is, to my judgment, the more dishonest course of the two. But it mvst be acknowledged, because it cannot with truth or sincerity be either denied or dissembled, that there are ve∣ry many of that Church that think otherwise, and think that the Church allows them so to think and to professe. And it is reported with likelyhood enough, that Cardinal Bellarmine himself, (though then a Jesuite, and imployed to dispute all Controversies upon the highest termes that are tenable) was not, of his own choice, willing to have maintained it, had hee not writ under an Imperious Pope Sextus V, that refuted passeport to his books de Romano Pontifice, till hee had added the fift, concerning this point. Which, what contradiction it hath found from those of his own profession, ought to be notorious to all, that give a judg∣ment in this point, and would not judge of they know not what. It is there∣fore manifest, that there are enough of those, that believe the Church to be, by the Charter of God, a Society, Corporation, or visible Body; And yet, by this Charter, not protected by the power of the Sword, but exposed to be persecu∣ted by the same; That is to say, called by God, to the profession of Christia∣nity, (part whereof is, to believe the Catholick Church, and (by consequence) to be a member of it) but to maintain this profession, not by force, but by suf∣fering rather than renounce it. Thereupon it follows, that, by the original in∣stitution of the Church, to be excommunicate, inferres no manner of losse in this world, unless it be to the Church that excōmunicates, as the Leviathan very truly and pertinently observes, pag. 276; In as much as, by being excommuni∣cate, a man may be moved to seek a course of revenge upon the Church that did it; And yet neverthelesse, upon supposition of Christianity, it may well be counted the punishment, of not performing that Christianity which a man pro∣fesseth. For, hee that does not believe Christianity to be true, or submits not to it, cannot think it any penalty for himself to be shut out of the Church. But, hee that professeth Christianity, and liveth not according to it, though the pe∣nalty which hee incurres by transgressing that profession is already incurred in respect of God, yet, hoping that God will not take the forfeiture which hee may take, may count his Excommunication, as indeed it is, the losse of the
meanes of salvation, which the communion of the Church importeth. If then it be demanded, whether the Church, by the original Charter of God, have power to constrain men by punishment to obedience; The answer is, that, abso∣lutely it hath not, but, upon supposition it hath. For, to him that thinks the Com∣munion of the Church no gain, Excōmunication is no punishment; And there∣fore no censure tending to Excommunication, which is the utmost constraint that the Church can use. But, to him that believes the Communion of the Church to be the means that God hath ordained for the salvation of particular Christi∣ans, as the losse of it is necessarily a punishment, so is the expectation of that losse a constraint, to imbrace the condition of retaining it. But, as this con∣straint depends not upon outward force, but upon a perswasion of the minde which goes afore; So doth it not originally inforce any punishment of this world, but onely upon supposition of privileges granted by secular Powers to the pro∣fession of it, or penalties upon not professing it. Which, being accessory to the original constitution of the Church, (because all the world knowes, that, from our Lord to Constantine, there were no such privileges or penalties) it is manifest to all understandings, that hee who pretendeth the Church to be a Society or Visible Body by Gods appointment, is not obliged to grant, that it is indowed with any temporal Power of this world, to constrain those who are of it by outward force, because hee pretends, that it hath Power to refuse the communi∣on of those offices which God is to be served with by Christians, to those that performe not their Christianity; Which it granteth to those who undertake it. As therefore, whatsoever is a condition of obtaining salvation under Christiani∣ty, is Gods Law, so, whatsoever, by virtue of Gods Law, is a just condition of obtaining or holding Communion with the Church, that is a Law of the Church, supposing the Church to be a visible Society of Christians by Gods appoint∣ment; though wee grant not, that the losse of this Communion imports any change in the worldy quality of any man, by the original constitution of the Church, as it was founded by our Lord and his Apostles, but, by the privileges necessarily accruing to it, when the Powers of the world, professing Christianity, undertake the protection of it. But having named these two Authors for my adverse parties in this dispute, I am obliged to take notice of the Oxford Doctors late Paraenesis, ad aedificatores Imperii in Imperio, published since the penning of this. For the whole book proceeds upon the same oversight which the other two have made, and the very Title of it contains. I demand of any man in his right senses, whether hee can be said to build the Church into an Empire, within that Empire or Sove∣raignty which maintains it, that challenges no maner of temporal effect for that Excommunication, which is the utmost means the Church hath to inforce the sentence of it. They that oblige Subjects to depose their Soveraignes if the Pope excommunicate them, I confesse, make both Soveraignes and Subjects the Popes Vassals, them to rule, and these to obey at the discretion of him that can excommunicate them if they do not. That the Scottish Presbyterians have done the like, it were easie to show, were it worth the while, as also from whence they took their rise to do it. And if he please to step over the water again into France, I can show him a more lively picture of an Empire erected within an Empire, when the Reformed Churches their had there Civil Assemblies, to order the businesse which should arise upon the privileges which they had pur∣chased by their arms, for the maintaining of their Religion by force. Whether by right or by wrong I say not here: But this is the thing which hee calleth Imperi∣um in Imperio, the Popes temporal Power making him rather Soveraign above, than within other Soveraignties. But, I have showed you already, that this opini∣on never was the Faith of the Catholick Church, but the position of the Papal Fa∣ction, disclaimed at this day by the farre greater part of that communion, though the contrary, being countenanced the more, make the greater appearance. For my own opinion, I have delivered it so clear in my book of the Right of the Church in a Christian State, that these Authors might, if they pleased to oversee all other Divines that deliver the same, by that alone have seen what
they had to refute. And truly, I do not believe, that any of them can allege a more convicting reason against those that build a Soveraignty within a Sove∣raignty upon the Title of the Church, than that which there is alleged from the Unity of the Church, prophesied of in all the promises of the calling of the Gentiles, which the constitution of one visible Church of all Christians fulfilleth. For, if the Church of several Soveraignties is to be one and the same Body, by communicating in the Service of God, upon supposition of the same Faith, then cannot the foundation of it create any title of tempo∣ral right, to the prejudice and disturbance of those Soveraignties, from whence all force, within their respective territories, is derived. If it be said, that the sup∣position is impossible, to wit, that the Church should have power to Ordain, Ex∣communicate, decree, and yet be indowed with no force to constrain those that are obliged to stand to the acts thereof; The reason now alleged to the contrary is evident. For, if the obligation of the inward man be of force to resolve a Christian, to part with his life to maintain the profession of it; If it be part of that obligation which Christianity createth, to hold communion with Gods Church; is not this obligation enough to inforce the acts of the Church, and that excommunication which inforces the same? And for experience from the effect, it is but alleging the subsistence of the Church, till the time that Gregory II and III Popes withdrew their obedience, and the obedience of those parts of Italy that followed them, from the Emperor Leo Isaunus, upon pretense of his erring in the Faith, in putting down Images. For that is the first example which Christendom hath brought forth, of temporal freedom from allegiance due to the Soveraigne, founded upon the Title of Christianity. If yet it be evident that this was the case, in which, I see, there is some difficulty made. But, before this time, it can neither be said, that the Church was not the same after Constan∣tine as before, nor that the power of it ever produced any rebellion against the Soveraign, upon this Title, more than when the Martyrs suffered for their Chri∣stianity, without defending themselves by force. And therefore, when this Doctor, for the ground of his opinion, (as visible to his imagination as the common notions in Euclide) alleges, that all Power, all Jurisdiction, all Lawes, all Punishment, all Government, all Appeales, all Councils are derived first, and do lastly resort to the Secular Power, no lesse in Ecclesiastical than in Secular Causes, and concerning Ecclesiastical as well as Se∣cular Persons, because all force which constrains obedience is vested in it; his imagination is meerly imbroyled with equivocation of words. For all Power is nothing else but a moral quality, consisting in the right of obliging other mens wills, (those in respect of whom the Power holds) by the act of his or their wills that have it. And what shall hinder God to create such an obligation upon the consciences of Christians, by virtue of their Christianity, not allowing them any force to inact it, but the denial of the communion of the Church? Whether the Rules of the Church be called Laws or Canons, hee that is tied to hold com∣munion with the Church, is tyed to observe those Rules by which it subsists, and, if hee do not, deserves to be set aside, rather than the Unity thereof perish. Whether yee call them Magistrates or Elders that are appointed to govern the Church, it maters not; if by virtue of Gods Law, the obligation of obeying them be evident in the Scriptures. Whether it be properly called Jurisdiction or not, when a Christian is censured to be put out of the Church, it shall have the same effect, with that Jurisdiction whereby a malefactor is put out of the world, according as the correspondence between the Church and the State will bear it. How this may be counted punishment, how not, I will not say again, having said it already. In all causes and concerning all persons, I acknowledge there lies an appeal to the Soveraign, the Church having to do onely in Ecclesia∣stical causes, concerning men as they are members of the Church, and so acci∣dentally, (when the Church is as large as the State, all acknowledging the same Church) the Jurisdiction thereof, whether properly so called or not, extending to as many as that of the State. For, the last appeal is one of those Jura Ma∣jestatis, or Prerogatives wherein Soveraignty consisteth, neither is it alienable,
though it is limitable by those termes which Christianity, when it is acknowledg∣ed to come from God, establisheth. On the other side, the Power of the Church, though never so evidently settled by Christianity, may be abused, not only when it is extended to some temporal effect, but also when it is extended beyond the ground and reason of that Christianity which it presupposeth. Instances you have of both, in the claimes, of temporal Power and Infallibility in behalf of the Church. And, as there lies an appeal to a Heathen Soveraign, professing not to persecute his Subjects for their Christianity, but to protect them in it, upon pretense that it is extended to a temporal effect; so may there by an appeal to a Christian Soveraign, upon pretense that it is extended beyond the bounds which Christianity alloweth. So the Council of Atiochia appealed Aurelian, because Paulus Samosatenus protected himself in his House, belonging to the the Church, by power derived from him. But hee alloweth them that trial which Christianity settleth. So Constantine received the appeal of the Donatists, but referred the trial to the Church, in a Council at Rome, and again another at Arles, representing all the West. But of the bounds of Secular and Ecclesiasti∣cal power I must speak again. That the Ecclesiastical may be from God, though limitable by the Secular, hitherto this is evidence. As for the holding of Councils, I mervail to see this Doctor so securely to dream, that the calling of them all be∣longs onely to the State, and that it were an usurpation in the Church to hold any but by commission from it; For hee is not ignorant how many Synods were held by the Church afore Constantine, and that, upon the same right as those meetings of the Apostles, which, I have showed, had the power and force of General Councils, without asking leave either of Jewes or Romanes. Which is enough, for the present purpose, to infringe the argument made by this Do∣ctor in the former part of his book; Not, that there is no Church, but that there can be none where there is a State. Wherein hee out-vieth the first book de Synedriis his Master, who, having granted, that the Excommunications of Christians were taken up by the voluntary consent of Churches, hath, by conse∣quene granted, that the Church was a Church, that is, a Corporation, before Constantine. And therefore I referr the consideration of the time after Constantine, till I speak of the bounds of Ecclesiastical and Civil Power in Church maters; Where, it will as easily appear, as it is easie to look into any record of the Church, that the holding of Synods was a mater of course and Canon and custome, al∣lowed indeed by the Empire, but constituted and limited by the Church. Not because the State might not have forbid them; Had they gone beyond the bounds of that right which the constitution of the Church establisheth, justly; unjustly if they had not; So that, the power of forbidding to be just, the use of it unjust; But, that the Church was yet unacquainted with the motives of trans∣gressing those bounds, and so the State had no just cause to interpose. Of Ge∣neral Councils I say not the same. Not as if the Church afore Constantine had usurped a right not due, had it assembled by representatives in a General Coun∣cil: But, whether such assemblies were forborn, as mater of more jealousie to the State, than either ordinary meetings for the service of God, or Synods; Or of more charge to the Church; It must be acknowledged, that the first General Council of Nicaea could not have been assembled, without the command, as well as the charge of Constantine. That other General Councils were never as∣sembled without the concurrence of the chief Powers of Christendome. That every Soveraign hath a Power to command the presence of every subject, where and when hee shall please. And that Constantius, when hee constrained the Council of Ariminum to sit against their will, to the prejudice of the respective Churches, (on purpose, by this duresse, and the opportunities of time, to bring them to his will) abused his Power indeed, but usurped it not. For, if the consti∣tution of the Church be no ground for any temporal Right, then can no quali∣ty in the Church exempt any man, from the service, which, as a member of the Common-wealth, hee owes his Soveraign. But, whether they acted by commis∣sion from Constantius, or by the quality they held in the Church, the successe of his designe witnesseth. For, as I have showed you, that without being assem∣bled,
they had both right obliging them, and means inabling them to maintaine the Faith by mutual intelligence and correspondence: So, being assembled al∣ters nothing in the case, saving the opportunity it giveth, to imploy their right, to that end which their quality pretendeth; Their assembling upon his command signifying no trust which they undertook to him, prejudicial to that which their quality in the Church importeth. Having said this in general, to that general Argnment, upon which this Doctor pretends to build his opinion, I am content to turn my Reader loose to him, provided hee be content to consider also, that which shall be found requisite to be said, when I have done with his two prede∣cessors. CHAP. XII. That the Law expersly covenanted for the Land of Promise. A great Ob∣jection against this, from the Great precept of the Law. The hope of the world to come under the Law, and the obedience which it requireth, was grounded upon reason from the true God, the Tradition of the Fathers, and the Doctrine of the Prophets. The Love of God above all by the Law extendeth no further than the precepts of the Law, the love of our Neigh∣bor onely to Jewes. Of the Ceremonial, Judicial and Moral Law. SO much difference as there is between these two or these three opinions, and the reasons upon which they proceed, it is manifest, that the issue and pretense of all is the same; That there is no such thing as a Church: Under∣standing by that name, a Visible Society or Corporation of all Christian peo∣ple, subsisting, or that ought to subsist by a Charter from God, one and the same from the first to the second coming of Christ. Which therefore remaines di∣stinct from all States and Soveraignties that professe Christianity, by the Rights upon which it subsists, though the persons of which both consist may be the same, if it so fall out, that Christianity be professed by all the Soveraign Pow∣ers under which there are Christians. But, that is the reason why I am forced to quote both Authors and Opinions by name, which in other points I shall avoid: Not onely because I would be as short in this abridgment as my designe will bear; But because nothing seemes to mee more odious, or further from the pro∣fession of a Christian, than the affectation of contradicting the opinions of men in repute for Learning; which therefore I would have avoided by silencing the names of these, had I not found so much difference in the means from which they would inferre the same consequence. And truly the Leviathan hath done like a Philosopher, in making the question general that is general indeed, and giving that resolution of all the branches of it, without which, whatsoever is said to some parts of it, leaves the whole unresolved, while any part so remaines. Those that onely dispute the power of Excommunication, are neverthelesse to give account, what Right the Secular Power can have, to appoint the Persons, that shall either determine or execute maters of Religion, to decide Controver∣sies of Faith, to minister the Sacraments, (which they may do themselves by much better Title than by their Deputies) than if they resolved and maintained all this as expresly, as the Leviathan hath done. It may be indeed hee hath made his resolution more subject to be contradicted, by so freely and generously declaring it; But whosoever shall undertake the same pretense, will stand no lesse obliged to God and to his Church, to give account, how every part of that Power, which, as well before as since Constantine hath been exercised by the Church, should henceforth be exercised by Secular Powers, without prejudice to Christianity, before hee go about to void it; Though hee give not the truth so much advantage against himself, because hee expresses not so much of his mea∣ning. For my part, as I found it necessary, so I finde it sufficient to have quo∣ted these opinions and reasons, advanced against the right of the Church, because I finde, they oblige mee to digg sor a foundation, upon which, as the true ground of that right which the Church claimeth, I may be inabled to dissolve whatsoever
reasons, wit, and learning, impregnated by passion or interest can invent to con∣tradict the same. Here then I must have recourse to a position, which some men will count ha∣zardous, others prejudicial to Christianity, according as their prejudices or en∣gagements may work; But will appear in truth, to them that shall take the pains to look through the consequences of it, in the resolution of Controversies which divide the Church, to concern the interest of Christianity, and the peace of the Church, more thn any point whatsoever, that is not of the Foundation of Faith. In as much as, there is no question that is started, or can be started, (as the case is now with the Church, so as to call in question the peace and unity there∣of) but the interpretation of the old Testment, or some part of it, in relation and correspondence to the New Testament, will be ingaged in it. Concerning which, the position that I intend to advance is this; That, by the Law of Moses, and the Covenant between God and the people of Israel upon it, nothing at all was expresly contracted, concerning everlasting life and the happinesse of the world to come. Not that I intend to say; That there was not, at that time, suffici∣ent ground for a man to be competently perswaded of his right to it, or sufficient means to come to the knowledge of that ground, (for hee that should say this; could not give account, how the Fathers should attain salvation under the Law) which, I finde all that maintain the truth of Christianity against the Jews so ob∣liged to do, that without it they must give up the game. But, that the thing contracted for between God and the people of Israel, by the mediation of Mo∣ses, was the Land of Promise; (That is to say, that they should be a free people, and injoy their own Lawes, in the possession of it) upon condition of imbracing and observing such Lawes as God should give. As for the kingdome of heaven, which the Gospel of Christ preacheth, the hope of it was so mystically intima∣ted, that there was sufficient cause to imbrace it even then, but not propounded as the condition upon which God offered to contract with them, as hee doth with Christians. And this, though I cannot say that the Church hath at anytime expressed to be a part of the Rule of Faith, yet, that the Church hath alwaies implicitely admitted it for a part of the reason of Faith, which wee call Divini∣ty, I must and do maintain. Before I come to prove this, I will here propound one objection, because it seems to contain the force of all that is to be said against it. For, when our Lord sayes, Mat. XIX. 19. If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandements; When hee resolves the great commandements of the Law to be the love of God above all things, and of our neighbor as of our selves, Mat. XXII. 36. In fine; wheresoever hee derives the duties of Christianity from the Law of Moses, hee seems to suppose, and so do his Apostles, that the same life everlasting which hee promiseth by the Gospel was proposed by the Law, as the reward for observing it. And indeed, what can the Gospel was propound, for a more suitable way or meanes to salvation, than the love of God and man, in that order which the Law of God appointeth? It is not for nothing, that S. Augustine observeth; The first commandement of the Decalogue, to acknowledge God, and the last; not to covet that which is another mans, to contain in them the utmost office of a Christian: And all Divines have distributed the precepts of Moses Law, into Moral, as well as Judicial and Ceremonial; The Moral precepts containing in them no lesse than the duties of Christianity, when they are done with such an intent, as God, who by giving Moses Law declareth himself to see the most in∣ward of the heart, requireth. Here, in the first place, (supposing that God, entring into Covenant with that people, intended to establish their Civil Government by the Law of Moses) I will proceed to argue, that all Civil Lawes, that are not contrary to the Law of Nature, and the actions by them injoyned or prohibited, may be done or not done for two several reasons: For, if there be reason enough for the Nations that know not God, nor ground their Lawes upon any presumption of his will, or expectation of good or evil from him, to unite themselves in Civil Society, then is their reason enough for them, to observe the Lawes upon which the be∣nefit
of Civil Society is to be had, though they suppose not themselvs obliged by God to them, nor to oblige God by keeping them. And if it be evident, that all Civil Lawes, not contrary to the Lawes of God and Nature, do come from God, as Civil Society doth, it will be as evident, that the keeping of them in that re∣gard, and for that consideration, is obedience to God. The Jewes Civil Law hath this privilege above the Civil Lawes of other Nations, to be gronnded upon those acts, whereby God, revealing himself for their freedom by Moses, ten∣dereth them the Land promised to their Fathers upon the Covenant they then had with God, upon condition of undertaking the Lawes which hee should give them for the future. And no reason can deny, that this was sufficient to con∣vince them, that God required of them, not onely the work which the Law spe∣cified, but that it be done in consideration of his will, and in reference to his honor and service; Though on the other side, it is not necessary to grant, that so much is expressed by the Civil Law of that Nation, expresly tending to their Civil freedome and happinesse, in the possession of the Land of Promise. It cannot be doubted, that the immortality of the soul, and the reward of good and bad after death was received among that people, from and before the time of receiving the Law: Otherwise, how should the Patriarchs obtain it, which the maintainance of Christianity requireth that they did obtain? It is also evi∣dent by the Scriptures, that the same conversation which Christ and his Apostles preached, was extant in the lives and actions of the Fathers before the Law, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Moses, and the rest, as the Fathers of the Church are wont to argue against the Jewes, that Christianity is more ancient than Judaisme. It is also manifest, that the same conversation was extant, and to be seen under the Law, in the lives of the Prophets and their Disciples, by the words of our Lord to the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. XXIII. 29-36. when hee chargeth them, that, professing to honor the Prophets by building their monu∣ments, but hating himself and his Apostles, they made themselves the heirs of those that killed the Prophets; And pursuing the same discourse, addeth; That hee would send them Prophets and Scribes and Wisemen, (which were his Apo∣stles and Disciples) whom they should crucifie, and scourge, and persecute from City to City, that all the righteous bloud that had been shed from Abel to Za∣charias son of Barachias might come on their heads. The same is testified by the Apostle Ebr. XI. 36, 37, 38. where, having through the whole Chapter showed, that the Fathers before and under the Law were saved by Faith, as Christians are, hee addeth; Others had trial of mockings and scourgings, and bands, and im∣prisonment, were stoned, were sawed asunder, were tempted, died by the sword, went about in sheeps and goats-skins, wanting, afflicted and distressed, (of whom the world was not worthy) wandring in deserts, upon mountaines, in caves and holes under ground. Which being the condition of the Christians to whom hee writes, (ex∣horting them, by all that Epistle, to indure persecution of the Jewes, rather than to deny Christianity by turning to the Law, which the Jewes indeavored to force them to, by raising them trouble) makes it manifest, that the same righteousness, for which the Jewes then persecuted the Christians, was that, for which their Fathers had persecuted the Prophets and other righteous men under the Law. And, hee that shall make trial to maintaine the truth of Christianity against the Jewes, that acknowledge all the Old Testament as well as wee, shall finde, that the Fathers of the Church have reason, when they allege this against the Jewes, to show, that the salvation which the Patriarchs and Prophets and other righte∣ous men before and under the Law obtained, was not by Judaisme, but by Chri∣stianity, Eusebius by name de demonstr. Evang. lib. I. There was no need then, that the Law should condition that this should be believed, and it was agreeable to the immediate intent of the Law, onely to suppose it. For, at that time, by reason of their deliverance out of Aegypt, they did acknowledge God to be the onely true God, searcher of hearts and Judge of the world to come. Though formerly they had been tainted with the Idolatries of the Aegyptians; as by the Prophet Ezekiel XX. 7. and their often relapses to Idolatry, upon occasion of the company that joyned themselves to them when they came out
of Aegypt, Exod. XII. 38. Num. XI. 4. Exod. XVI. 2. XXXII. 1. may appear. Therefore this Law being tendred for the Civil Law of that people, it is not srange that hee should covenant with them no further, than that they should expresly acknowledge him for their God, in opposition to all other pretended Gods, and serve him by such ceremonies as hee should appoint; Governing their civil life by such Lawes, as hee should allow an interest in the Land of Pro∣mise to those that should observe, having appointed those to be cut off from it, that should not observe the same. Though, this being the immediate intent of the Law, another principal and utter intent of it must be acknowledged, to make way for that inward and spiritual righteousnesse which the Gospel requi∣reth. For those, who, by the temporal punishment of the Law should be con∣strained to yield outward obedience to it, and abstaine from such evill deeds as should put them out of protection of it, being assured, by the doctrine of their Fathers before the Law, maintained by the Prophets under the Law, of Gods particular providence, and the immortality of the soul, and the reward of good and bad, according to that spiritual righteousnesse which they themselves lived in, were thereby sufficiently obliged to obey God, not onely as their Soveraigne in this world civilly, but inwardly and spiritually, as him whom they expected to be judged by, and remaine with everlastingly in the world to come. For, as the necessity of Christs coming is necessary to the maintenance of Christianity, so it is also necessary to the same purpose, that wee maintain this coming of his to have been fore-told and signified by the Old Testament, and yet the intent of it not covenanted for, because the intent of his coming was to covenant for it▪ Which had it been covenanted for by the Law, hee should not have needed to come, for the purpose of introducing and establishing a Covenant, which was already effectually accepted and in force; Nor to do the miracles which yet serve not to convince the Jewes that this was the intent of the Law, so farre were they from being convinced without them. True it is indeed, that, though this Covenant had been established by the Law, and accepted by Gods people, the coming and miracles of Christ would have been no lesse necessary to introduce the Faith of the holy Trinity. But it is ma∣nifest, that the revelation of that Faith was necessary, as the means to procure this Covenant to be accepted, as obtained by the Son, and made effectual by the Spirit. And therefore, the coming of Christ tending to convince the world thereof, it is manifest, that the end for which the world was to be convinced thereof, (that is to say, that the Covenant of the Gospel might be accepted) was not in effect before, not brought to passe without it. I do therefore much approve of the comparison which Grotius hath made between Moses his Law and the Romane Lawes, which had their rise from the Pretors Edicts; Who, being annuall Magistrates, and having a great Jurisdiction in their hands, were wont, because at the first written Lawes were not provided, to signifie at their entrance, by posting up an Edict, what pleas they would receive and give pro∣cesse to; But so, that of course they retained the most points which their pre∣decessors had declared, which therefore, being translated of course out of this yeares Edict into the next, were called tralatitia, and thereupon all things that are customary and usuall, are properly called tralatitia in Latine. Wee must un∣derstand further, that, the Fathers afore the Law had separated themselves from the Nations, (that had fallen, and were falling away every day from the true God to the worship of Idols) not onely by acknowledging and serving the onely true God, but by very many Lawes and Customes, whereby they ruled their Fa∣milies and inferiors in religion and justice among themselves. It must therefore be concluded, that those principles upon which their Religion stood, were not blotted out when they received that taint of Aegyptian Idolatries. But remain∣ed in force and virtue among them, at such time as, by receiving the Law be∣coming a free State, they undertook to serve God, and to govern themselves ac∣cording to the Lawes which hee should give. For it is evident, that divers Lawes and Customes which were in force among them before the Law, are presuppo∣sed, and further limited by the Law, and therefore not introduced by it, but de∣rived
from the Fathers, as our Lord observeth of Circumcision, John VII. 22. Such was the Law of mourning for the dead, so much in force at giving the Law, that, upon the death of Aarons sons, it was necessary, that a Law should pre∣sently come forth, incerdicting the Priests to mourne for them upon paine of death, the rest of the people remaining under that Law; Though Aaron there∣upon excuses himself, that they did not feast upon the sinne offering upon that day of mourning, and is accepted, Levit. X. 5, to 19. This the Law introduceth not, but was in force under the Fathers, as wee see Gen. L. 2, 10. XXVII. 41. The same is to be said of the seven dayes in which Marriages were celebrated under the Law, as wee see in Sampson, Judg. XIV. 12, 15, 17. which is doubled Tob VIII. 22. no where introduced by the Law, no more than the seven dayes, or seventy dayes, or thirty dayes of mourning, Gen. L. 2. Deut. XXXIV. 8. The like of answering adjurations, which the Law, Levit. V. 1. presupposes, as also Prov. XXIX. 24. as a duty then received, that, if a man conjure all that know any thing of his businesse, to declare what they know, all that heare him stand bound to declare their knowledge in it. For, for this cause it is, that the Law, supposing him guilty of perjury that conceals his knowledge in that case, makes him liable to the sacrifice for expition of perjury, as you may see Levit. V. 1. And by virtue of this custome among Gods people, not onely stood they bound to answer the High Priest, as our Lord answers Caaphas, Mat. XXVI. 63. or the King, 1 Kings XXII. 18. 2 Chron. XVIII. 15. Jos. VII. 19. Job. IX. 24. but al∣so private men, in the Co where their cause was hearing, adjuring all that were present to testifie their knowledge in their causes, if wee believe the Jewes Constitutions. In like maner, wee have nothing ordained in the Law that Tithes should be payed, or, that it should be lawfull, or acceptable to God to conse∣crate any other part of their goods to the service of God, or to make Vowes of abstinence from things otherwise lawfull: But wee have it determined by the Law, what kindes shall be Tithable, what Vowes shall stand good, what sacrifice shall be offered by him that transgresses his Vow, how every thing that a man freely consecrates to the service of God shall be valued in money, Levit. XXVII. 1-30. Psal. XV. 4. Gen. XIV. 20. XXVIII. 22. Numb. XVIII. 29. The like is to be said of many other Lawes, which, being in the Old Testament mentioned as in force by custome, and no where introduced by the Lawes of Moses, must be presumed to descend by Tradition from the Fathers. Which hee that believes, as it cannot be doubted, must of necessity acknow∣ledge, that not onely the principles and grounds of spiritual and inward obedi∣ence to God for Gods sake, but also the precepts wherein it consists, are rather presupposed by the Law than introduced by it; And therefore may well be said, to be translated out of the Law of Nature into Moses Law, when they are mentioned by it. Though hereunto I must adde this; That, they had not onely the doctrine of their Fathers afore the Law, to introduce and to regulate this inward obedience, but also the Prophets under the Law. The intent of whose Office was, not onely to reclaime them from Idol; to their own true God, but also to instruct them wherein consisted, not so much that civil and outward observation of his Law, which it promiseth to reward with temporal happinesse in the Land of Pro∣mise, as that spiritual and inward obedience to God, from which they might con∣ceive competent ground of hope toward the world to come. Every man knows, how ready they were to fall from God, all the time, whereof wee have the re∣cords in the Scriptures, before the Captivity of Babylon. After that time, wee do not finde that ever they ell to the worship of Idols, but wee finde abun∣dantly, by the reproofs of the Scribes and Pharisees by our Lord in the Gospels, that the next sinne to it, of Superstition and Hypocrisie, was soon come in in∣sea of it; When, by the outward observation of the Ceremonial and Judicial Lawes, they promised themselves the favor of God and the reward of the world to come. As, by paying Tithes precisely Mat. XXIII. 23. Luc. XI. 42. XVIII. 12. by washing their hands and vessels according to the Tradition of their Predecssors, Mar. VII. 4, 8. Mat. XXIII. 25, 26. Luc. XI. 39. by punctu∣ally
observing the Sabbath, Mat. XII. 1-12. Mar. II. 23-28. Luc. VII. 1-9. XIII. 10-16. XIV. 1-5. Joh. V. 9—inlarging their Phylacteries and fringes Mat. XXIII. 5. by many things more, which are to be read up and down the Gospels. This disease could not have been reproved by our Lord by the testi∣mony of the Prophet Esay, Mat. XV. 9. Mar. VII. 7. Esa. XXIX. 13. had it not taken root even before the Captivity, when as yet they were so subject to fall to the worship of false Gods. Therefore wee finde the reproof of this superstitious and hypocritical confidence in the Sacrifices which they thought to bribe God with, and other outward performances of the Law, to be the ordina∣ry work of the most part of the Prophets; David, Psal. XL. 7, 12. Psal. L. 8-13. LI. 18. The Prophet Samuel, 1 Sam. XV. 22. The Prophet Esay, of Sacrifices and Festivals, Esa. I. 11-20. Of their Fasts, Esa. LVIII. 3-10. Of their ser∣ving God by Traditions, Esa. XXIX. 13. The Prophet Jeremy, that God requi∣red not Sacrifices but obedience, Jer. VII. 21, 22, 23. and concerning patience and hope, in the afflictions which hee sendeth, Lam. III. 25-33. The Prophet Hosea, in the Calves of our lips, Hos. XIV. 2. The Prophet Micah, when hee teacheth what they should come before God with, Micah VI. 6, 7, 8. The Pro∣phet Zachary, of celebrating their Fasts, Zac. VII. 3-10. VIII. 16, 19. In fine, all the Prophets in their instructions and exhortations to the inward obe∣dience of God in spirit and in truth, have showed themselves true fore-runners of our Lord Christ and his Apostles; Not onely in preaching the principal in∣tent of the Law to be the same which the Gospel pretends to covenant for, but in suffering, (as well for this, as for reproving Idolaters) at the hands of those that taught for doctrines the Traditions of men, the like things as our Lord and his Apostles suffered for the same cause, at the hands of the Scribes and Phari∣sees. First then, the acknowledgment of one God that disposeth of all things, and knowes the secrets of all hearts, expresly covenanted for by Moses Law, by consequence of right reason infers the duty of spiritual obedience to him in all his commands; Secondly, the Fathers before the Law had delivered, the Pro∣phets after the Law did preach the same, no lesse than they did the acknowledg∣ment of the true God, but more principally than the outward observation of the Ceremonial or Civil precept of it; Therefore there might be, and was sufficient means under the Law, to make them understand their obligation to that spiritual obedience which the Gospel covenanteth for, though wee suppose, as the truth is, that the Law expresly covenanteth onely for the temporal hap∣pinesse of the Land of Promise; Therefore there was also sufficient meanes to oblige them to expect the coming of the Christ, as wee see by the Gospel that they did at the coming of our Lord, and, as all that will maintain Christianity against the Jewes are bound to maintain. And therefore to the objection proposed I answer; That, though the words of the precept of loving God with all the heart, and all the minde, and all the soul, and all the might, may contain all that Christianity requireth, to be done, in con∣sideration of duty to God, and with an intent of his honor and service; Yet neverthelesse that sense thereof that depends upon the Covenant of the Law is to be limited, to the observation of those precepts which God should confine their civil life to, in the service of him alone; The intent of the Covenant being to contract with God for temporal happinesse in the Land of Promise, they un∣dertaking, as a Common-wealth, to live by such civil Lawes as hee should give, as well as to worship him by such Ceremonies as hee should prescribe. And therefore, supposing they observed those precepts, they were to expect the in∣heritance of the Land of Promise, though wee suppose, that they did it out of respect to that reward, and not onely to God and to his honor and service. Yea, though wee grant, that, for the acknowledging of the true God alone, they were bound to indure persecution and death, rather than for fear of torment to deny God, or sacrifice to Idols, or renounce his Law, as wee see Daniel and the three Children did under Nebuchadnesar, and the zealous Jewes in the Maccabees time under Antiochus Epiphanes. For, if the Heathen had cause to believe, (that which is received of all, as the ground of civil Society) that particular
persons are bound to expose their lives for the defense of their Countrey, (that is, to no other end, but, that they may live and die in the Lawes under which they are bred) though they had no promise of God, that they should hold their inheritance of this world by maintaining them; Cereainly, the people that obtained their inheritance by taking upon them Moses Law, shall stand bound, not onely to maintain it by the sword, under the conduct of their Soveraignes, but also by suffering for it when they were not to maintain it by force. A thing nothing strange to a man that shall consider, how desrable life is to him, that is forced from the Lawes of his Countrey. As for the other part of loving our Neighbor as our selves, it is without doubt pregnant with an evident argument of this truth, seeing, in plain reason, the extent of the precept might so argue the intent of it: For it is evident by in∣finite Texts of the Law, that a mans neighbor, in this precept, extends no fur∣ther than to Israelites, whether by birth or by religion, that is to say, those that are ingraffed into the Covenant by being circumcised. For example: Let mee ask, how the Law could forbid the Israelites to seek the good of the Moabites and Ammonites, if it be part of the same Law, to love all men, under the qua∣lity of neighbors, as themselves. Let mee demand of any man, how Mordecai was tied, not to do that honor to Haman, that his Soveraigne commanded to be done. How hee could in conscience disobey his Prince, in a mater of indifferent nature, of it self, had it not been prohibited by the Law of God. Whether a Jew that is commanded by the Law to professe hostility against all Amalekites, could be dispensed with in this obligation, by any act of his Soveraign. Whe∣ther any just reason can be alleged for Mordecai but this. Nay, those who are called strangers in the Law; (That is to say, those that had renounced all Idols, and professed to worship the true God, and thereupon were privileged to dwell in the Land of Promise, out of which the Israelites were sufficiently commanded to root all Idolaters) those strangers I say, by the leter of Moses Law, are not comprehended in the precept of loving our neighbor as our selves. For hee that asked who is the neighbor that the Law speaks of, Lut. X. 27-37. is not convicted by our Lord, by any leter of the Law, but by a Parable, inti∣mating, the example of that which hee did for mankinde to be the reason of that which the Gospel requires. Forsooth, if the love of Christians extend to strangers and enemies, because the good Samaritne, which is our Lord Christ, extended his so farr, then, not because Moses Law had convenanted for it. There∣fore, besides this precept of loving our neighbors as our selves, it was requisite that the Law should, by a particular provision, limit that respect and tenderness wherewith they were required to use those strangers, as converts to the true God, (for so the Syriack translation of the Law calls them alwaies) to wit, in the rank of Widowes and Orphans. If this be true, the precept of not co∣veting, by the immediate intent of Moses Law, stands confined to that sense which the Jewes at this day give it, according to the decisions of their Doctors, that no man, by contrived oppresion or vexation, designe to force his neighbor, that was by the Law inabled to make a divorce, to part with his wife, or any thing else that hee called his own. Which sense our Lord also in the Gospel manifestly favors, Mar. X. 19. where, recounting the precepts that those must keep that will inherit life everlasting, after thou shalt not bear false witnesse, hee inserres, thou shalt not take away, by fraud or oppression, that which is another mans, for the sense of the tenth Commandement, thou shalt not cover that which is thy neighbors; All which extendeth no further, than the over act of seeking what is not a mans own. And, though this be out Lords answer to him that asks what hee is to do to obtaine life everlasting, yet it may well seem, that our Lord intended first to propound unto him the civil Law of Moses, as necessary to salvation, and a step towards it, because the Gospel saith, that our Lord loved him that answered; All these things have I kept from my youth up, as acknowledging that hee said true; For, that hee had kept these precepts in that spiritual sense, and to the intent and purpose which the Gospel requireth, it was not true. And by that which followes, when hee askes what remained to
be done, namely, that hee leave all to follow Christ, hee inferrs in one precept, the whole inward and spiritual obedience of God, which, under the Gospel, is expresly required; To wit, that a man set all the world and himself behinde his back, that hee may follow Christ. Therefore, though they be the obedience which under the Gospel is expresly required, yet, when it is said of the precepts of the Law, which who so shall do shall live by them, Levit. XVIII. 5. Ezek. XX. 11, 21. it is not to be granted, that everlasting life is necessarily signified, but one∣ly a prosperous estate, which vivere in the Ebrew, as well as in the Greek and Latine, elegantly signifies. And yet there is good reason why these are counted by our Lord the chief precepts of the Law, though, as for the immediate in∣tent thereof, they reach no further than the over act which other Lawes deter∣mine as well as they. Because more apt to signifie the general extent of that inward and spiritual obedience, which, being preached and taught by the Fathers, was first to be translated out of their doctrine into the Law of Moses; that the Prophets, (who, being authorized by the Law Deut. XVIII. 18.—. were rai∣sed by God to prepare the way for our Lord Christ and his Gospel) might have as it were a Text in the Law, upon which they might ground their Sermons of spiritual obedience, which the Gospel of Christ, whose coming they preached, should expresly require. And this is that secret of Gods Law and of his Co∣venant, which the Prophet David declares to be revealed to those that keep Covenant with God, and prayes that his eyes may be opened to see it in the Law, the study whereof inlightens a man to discover it, Psal. XXV. 13, 15, XIX. 9, 10. CXIX. 18. if wee adde hereunto the secret of Christ his coming, which this obedience, or, at the least, the tender of a Covenant which should condition for it, presupposeth. As for the division of the Precepts of the Law into Ceremonial, Moral, and Judicial, it will very fitly fall in with the truth which I insist upon, in case those that advance or maintaine that division be content to receive this truth. For it will be very proper to say, that the Ceremonial and Judicial Precepts are those that depend upon the expresse and immediate intent of the Law, as it containeth the condition on their part, upon which God on his part covenants to give them the civil happinesse of the Land of Promise; But the Moral precepts, such as might be counted Civil Lawes, being observed civilly out of respect to that hap∣pinesse, and might be counted spiritual Lawes, as the offices of them might be done out of obedience to God, in respect to his service; Which sense, the light of Nature, stirred up by that measure of revelation which God was pleased to grant the Fathers before, and the Prophets under the Law, having prevailed to bring into force before the Law, was translated out of unwritten custome into the Law of Moses, to give the Prophets a ground of their doctrine of the love of God above all and a mans neighbor as himself, so to make way for that spiritual obedience, which, under the Gospel was expresly to be required. But, if they refuse to admit this division, so as to comply with the sense I pre∣tend, then will it be easie for mee to refuse the division, as not contained in the Scripture, but the conceit of Divines, that neither do understand the true diffe∣rence between the Law and the Gospel, not can be content to be showed it. For, neither doth any Scripture of the Old or New Testament expresse this division to come from the first and immediate, and expresse intent of the Law, nor is there any Tradition in the Church of it, which are the two onely means that hitherto remain in question, whether mater of Faith can be grounded upon both of them, or onely upon the one: And to have recourse to any opinion of the Jewes, since the separation of them from the Church of God, in a point concerning that difference, must needs be an affront to Christianity.
CHAP. XIII. That the Law tendreth no other promise but that of the Land of Canaan. How the Resurrection is signified by the Prophets. Expresse texts of the Apostles. Their arguments, and the arguments of our Lord do suppose the mystical sense of the Scriptures. That this sense is to be made good throughout the Scripture, wheresoever the ground of it takes place; Chri∣stianity well grounded supposing this. What parts of Scripture may be que∣stionable, whether they have a mystical sense or not. The sayings and do∣ings of our Lord have it; As also those passages of the Old Testament, which are fulfilled by the same. The sense of the Fathers. HAving showed, by removing this block, that there is no appearance of inconvenience in admitting this truth, I am now to show, what appea∣rance of necessary consequences from the Scriptures there is to inforce it. Be∣ginning then with the first proposition of the Covenant of the Law in Marah, Exod. XVI. 27, 28. wee reade, that at Marah God appointed them a Statute and a Judgment. The Jews say, that there hee gave them the precepts of the Sabbath, and Honoring parents. Whether so or not, something God propounds them to do; For, to show what hee bids them expect, doing it, hee inferres; And there hee tried him and said; If thou wilt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and do that which is right in his eyes, and wilt receive his precepts, and do all his Statutes, I will bring upon thee none of the griefs that I brought upon Aegypt. For I am the Lord thy God that heal thee. It will be hard to say, how the Law could be established upon any other condition than first it was propounded on, and here is nothing but an earthly promise. Come wee to the giving and receiving of the Law, Exod. XIX. 5, 6. And now, if you will hear my voice and keep my Covenant, yee shall be to mee, whose all the earth is, a Jewell above all Nati∣ons of the earth, a kingdome of Priests, an holy people. All Nations being at this time polluted by offering sacrifices to devils, and enemies to God, the Israelites, redeemed by God out of Aegypt to be free under his government, and to offer sacrifices to him alone, might well be a kingdome of Priests, a holy people, Gods Jewel above all Nations of the earth, without any Covenant for the happiness of the world to come. After the giving of the Decalogue, and other Precepts, by the mediation of Moses, Exod. XXIII. 25—. And you shall serve the Lord your God, and hee shall blesse thy bread and waters: And I will take sickness from a∣mid thee: There shall no woman miscarry, or be barren in thy Land. I will make full the number of thy dayes. I will send my terror before thee, and the rest that followes there to assure them, how and by what means hee will bring them in∣to the Land of Promise. Hitherto, in treating, in contracting this Covenant, no mention of the world to come; What shall wee finde at renewing it? Deut. XXIX. 1. These are the words (that is, the termes) of the Contract which Moses struck with the Israelites in the plain of Moab, besides that in Horeb. Then, re∣peating the summe of what they had seen since their coming out of Aegypt, as to move them to imbrace Gods Covenant; Wherefore, saith hee, yee shall observe the termes of this Covenant, and do them, that yee may prosper in whatsoever you do. And so, contesting the whole Assembly, that they and their posterity must, by transgressing, come under the curse which it is inacted with, thus expresses the summe of it; That hee may settle thee to himself, for a people, and hee be thy God, as hee hath said to thee, and as hee hath sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thy Fathers: To whom hee had expresly sworn to give the Land of Promise, and therefore so determined the expresse sense and intent of being their God. For, to expound what it means, for them to have God for their God, and hee them for his people, it followes, that if any of them return from the Lord to the Gods of the Aegyptians, and other Nations, they shall incurre the curse which the Covenant is inacted with, that the Land, being turned into salt and brimstone, shall not be to be sown, nor spring, nor grasse grow, but be like
Sodome, and Gomorra, and Seboim, which the Lord overthrew in his wrath Hereupon hee begins the XXX Chapter thus; And it shall come to passe, that, when all these things are lefallen te, and thou shalt call them to minde, among all Nations to which God shall have driven thee, and return to the Lord thy God; And the rest, whereby God promises, that hee will be intreated of his people, and turn the said curses from them upon their enemies. Remitting plainly, him that will understand what those are, to that which went afore, from cap. XXVI. 16—. XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX. which hee that will peruse, may trust his own sen∣ses, whether they speak of life everlasting, or of the Land of Promise. And in∣deed, the whole book of Deuteronomy containing nothing else, but the repeti∣tion, and continuation of what was most necessary to introduce and perswde this renewing of the Covenant, whether wee judge of the premises by the con∣clusion, or of the conclusion by the premises, wee shall inde no more thn what I have said. Now the whole XXV of Leviticus, being nothing else, but an exhortation and warning to keep the Law, propounded before the camp re∣moved from Mount Sinai, as you have it XXVI. 46; Had any such thing as eter∣nal life been covenanted for, of necessity the arguments there used must have been drawn from thence. But you shall finde no more than concernes the Land of Promise. The effect of this reason is not to argue a negative from Scri∣pture; That is to say, this is not recorded in the Scripture, not in this or that part of the Scripture, therefore not true; But to argue from the common reason of all men, and the visible nature of the businesse then in hand, that, what was not then expressed for a condition of that Covenant which is related to have been struck between God and the Israelites, cannot be presumed to have been an expresse condition of it. For, by interpretation, from, not onely the con∣versation of the Fathers, but the doctrine of the Prophets, and the preaching of the Gospel, I grant that it is the principal intent which the Law intimateth, though not expresseth. One particular precept of the Law I must not omit. It is that of Lev. V. 1-5. which appointeth the same sacrifice to be offered for legal uncleannesse as for perjury. Now, it is to be considered, that legal uncleannesse is not a thing for∣bidden by the Law, but is contracted by observing the Law, as Tobits unclean∣nesse, which made him lye out of the house, and occasioned his blindenesse by burying the dead, Tobit III. 11. being indeed an outward accident, coming to passe without any inclination of mans will to it, and therefore not imputable. If therefore the same means of expiating that which is not forbidden by the Law, expiate such a sin as perjury, let any man understand how by this Law ex∣piation is made for the guilt of perjury, whereby every Christian believes hee becomes lyable to everlasting death, when by the same, expiation is made, not for sinne, but for a legal incapacity of conversing with Gods people, or coming to the Tabernacle. Another is that of Prayer negatively: For, who will believe, that the spiritual reward of everlasting life is promised by the Covenant of the Law, which does not so much as command the spiritual service of Prayer, as the Jewes themselves observe, (Maimoni in the beginning of the Titles of Prayer and Blessings) that Prayer is commanded onely by the precept of the Law, Deut. VI. 13. X. 20. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him. The Lord thy God shalt thou fear, and him serve. And those Blessings in which so much of their Religion consists, onely by Deut. VIII. 10. And when thou hast eaten and art full, then shalt thou blesse the Lord thy God for the good Land which hee hath gi∣ven thee. Out of these texts their Elders, they say, have taken occasion to pre∣scribe the kindes, and measure, and circumstances of their Prayers and Blessings. And truly, when there is so much in the Law, of their Festivals, and Sabbaths, and Sacrifices, and so little of the spiritual duties which God is to be served with, and was served with even under the Law; It is impossible to give a reason of it, unlesse wee say, that, as the Gospel was yet to be a secret to the spiritual service of God, which under it was to be required, was not, under the Law, to be covenanted for, that is expressed. And here I am not to forget the Sect of Sadducees, which, though it denyed
the reward after death, yet notwithstanding was not, onely tolerated among the Jewes, but also in such Power, that I have showed in another place, that, du∣ring the time mentioned by the Acts of the Apostles, it had authority in all publick maters of the Nation under the Romanes. For, if they that denied the Resurrection, expresly renounced the Law, by renouncing the expresse condi∣tion of it, it will be impossible to say, how they that renounced the Law, should manage that Power of governing their own people by the Law, which was re∣served to the Nation by the Romanes. Indeed, when Idolatry prevailed, the precepts which punished that sinne by death, of necessity were supereded for the time. But, when after the Captivity, some denied the life to come, others expected it from the literal and carnal observation of the Law, both maintain∣ing themselves under the Law and by it, it might be signified by the Law, as our Savior proves the Resurrection, Mat. XXII. 23. Mar. XII. 18. Luc. XX. 27. but, had it been covenanted for, impudence would not have had wherewith to maintaine the contrary, acknowledging the Law. And therefore I agree, that, when our Lord sayes; Search the Scriptures, for in them yee think yee have e∣ternal life; John V. 39. This think is a term of abatement: Signifying, that they expected salvation by the Law, which indeed is not to be had but by his Gospel, which the Law intimateth and involveth. Yee think yee have it so, as indeed yee have it not. In the next place, consider wee a while the Writings of the Prophets, that is, all that followes the Law in the Old Testament, and wee shall finde there, such intimations of the world to come, such instruction to that conversation by which it is attained, as may show, that it was not covenanted for, though at∣tainable by Gods dispensation of that time. That which wee reade in the Pro∣pher Esay XXVI. 19. Thy dead shall live, my carkasses shall arise, awake and sing yee that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth the Gyants; is the very picture of the Resurrection which Chri∣stians believe. But what it signifies there, let the consequence of the Scripture witnesse, which showes it (by the beginning of the Chapter) to be part of a Song which should be sung in the Land of Judab at that day: That is, at such time as God, having afflicted his people, according to the Prophesies going a∣fore, should restore them again, as hee prophesies there and afterwards. The Vision of dry bones which the Prophet Ezekiel XXXIII. saw, upon the breathing of God, clothed with flesh and skin, to rise againe, manifestly fore∣tells the return of the Jewes from Captivity, to be a Nation againe; But o, that it cannot be denied, that S. Hilary had reason to call him several times the Prophet of the Resurrection for it. Nor must wee make any other account of Daniel, who, having prophesied of the miseries that were to befall the Jewes, especially under Antiochus Epiphanes, and their deliverances in the end, sets forth the glory and ignominy of those that had stuck to their Law till death, or fallen from it, after they had their freedom under the Maccabees, by the figure of rising from the dead, XII. 1, 2. For, having first said, at that time thy people shall escape, whosoever is written in the book; (Which time is that persecution un∣der Epiphanes) when hee adds incontinently; And many of those that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, some to ever∣lasting reproach and shame. And teachers shall sbine as the shine of the sky, and those that make many righteous, as the starres for ever and ever; I say this following immediately, it cannot stand with common sense, that it should not concerne the same times and persons: Though wee allow it a competent argument, that the Prophet, which sets forth the deliverance of that people in such termes, understood the Resurrection of the dead well enough, and intend∣ed, by using the same, to make way for Christianity that professes it. But the words of S. Job XIX. 25. are more questionable. I know, saith hee, that my Redeemer liveth, and shall stand upon the earth at last: And after they have pierced this my skin, I shall see God out of my flesh. But if wee compare this with what hath been hitherto produced out of the Prophets, it will not seem probable, that the Resurrection, which they so darkly intimated, should be
so plainly preached, either before the Law, when Job lived, or under the Law, when the book of Job is said to have been penned. And truly, hee that per∣swaded himself that God would deliver him out of his present affliction, might well say; I know that my Redeemer liveth: And hee that saith XLII. 5. By the hearing of the eare, I had heard of thee, but now doth mine eye see thee; might say to the same purpose, that hee should see God standing at length upon the earth, after that his skin had been pierced with sores. Consider now those passages of the Prophets, whereby they declare, how they are moved to question Gods providence, by seeing the righteous afflicted and the wicked to flourish in this world, Psal. LXXIII. 2-20. Jer. XII. 1, 2. Mal. III. 13-18. besides all the discourses of this point, in Job, Ecclesiastes, and elsewhere. It is plaine, every Christian can answer this out of the principles of his profession, by saying; That God reserves his full account to the day of judgment, in the mean time maintaining sufficient evidence of his providence, by the account which hee takes of some sinnes in this world. And, had this been a part of the old Covenant, it had been no lesse ready for every one to answer with. What saith David? When I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I the end of those men: Forsooth, thou settest them in slippery places, and castest them down to ruine. How came they to desolation in a moment? they came to an end by terrors. As when a man awakes out of a dreame, Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt scorn the image of them. Is there any thing in all this to determine, whether in this world or in the world to come? Though the consequence be good, not in this world, therefore in the world to come. What saith Jeremy? And thou, O Lord, knowest mee, and triest my heart before thee. Pluck them out as sheep to be slain, and consecrate them to the day of slaughter. What saith Malachi? They shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, when I store up my Jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spareth his son that serveth him. And yee shall again distinguish between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not. All this is true to those that are in Covenant with God, as the temporal pro∣mises are true, even in this life, and therefore expresses not the world to come, whatsoever may be inferred by the foresaid consequence. And truly Ecclesiastes is so farre from expressing the answer that Christianity maketh to this objection, as to give some men occasion to imagine, that it alloweth the world to come no more, than the lives of worldly men do own it. And all the obscurity of the book of Job will never be resolved, without acknowledging, that this truth was then a secret, which the Prophets knew, but preached it so sparingly, (and with such good husbandry, which the Greek Fathers use to call ) as the hope of proficience by their Doctrine, in their hearers did require. The same ac∣count is to be had of the Prophet Habakkuk II. 3-14. where hee proposeth the difference between the Chaldeans and Israelites in these termes; Behold, the soul that is exalted is not right in him: But the just shall live by faith: And concludes; See, is not this of the Lord of Hosts? And the people shall labor for fire, and the Nations be weary for nothing. For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the seas. Which, all the Prophets will witnesse to signifie the restoring of the people of God, to the destruction of Idolatry, and their enimies I∣dolaters. No where is this truth more observable than in the Psalmes XVI. 11. Thou shalt make known to mee the way of life: Fulnesse of joyes is before thee, and pleasures at thy right hand for ever more. Is not this true in the sense of Ezekiah, Esa. XXXVII. 10, 21? First hee saith; I shall see the Lord no more in the land of the living: But upon the tender of the Pro∣phet, hee askes, What is the signe that I shall go up into the house of the Lord? Where, the presence or right hand of God, and the pleasure of it, is the joy that his people have to worship him before the Ark of his presence. Psal. XVII. 15. As for mee, I will behold thy presence in righteousnesse, when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likenesse. The same thing hee meanes, and hee awakes, when hee comes out of trouble to serve God. Though I am
to grant, that I cannot think of any text in all the book of Psalms, wherein the world to come is more literally exressed, thn in these words. Psalm CXXVI, 5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Hee that now goeth on his way weeping, shall doub lesse come again in joy, and bring in his sheaves. Whether at the returne from Captivity, or in heaven, let the beginning of the Psalme speak; When the Lord turned again the Captivity of his people, thn were wee like men that dreame. But there would be no end, if I should go about to produce all those passages of the Psalmes, wherein the same is to be observed. Let us come now to the New Testament, and produce first the sayings of the Apostles, wherein my position is expresly affirmed, especially in the Apostle to the Hebrewes VII. 19. For the Law persited nothing, but the bringing in of à bet∣ter hope, by which wee draw nigh unto God. What is this better hope, but that of the world to come, so much better than the Land of Promise? and what brin∣geth it in but the Gospel of Christ, by whom alone sinners have accesse to God? X. 19—. Againe, VIII. 6. But now hee hath obtained a more excellent ministe∣ry, by how much hee is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is inacted upon better promises. IX. 15. And therefore is ee the Mediator of a New Covenant, that, dath interceding for the redemption of those sins that were under the first Co∣venant, those that are called may receive the promise of eternal life. This more excellent Ministery, is the Priesthood of Chrit after the order of Melchisedeck. To make way for which, the whole Epistle ciputs, that the Levitical Priest∣hood is removed, as the interest of Christianity against the Law of Moses, and the qion on foot required. Now Melchisedek was  Priest, not by the law of a carnal precept, but by the power of indissoluble life; saith hee again, Ebr. VII. 19. What thi carnal precept is, you have IX. 9-14. When hee saith, that at present; to wit, under the Law; gifts and sacrifices are offered, which cannot persit him that serveth, as to the conscience, consisting onely in meats and drinks, and several washings, and carnal justifications, imposed till the time of Reforma When Christ, coming as a High Priest of good things to come, and having fo sage into heaven, cleanses the conscience from dead works to serve the living d. So that, according to the Apostle, the Sacrifices of the Law effecting only a carnal right to the Congregation of Gods people, the Sacrifice of Christ a right to heaven, this right is tendred by the Gospel, the other by the Law. And thus S. Paul, 2 Tim. I. 9, 10. calleth the Gospel, the Grace that was given us in Christ Jesus before the ages of the world, but is manifested now by the appearance of our Lord Christ Jesus, who hath destroyed death, but declared life and incorruption by the Gospel. For, though the life to come was known and declared by the Pro∣phets under the Law, yet had they no expresse commission to ingage God for it, till Christ rendred it, as that which the Gospel covenants for on Gods part. But, I must not forget the occasion of that memorable passage, quoted from Ebr. IX. 9. from the discourse that went afore, whereby the Apostle declares the whole course and constitution of the service of the Temple to be nothing else, but a Parable of the present time, to wit of Christianity; As also the legal Taber∣nacle was nothing else but a Copy of the Heavenly, by the pattern whereof hee observes that Moses was commanded to build it, VIII. 5, 6. calling it therefore the Worldly Sanctuary IX. 1. because it was a Copy, as it were, of this whole world, in the several parts of it, as Philo and Josephus have discoursed at large. The most Holy place, into which the High Priest entred once a year, by the A∣postles interpretation, answereth to the highest heavens, whereunto our Lord Christ is ascended, whom therefore hee calleth the minister of the true Taber∣nacle, which God and not man pitched, VIII. 7, And therefore the outward Sanctuary, into which the Priests went once a day, was intended to signifie the Starry heavens, and the Court of the Tabernacle the World here below, as Philo and Josephus declare, justifying the reason why the Apostle calls it a Worldly Tabernacle. This interpretation of the Ceremonial Law made by the Apostle in this place, by that which it expresly affirmes concerning the twofold sense of that part of the Old Testament, induces a consequence to the twofold sense of all
the rest; Inferring, that, if the mystical and allegorical sense of the Old Testa∣ment determine in the promises of the world to come, then the literal and hi∣storical sense of the same determines in the promises of this life; the allegory, that is to say, the reason of interpreting the Old Testament to that purpose, consisting in nothing else, but the correspondence between them. I am not ignorant, that some Divines have done their best to create one Controversie more to divide the Church, by maintaining, that there is but one sense of the Scriptures, which the leter intends; The things figured under the Old Testament, and the figures of them there set down, making but one and the same sense, as a man and his picture are called the same man, because without the things sig∣nified, the signes are nothing, at least, in the nature of signes. For my part, I finde it a thing as easie, as for every fool to tye knots which a wise man cannot loose, to ingage in disputes, in which men cannot yield to the truth, while that ingagement continues. But I finde no pretense, why that sense of the Scri∣ptures which they make one, consisting of the figure and the thing figured, should not be counted two, one immediately, the other principally intended. Because the Gospel was a secret under the Law, as S. Paul so many times layes down; So that, hee which knew the Law, many times understood not the ut∣most intent of it under the Gospel. Seeing then that this way of allegorizing the Old Testament is used by our Lord and his Apostles, not onely in the Cere∣monial Law, but in all that properly belongeth to the Old Testament; I do con∣clude, not that the Scriptures have two senses, but, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament have an obvious sense, (that was understood, or might be under∣stood by Jewes) and a retired sense, which could not be understood, but by those under the Old Testament, that belonged to the New, as S. Austine many times distinguishes. And, by thus limiting my position, I avoid a great inconveni∣ence, which Origen, and those that go the same way with him, though to seve∣ral purposes, have incurred. Hee, in his Exposition upon S. John, notes it for the fashion of the Valentinians and other Gnosticks, to draw their strange fan∣tasies from some mystical sense, which they fasten upon the Scriptures, though they be not able to prosecute and make good the same sense, throughout the text and thred of that Scripture which they allege for it, as wee understand by Irenaeus, in the later end of the first Chapter of his first book. To avoid this inconvenience, both Origen, and many after him, have sought for a mystical sense of the Scripture many times where it is not to be found, that is to say, where the reason and ground of the difference between the Leter and the Spi∣rit reackes not. For, the ground thereof is the purpose of sending our Lord Christ in due time, and, in the meane time the Prophets, to prepare the way for the Covenant of the Gospel which hee came to proclaime. But first the Chief of them, Moses, was to treat and strike a Covenant between God and his peo∣ple, whereby they should hold their freedome in the Land of Promise, upon condition of serving him, and governing their own civil conversation by such Lawes as hee should give. It will therefore be necessary to grant, that those Scriptures which proceed not upon supposition of such a purpose, but of the accomplishment of it, have but one sense; To wit, that which was figured by the Old Testament. But, this being excepted, the rest of the Scriptures, which suppose this purpose not yet declared, must, by the same necessity, have this twofold sense, according as the subject of several parts of it shall be capa∣ble of, or require both. Here, those that know what an allegory is, must distinguish the vulgar use of it, even in the Scriptures themselves, from that which standeth upon this ground, which is particular to the Scriptures; Wherein even men of learning sometimes lay stumbling blocks before themselves. For, as an allegory is nothing but an ornament of Language, it is plain, that even the literal sense of the prophesies of the Old Testament, and other parts both of the Old and New, is set forth by allegories; The sense whereof, hee that should take to be the allegorical sense of the Scriptures, would deceive himself too much. For, the allegorical sense which wee speak of here, is seen as well in things done, as said in the Old Te∣stament,
as not contained in the sayings there recorded immediately, but by the meanes of things done under the Old Testament, wherein, that which is written is true indeed; But so, that the things which come to passe in the out∣ward and temporal estate of Gods people are intended to figure, that which comes to passe in their spiritual estate under the Gospel, or in their everlasting estate of the world to come. The ground whereof being the purpose of ma∣king way for the coming of Christ, and the Gospel which hee was to preach, as all Christians against the Jews are bound to maintain; The New Testament, be∣ing figured by the Old, must needs be the intent and meaning of all that which figured it. This wee shall finde by the writings of the Apostles, and the ar∣guments, which, upon supposition of this truth, they draw against those, who, having received Christianiy, and upon that account admitting it for a principle, did neverthelesse, by acknowledging the obligation of the Law, seek thir sal∣vation by it. Thus S. Paul, 1 Cor. XV. 45. And so is it written, the first Adam was made a living soul; The last Adam a quickning spirit. Meaning, that his being made a quickning spirit, is in correspondence to the Scripture that saith; Adam became a living soul; Gen. II. 7. whereby hee establisheth this way of allegory which wee treat, upon correspondence between corporal and spiritual, from the beginning of the Bible. For, upon this ground, that which wee reade in Genesis, of the dominion of Adam upon living creatures, is by the Apostle transferred to the subjection of all things to Christ, being exalted to the right hand of God, Heb. II. 6. 1 Cor. XV. 27. Eph. I. 22. Neither doth the Apostles arguing the duties of Wives and Husbands, upon that which Christ performed to his Church Eph. II. 31, 32. stand upon any other ground but this. So when S. Peter argues, that Christians are saved by Baptism, as Noe by the floud 1 Pet. III, 20, 21. hee appropriates eternal salvation to the New Testament, by finding it figured in the temporal deliverances of the Fathers. Whose Faith, manifestly tending to the Land of Promise, the Apostle by allegory shewes the secret of Christianity, tending to eternal life, in it Heb. XI. 13-16. For Abraham and his Successors died, saith hee, without receiving the promises, but seeing and salu∣ting them afarre off, and confessing themselves strangers and pilgrims in the land whereof they had received the promise. Which they that professe, declare they have a Countrey, which they seek. For, if they had thought of that which they had for∣sook, they had time enough to return. But now they desire a better, that is, an hea∣venly; Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: For prepared them a City. Can this be understood, without the correspondence between their inheritance of this world, and that which was figured by it, of the world to come? So, when S. Paul expounds those things which befell the children of A∣braham and Isaac, by the allegory of the Jewes and Christians, Gal. IV. 22—Rom. IX. 7-10. plainly hee maketh the promise of the life to come proper to the New Testament, upon such termes as I have said. And if this be the rea∣son, why and how those things that went before the Law shadowed and were to shadow the Gospel, it could not but hold in the Covenant of the Law, and the precepts of it. This appears by the Apostles exhorting the converted Jewes to stick close to the Gospel, from the Psal. XCV. 7—Heb. III. 12—where, if the Israelites, who, having seen Gods works forty yeares in the Wil∣dernesse, tempting and provoking him entred not into his rest, but left their carkasses in the Wildernesse; Hee inferres thereupon, Heb. IV. 1-11. that they are to beware, least, having received a promise of entring into Gods rest, they al∣so should come short by the example of the same disobedience. Which all suppo∣ses this correspondence, for the ground of such consequences from the Old Te∣stament. And truly the same is the argument by which S. Paul recalls the Corinthians, (which Church evidently consisted as well of Jewes as Gentiles) srom the misprision of Idolatry which they incurred, by eating things sacrficed to Idols, 1 Gor. X. 1-6-11. where, having related what befell the people in the Wildernesse, hee concludes; These things hapned to them in a figure, and are written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come. That is to say, they are written to deterre Christians from the like sinnes, by the fear
of punishment correspondent to that which they incurred. And therefore threat∣ning Christians with the losse of eternal life, by the example of Jewes coming short of the rest of the Land of Promise, hee supposes the correspondence which I argue. Which is yet plainer in the words of the Apostle, Hb. X. 28, 29. Hee that despised the Law of Moses under two or three witnesses, died without mercy. How much worse punishment, do you think, shall hee be thought worthy of, that treads under foot the Son of God— For it is manifest, that his meaning, or, the answer of his question is a question, how much eternal death is worse than that death which they incurred. Onely, that they incurred it de facto, which, under the Gospel hee saith not shall come to passe, but reserveth hope of mer∣cy. In fine, whosoever will go about to deny the mystical sense of the Old Testament, must deny all the arguments that the Apostles make against them, who, supposing Christianity, thought the Law necessary to salvation neverthe∣lesse, as impertinent to the purpose to which they are used: All of them sup∣posing this sense. And therefore I conceive it is necessary to yield Origen this, and whosoever imployes Origens reason, that the mystical sense of the Old Testament is to be made good throughout, so farre as it concernes the Old Te∣stament; (because I have cautioned afore, that the New Testament is begun to be discovered under the Old) and, according as the nature and subject of the several parts thereof will either require or indure: Which is thus to be under∣stood according to the grounds already laid. If the Old Testament containe one continued Prophesie of our Lord Christ, and of the New Covenant which hee preached, and the People of God under it a figure of the Church, then must the Rulers of Gods People, (the Patriarchs before the Law, under the Law, the Kings, the Priests, and Prophets) be first fi∣gures of Christ, whom all Christians suppose anointed King, Priest, and Prophet; Then must the Civil Government of Gods People by them figure the spiritual conduct of the Church. And, in as much as particular Christians, who are such not onely to the Church but to God, by participating of Christs anointing are conformable to his example, that which befell them outwardly in the leter un∣der the Law, befalls all Christians inwardly in the spirit. This is no more than S. Austine proposes us, as the Rule for expounding the Psalms, and must take place all over the Old Testament, where the reason is the same. This for the Histories and Prophesies of the Old Testament. As for the Precepts of the Law, the Ceremonial do openly professe an intent of signifying and fore-telling the mystery of Christ and Christianity; As for the Judicial, they also may be said to be a figure of those precepts of inward and spiritual obedience, which the Go∣spel declares, as civil righteousnesse is a rude shadow of inward and spiritual righteousnesse; And as, in Aristotle, a rude draught is said to be done  in a figure: When the outmost lines of a picture give in grosse the shape of the person represented, before it be filled up within to make the representation complete. But it is not to be denied, that there is a difference between these two reasons and wayes of figuring, both derived from the same ground of fore∣telling and making way for Christ and the Church. As for the instructions, exhortations, praises of God, prayers, and the rest of that nature, which, in con∣sequence to the Covenant of the Law, and the intimation of the Gospel with it was to contain, are found in it, or in the Prophets; it were an impertinence to seek two senses in any part of it; all belonging to the Gospel, though accom∣modated to the dispensation of the Law, in that the duties of Christians were to be more sparingly declared even by the Prophets, than under the New Te∣stament, as I shall have time to show. This rason justifies that course of interpreting the Prophets which Grotius holds in his Annotations, assigning the fulfilling of all their Prophesies to something that fell out to the ancient people of God, afterwards, by corre∣spondence, mystically to be fulfilled again in our Lord Christ and in his Church; And thereupon, brings upon this opinion the displeasure that hee undergoes, for expounding Esay LIII first of the Prophet Jeremy, and then mystically of our Lord Christ and his sufferings, in correspondence to what befell that Prophet.
But those who are displeased at him for it, should considar what hee hath said generally to the point upon Mat. I. 22, 23. where it appears, that the words of the Prophet Esa. VII. 14. were first fulfilled in a childe born Esay of the Pro∣phetesse his wife, if wee will allow any consequence of sense in the text. For this reason is the ground, upon which, the like meaning of the rest will necessa∣rily be found requisite. And truly, if Origen was justly rejected by the ancient Church, for not making good the literal and historical sense of that which be∣fell Adam and Eve in Paradise, hee that will draw this out into consequence, must necessarily yield, those Prophesies which belong to our Lord and the New Testament to have been literally fulfilled in the temporal state of the Jewes afore; Otherwise, the history is no lesse destroyed in Prophesies, than in the re∣lation of Paradise. And if all Prophets were figures of Christ, it is no strange thing, that the Prophet Jeremies sufferings, being the greatest that wee finde re∣corded, and from his owne people, should figure our Lords. This for Christ. Now, Prophesies either promising good or threatning punishment, either to Gods people, or their neighbor Nations, the promises of temporal good to Gods people, are, if the premises be true, promises of temporal good to the Church: Threatnings of temporal punishment, are predictions, partly of the rejection of Gods ancient people, partly of punishment upon the New, no continuing in the Covenant, as I showed out of Psal. XCV. 7—. Ebr. III. 7—. But those promises trauslated to spiritual good concerne first, certain remaines of Israel according to the flesh, intended by God to be added to the Church; Then the coming of the Gentiles to the communion of the same: The commi∣nations, as spiritual, signifying the utter destruction of both sorts of enemies, as well Jewes as Gentiles, or whatsoever enemies of Gods Church, in the world to come. Neither is there just cause to think, that thereby advantage is given to the Jewes against Christianity, by granting, that such passages, out of which the New Testament drawes the birth and sufferings of our Lord, are reasonably to be understood of his predecessors in Gods ancient people. For it is plaine, that, it despite of the Jewes, the works done by our Lord, and his Prophesies, concerning his Dying and Rising again, and the destruction of the Jewes, and the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, seconded by his Apostles, and that which they did to winn credit, that they were the witnesses of the same, are the evidence upon which the Gospel obliges. The Scriptures of the Old Testa∣ment, (which were no evidence to the Gentiles, as much and more concerned in the Gospel than the Jewes) were evidence, and so to be, not of themselves, for what need Christ then have done those works? But upon supposition that God intended not to rest in giving the Law, but to make it the thred to intro∣duce the Gospel by; Which supposition, as it is powerfully inforced by the nature of the Law, and the difference between the inward and the outward obedience of God, as it hath been hitherto declared and maintained; So is it also, first in∣troduced, by those works which our Lord declareth to be done for evidence thereof, then made good, by the perpetual correspondence between the Old and New Testament, which any considerable exception interrupts. And there rea∣sons so much the more effectual, because this difference of literal and mystical sense was then, and is at this day acknowledged by the Jewes themselves, a∣gainst whom our Lord and his Apostles imploy it, in a considerable number of Scriptures, which they themselves interpret of the Messias, though they are not able to make good the consequence of the same sense throughout, because they acknowledge not the reason of it, which concludes the Lord Jesus to be the Messias whom they expect. If these things be true, neither Origen nor any man else is to be indured, when they argue, that a mystical sense of the Scri∣pture is to be inquired and allowed, even where this ground takes no place; For vindicating the honor of God, and that it may appeare worthy of his wisedom, to declare that which wee admit, to be the utmost intent of the Scriptures. For, if it be for the honor of God to have brought Christianity into the world, for the salvation of mankinde, and to have declared himself by the Scriptures for that purpose, then whatsoever tends to declare this, must be concluded
worthy of God and his wisedom, whatsoever referres not to it, cannot be pre∣sumed agreeable to his wisdom, how much soever it flatter mans eare or fantasie, with quaintnesse of conceit or language. Now, as I maintain this difference between the literal and mystical sense of the Old Testament to be necessary for the maintenance of Christianity, as well as for understanding the Scriptures; So are there some particular questions ari∣sing upon occasion of it, which I can well be content to leave to further dispute. As for example; There is an opinion published which saith; That the abomi∣nation of desolation, which, our Lord saith, was spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, Dan. IX. 24—. Mat. XXIV. 15. Mar. XIII. 14. was fulfilled in the havock made by Antiochus Epiphanes: Which is also plainly called the abominatio of desolation by the same Prophet, Da. XI. 31. XII. 10. Whether this opinion can be made good according to historical truth or not, this is not the place to dispute. Whether or no the difference be∣tween the literal and mystical sense of the Scriptures will indure, that the same Prophesie be fulfilled twice in the literal sense, concerning the temporal state of the Jewes, once under Antiochus Epiphanes, and once under Titus, that is it which I am here content to referre to further debate. One thing I affirme; that, notwithstanding this difference, it is no inconvenience to say, that some Prophesies are fulfilled but once: Namely, that of Jacob Gen. XLIX. 8-12. that of Daniel IX. 24. that of Malacbi III. 1. IV. 5, 6. Because the coming of Christ boundeth the times of the literal and mystical sense; And therefore there is reason why it should be marked out by Prophesies of the Old Testament referring to nothing else. Againe, I am content to leave to dispute, whether the many Prophesies of the Old Testament, which are either manifestly alleged or covertly intimated by the Revelation of S. John, must therefore be said to be twice fulfilled, once in the sense of their first Authors under the Law, and again under the Gospel in S. Johns sense to the Church; Or, that this second comple∣ment of them was not intended by the Spirit of God in the Old Prophets, but, that it pleased God to signifie to S. John things to befall the Church, by Prophe∣tical Visions, like those which hee had read in the ancient Prophets, whereby God signified to them things to befall his ancient people: For, of a truth, it is the outward rather than the spiritual state of the Church, which is signified to S. John under these images. A third particular must be the first Chapter of Genesis: For, in that which followes, of Paradise, and what fell out to our first Parents there, I will make no question that hoth senses are to be admitted, the Church having condemned Origen, for taking away the historical sense of that portion of Scripture. But whether the creation of this sensible world is to be taken for a figure, of the renewing of mankinde into a spiritual world, by the Gospel of Christ, accord∣ing to that ground of the difference, between the literal and mystical sense of the Scripture, which hitherto I maintaine; This, I conceive, I may, without pre∣judice, leave to further debate. But leaving these things to dispute, I must in∣sist, that those things which the Evangelists affirm to have been fulfilled by such things as our Lord said or did, or onely befell him in the flesh, have a further meaning, according to which they are mystically accomplished in the spiritual estate of his Christian people. The chiefe ground hereof I confesse is that of S. Matthew VIII. 17. where, having related divers of our Lords miracles, hee addeth; that they were done, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Esay LIII. 4. Hee took our infirmities and are away our sicknesses; To∣gether with the words of our Lord, Luke V. 17-21. where hee telleth them of Nazareth, This day are the words of the Prophet Esay (LXI. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon mee, because hee hath anointed mee to preach the Gospel to the poor—) fulfilled in your hearing; And his answer to John Baptist grounded upon the same passage, Mat. XI. 4, 5, 6. Go and tell John what yee have heard and seen: The blinde receive sight, the lame walk, the lpers are cleansed, the deaf heare, the dead are raised, and the poor have the Gospel preached them. For, as the Evangelist and our Lord both affirm, that these things were prophesied concerning the cures
which our Lord did upon their bodies, so can it not be doubted, that the cure of our soules is spiritually signified by the same, whether you consider the promises, whereby the ground of this correspondence is settled, or the expresse words of the Apostle 1 Pet. II. 24. where, that which S. Matthew expoundeth of the cures which our Lord did upon their bodies, is referred to the taking away of snne by the sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse. Which if it cannot be denied, I shall make no difficulty to inferre, that the words of the Prophet Esay VII. 14. Be∣hold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and yee shall call his name Emmanuel; (which the Evangelists referreth to our Lord, Mat. I. 22. and, by the premises, were fulfilled when they were first said, as in the figure) are still accomplished in the children, which by Gods grace are still orn of the holy faith of his Church by grace. Nor, that the words of the Prophet Osee XI. 1. Out of Egypt have I called my Son, (which, being manifestly said of the Israelites coming out of Egypt, the same Evangelist II. 15. affirmeth to be fulfilled in our Lords co∣ming back out of Egypt) are still accomplished in those which out of the dark∣nesse of this world are brought to Gods Church, which is spiritually the Land of Promise. Nor, that the words of the Prophet Jeremy XXXI. 15. (which the same Evangelist expoundeth of the Innocents which were slaine by Herod at Bethlehem, but, the correspondence hitherto established requireth us to under∣stand of the captive Jewes at Ramah in that Prophets time) are still fulfilled in all that suffer persecution and death for Christianity. Nor, lasly, that the words of the Psalmes XXII. 8, 18. Hee trusted in God that hee would deliver him; let him save him seeing hee loveth him; They pierced my hands and my feet; And, They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture; XLI. 9. Hee which did eat of my bread, hath lift up the heel against mee. XLIX. 9, 21. The zeale of thine house hath eaten mee up; And, They gave mee gall to eat, and in my thirst they gave mee vineger to drink. VIII. 2. Out of the mouth of babes and suck∣lings thou hast perfected praise; CIX. 8. His Office let another take; XVI. 10. Thou shalt not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thine holy One to see corruption; (which the New Testament will have to be fulfilled in those things that befell our Lord Christ, in the flesh, in his crucifying, Ma. XXVIII. 18, 35, 43. Mark XV. 22, 23, 24. John XIX. 17, 29. in Judas betraying him, John XIII. 18. in his purging the Temple, John II. 17. in the children that praised him, Mat. XXI. 16. in Matthias chosen in Judas stead, Acts I. 20. in the resurrection of Christ, Acts II. 31. XIII. 35. But the correspondence premised and the reason of it, require us first to understand of those things which befell David and Gods ancient people) are still spiritually verified and accomplished, in those things which be∣fall the children of God and his Church under the state of Grace. Neither shall I make any question that, the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel which wee have settled being supposed, it will not follow neverthelesse, that all the Old Testament ought, by virtue thereof, to be so fulfilled in the life of our Lord Christ; But, that the Spirit of God in the Evangelists showeth, that the Spirit in the Prophets so directed their words, that they were intended to be farre more properly fulfilled in our Lord Christ, than in those whom they were spoke of in the literal sense. For wee do not finde that the Text (that is to say, that which went before and that which followes after those words which the Gospels say were fulfilled in our Lord Christ) is answered by any thing which wee reade to have befallen him in the flesh. And the general correspon∣dence between Israel according to the flesh in the Old Testament, and Israel according to the Spirit in the New, being sufficient to justifie our Lord to be the Christ whom they expected, and, by consequence, that twofold sense of the Old Testament which here wee maintaine; there is no cause why they should be said to be impertinently alleged, though by ordinary reason supposing this corre∣spondence, that could not be proved from those Texts, which the Gospels say that they signifie. Indeed, such of them as are used by our Lord and his Apo∣stles to prove him to be the Christ, must be said, and well may be maintaind, to do it, by the perpectual correspondence of Gods earthly promises (made good to his carnal people, through the meanes of their Kings, Priests, and Prophets)
with the promises of the world to come, made good by the means of our Lord Christ to the Church. Ther is yet another kinde of our Lord Christs sayings, and of things that befell him in the flesh, in which there appears at the first view, that difference of literal and mystical sense which hath been settled, between the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. The Parable of the Prodigal childe for example, seems not onely to contain a plain song of Gods earnest desire to be reconciled with penitent sinner, but also a descant, of the rejection of the Jewes and the calling of the Gentiles figured by it. In like maner, the Parable of him that fell among theeves as hee went down to Jericho, Luke XI. seemeth not onely to instruct, who is the neighbor that wee are to love as our selves, but also to fi∣gure the fall of man and the sending of our Lord for the restoring of him, in∣timated as the ground of it. So the acclamations of them that went afore and them that came after our Lord, at his entrance into Jerusalem, Mat. XXI. agree∣ing in the same note of Hosanna to the Son of David, I cannot tell whether any Christian could be so moroe as to doubt, but that it fell out on purpose to sig∣nifie the agreement of the Old and New Testament concentring in our Lord Christ. But, as it cannot be reasonably denied, that these Parables and the like are mystical significations, of the purpose of God in sending Christ, or the event of it, in the rejection of the Jewes and calling of the Gentiles; So is all this nothing to the two senses of the Old Testament in which it is twice ful∣filled, once according to the Leter, and again, according to the Spirit. I have thus farre inlarged this point concerning the correspondence and diffe∣rence between the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, between the Ancient and New people of God, to show how I conceive the scruples are to be resolved, which may be made against an assumption of more efficacy and con∣sequence than any other, wheresoever any point of Christianity is to be showed from the Old Testament. Yet so much more protection I owe the truth, as to show further, how well it agreeth with the sense of the Catholick Church, by which I had begun to show that wee are to examine all maters of Faith. In∣deed, I must caution this first, that I do not pretend, as if this point were any part of the Rule of Faith, which is the substance of Christianity to be believed, but, of all points concerning the knowledge of the Scriptures, which is the skill of Christian Divines, I hold it of most consequence. And that therefore, though I am not obliged to affirm, that it is expresly taught by all the primitive Doctors of the Church, (as, all maintaining the mystical ense, it may be maintained, that, by consequence they do all unanimously deliver it, & Origen in praef. de Principiis so accounts it) so will it be necessary to show how well it standeth with the sense of them, that it may appear, that there is no consent of the whole Church against it. It shall be therefore sufficient to name S. Jerome, S. Chrysostome, and S. Augustine, the first affirming that hee reades nothing of the kingdom of hea∣ven in all the Old Testament, Epist. CXXIX. Mihi in Evangelio promittuntur regna coelorum, quae vetus Instrumentum omnino non nominat. To mee the kingdom of heaven is promised by the Gospel, which the Old Testament nameth not at all. The second, in his Homilies de Lazaro, and divers others places, raising his ex∣hortations drawn from examples of the Saints in the Old Testament upon this ground, that, if they did so, and so when the Resurrection was not preached, it behooveth us under the Gospel to do much more. The last, besides other pla∣ces, (whereof some you may finde quoted in my book of the Service of God at the Assemblies of the Church) in the book de Gestis Palestinis, relating it for one of the Articles which Pelagius renounced at that Synod, not onely that the Saints under the Law obtained salvation by it, but even that the salvation of the world to come was preached under the Law. The Article charged upon Pela∣gius you shall finde there to be this, cap. V. Regnum coelorum etiam in veteri Te∣stamento promissum. That the kingdome of heaven was promised also in the Old Testament. To which Pelagius answering; That this may be proved by the Scriptures; was judged by the Council, not to depart from the Faith of the Church. Which notwithstanding, when S. Austine considers; That the Old
Testament in vulgar Language signifies the books of the Old Testament, in which, the kingdome of heaven is promised, as the Gospel is fore-told; But, in the Scriptures, the Old Covenant in which it is not promised; Hee sayes as much as I have done. Therefore hee saith further; In illo verò Testamento quod Vetus dicitur, & datm est in monte Sinâ, non invenitur apertissime promitti nisi terrena foelicitas. But in that which is called the Old Testament, and was given in mount Sina, none but earthly felicity is found to be very openly promised. Where∣upon hee proceedeth to observe, that the Land of Canaan is called the Land of Promise, in which, the promises of the Old Testament, figuring the spiritual promises belonging to the New, are tendred by the Law. And reason hee had to insist upon this, because of another Article charged upon Pelagius, of kin to this, that men were saved under the Law, as under the Gospel: As you may see there cap. XI. Which might well be understood to mean, without the Grace of Christ. But having cleared the ground of the difference between the literal and allegorical sense of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, I hold it utterly unnecessary, if not altogether impertinent to tender further proof of this po∣sition from the Fathers, then the constant agreement of them in maintaining that difference; Being, when it is rightly understood, the necessary and immedi∣ate consequence of it. Indeed, it cannot be maintained, that they did under∣stand expresly the true ground of this difference; which had they done, they would not have been found to use it impertinently and unseasonably, as all lo∣vers of Truth must avow that many times they do. Notwithstanding, in as much as they agree in maintaining and using of it, from which use, the ground of it, which is this position, is to be inferred; it shall be enough, that all of them agree in delivering that by consequence, which the principal of them, at least in expounding the Scriptures, do expresly asfirme. For, nothing obliges mee to maintaine, that this is a poit necessary to the salvation of all Christians to be believed. And by consequence, that it hath been every where taught, and no where contradicted. It is sufficient, that I can and do hold it more general∣ly necessary to the right understanding of the Scriptures, than any other point of skill in the Scriptures. Now, if any man object, that this is the doctrine of the Socinians; I answer, first; That they also hold, that nothing is necessary to salvation to be believed, but that which is clear to all men in the Scriptures. And, that this position hath a necessary influence into their whole Heresie, which is grounded upon the unreasonable presumption of it. On the contra∣ry, the difference between the Law and the Gospel, is a principle, from which I hope to draw good consequences, in maintainance of the Faith of the Church against the Socinians; who, if they did alwaies see the consequence of their owne positions, would not deny the Tradition of the Church, as I obser∣ved afore: If they do not, I am not to waive the doctrine of the Fathers, because the Socinians acknowledge it. But lastly, I demand, whether So∣cinus provide for the salvation of the Fathers, or not. If so, why is his opi∣nion blamed? If not, why is mine opinion, that do, taken for his?
CHAP. XIV. The Leviathans opinon, that Christ came to restore that kingdome of God which the Jewes cast off when they rejected Samuel. It overthroweth the foundation of Christianity. The true Government of Gods ancient people. The name of the Church in the New Testament cannot signifie the Syna∣gogue. Nor any Christian State. THis position being settled, in the next place, I will proceed upon it, to ar∣gue the vanity of that conceit of the Leviathan, pag. 263. that the intent of Christs coming was, to regaine unto God, by a New Covenant, that King∣dome, which, being his by the Old Covenant, had been ravished from him, by the rebellion of the Israelites, in the election of Saul. For, supposing most truly, that God became their King, by the Covenant of the Law, and that un∣der him Moses had the Soveraigne Power to all purposes, pag. 250, 251, 252. hee inferreth further, that, after Moses, it was by God vested in the High Priests Aarons Successors, though hee for his time was subject to Moses: And this, pag. 217. from that text of Exodus XIX. 6. where God promiseth them, that, upon undertaking his Covenant, they should be a Sacerdotal Kingdome, which in the Original is a Kingdome of Priests, in 1 Pet. II. 9. (where hee challengeth the effect of the promise to the Church of Christ) a Royal Priesthood, in S. John Rev. I. 6. Kings and Priests; But chiefly, pag. 253. from that text of Num∣bers XXVII. 21. where it is ordered, that Josue stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask counsail for him before the Lord, At his word they shall go out, and and at his word they shall come in, both hee and all the children of Israel with him. For, saith hee, unlesse wee understand them to be a kingdom of Priests, because the High Priests succeeded one another in the Kingdom, it accordeth not with S. Peter, nor with the exercise of the High Priesthood, the High Priest onely being to declare the will of God to them by entring into the Sanctum Sancto∣rum, pag. 218. Though after the death of Josua and Eleazar, when a generation was risen that knew not the Lord, Jud. II. 10. it came to passe, (as it is said divers times in that book) that there was no King in Israel; The High Priests not be∣ing obeyed according to Law, and the power of the Judges depending upon the voluntary submission of the people, to the graces, and the successe God gave then for their deliverance; Till, rebelling against Gods appointment, they de∣sired a King: As God expresly construes it, 1 Sam. VIII. 7, 8. pag. 253, 254. For thenceforth, God having given way to them, when God was to be consul∣ted, the High Priest put on the holy Vestments, and inquired of the Lord as the King commanded, according to the examples which hee allegeth, pag. 228. This kingdom of God, saith hee, so cast off by the choice of Saul, is that which our Lord Christ, accoring to the promise of God by the Prophets, came to restore: And the Gospel nothing else, but the good newes, that God would give them that should believe our Lord Jesus to be the Christ, and submit to Gods govern∣ment by him, immortal life, in that kingdom which Christ, after the general Judgment, should restore upon earth, pag. 219, 234, 240, 241. and so Christs kingdom is said not to be of this world, John XVIII. 36. because it comes not till after the general Judgment, that this world is past, pag. 262, 263. This monstrous conceit is reproveable upon the same grounds as Christianity is receivable upon, from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, upon which, the difference between the Law and the Gospel is stated, and the Old Testament admitted for a figure, representation and introduction to the New; So that, the Law being admitted to proceed from God, the Gospel is inferred, so soon as the true meaning and purpose of God, in providing it for the time as an introdu∣ction to the Gospel, is understood. If the maintenance of Christianity re∣quire, that the ancient people of God, their Kings, their Priests, and their Pro∣phets be taken for figures of our Lord Christ, and of his Church and Christian people; (as the Covenant of the Law, promising civil and temporal happinesse.
is a figure of the New Covenant of Grace, promising forgivenesse of sin and e∣vrlasting happinesse in being freed from it and the punishment thereof, and perfectly subject to God by perfectly knowing God) Then is the kingdome of Christ, though not of this world, yet in this world, as taking place in them, who, living in this world, neverthelesse acknowledge the inward and spiritual obedi∣ence of their soules to be due to him, who, having ransomed them from the bondage of sin, and maintaining them here against it, will one day make them raigne with him in the world to come; Which all Christians, untill the Levia∣than, alwaies took to be Christs Kingdome. For though there be those that be∣lieve, that Christ is to come and raign again upon earth for a thousand years after the worlds end, and would astonish us into an expectation to see it come to passe within these very few yeares; (whose opinion, as I am farre enough from allowing, so I cannot think this the place to say any thing to it) Yet is it not their intent to say, that this raign of Christ upon earth, is either his kingdom of Grace, which is begun here, by the obedience which wee yield to his Gospel; Or his kingdom of Glory, which is consummate in the world to come, by the ac∣complishment of that subjection and our happinesse in it. For after the thou∣sand yeares aforesaid are past, then do they expect the general Judgment which all Christians believe, not afore the raign of Christ upon earth, and the kingdom which hee shall resign to the Father, 1 Cor. XII. 24-28. It had been worth this Philosophers wit to tell us, what kinde of Immortality wee are to expect, in a civil government under Christ. When our vile bodies are made like his glorious body, according to the working whereby hee is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. III. 21. When wee are neither to marry nor to be given in marriage, but shall be like the Angels of God in heaven; Mat. XXII. 30. And when wee shall have been caught up in the clouds to meet our Lord in the aire, 1 Thess. IV. 10. what shall bring us down to live upon earth again? But to leave this singularity to the fa∣ther of it, I must needs stand astonished to see an imagination of such conse∣quence to all Christianity advanced upon such imaginary grounds. For my part, truly, I fully believe Josephus, that the Jewes, after the Captivity, were governed by the High Priests in chief, so farre as by sufferance of their Sove∣raignes, (the Persians and after them the Macedonians) they were governed by themselves. For this must be the reason, why the sons of Mattathias, having been the means to free them from the monstrous tyrannies of Antiochus Epi∣phanes, and thereupon, by degrees seizing into their hands the Soveraign Power, found it necessary to make themselves High Priests, which by lineal succession from Aaron they were not intitled to be. After which time, being reduced un∣der the dominion of the Romanes; that power which they allowed them over themselves was in the High Priest, so often as they allowed them not a King of their own, as will easily appear by the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, com∣pared with Josephus. For first indeed, after the return from Captivity, it seems to mee, that there was a Governor over them for the King of Persia: For Ze∣robabel is stiled Governor of Judah, Hag. I. 1. And Nehemiah, who, wee know, had his Commission from the King of Persia, qualifieth himself by the same stile, making mention also of others besides, Neh. V. 14, 15. and it is to be ob∣served, that the word or title  is elswhere reckoned among the stiles of the Lieutenants, or Governors, of the Chaldean and Persian Empires, Dan. III. 2, 3- 27. VI. 8. Ezra V. 3. VI. 7. VIII. 36. Nehem. VII. 7, 9. Esther VIII. 9. IX. 3. When as therefore, they obtained of their Soveraignes to be governed by their own Nation, shall wee imagine that this power was trusted with the High Priests, because God had made them Soveraignes by the Law; Or because, after the King, whom in that estate they could not have, the High Priest was regular∣ly the second person in the Kingdom? For, what a ridiculous thing is it to ima∣gine, that, because Josue and the people to goe in and out, at the word of the Lord by Eleazar the High Priest, therefore the High Priest was alwaies Soveraigne? Was it any more for Josue to be ruled by Elazar the High Priest, and his answer by Urim and Tummim, not by going into the Sanctum Sanctorum, than for Saul or David to be directed by
the answer of the High Priest in those dayes; when, as our Author saith, the right of the High Priest, was, by Gods permission, though against Law, seized in the Kings hands? As for the Judges, they that reade; In those dayes there was no King in Israel, every man did what was right in his own eyes; with their eyes in their head, do thereby understand, that, though the stories of the Idol in Dan, and of Gibea, are last in the book of Judges, yet they are first in order of time, be∣fore any Judge had succeded Josue, the Judges having the same power for which Moses is called King in Israel, Deut. XXXIV. 5. For, God being their King by the Covenant of the Law; while hee raised up no Judge to be his Vicegerent in Moses stead, hee governed the by the Elders of the people, to whom, there∣fore, Clemens and Eusebius and other Chronologers impute the time between Josue and Judges. When this Government proved not of force to rule so stiff∣necked a people, and that God had raised up a Judge, to refuse him, was to refuse God, who, by manifest operations of his Spirit in him, had declared him his Vicegerent. Which is the plain reason why God pronounces, that, in refusing Samuel, they had refused him, and not Samuel. For it is manifest, that they might by the Law demand a King, Deut. XVII. 14, 15. so ridiculous a thing it is to imagine, that, by demanding a King as other Nations had, they rebelled against God, who had made the High Priest their Soveraign: For God expresseth their rebellion to consist in refusing Samuel, whom hee had declared his Vice∣gerent, who being once declared, they were no more free do demand a King, by the Law, till his death. Neither doth a Royal Priesthood, or a Kingdome of Priests signifie, that the High Priests were their Kings; But, that they who came out of bondage should now make a Kingdom themselves, to be gover∣ned by their own Nation and Lawes, which Lawes should consist much in offe∣ring sacrifices to God: And those sacrifices, though, for the future, special per∣sons were to be appointed to offer them, yet, in regard they were offered in the name and on the behalf of the people whose offerings they were, the body thereof are justly called Priests; As all Christians, to whom S. Peter challengeth the effect of this promise, are ftiled by him a Royal Priesthood, and by S. John, Kings and Priests; though nothing hinder them to have their Priests, whose fun∣ctions cannot be intermedled with by those who are no Priests, without sacri∣lege. In fine, the effect of these words is that of the Prophet Esay LXI. 5, 6. that when the people shall be restored, the Gentiles shall be their laborers and Vine-dressers, while they, in the mean time, attend upon keeping holiday, by offering sacrifices, and feasting upon the sacrifices which they had offered. It will now be easie to maintain, that the Church, when our Lord saith tell it the Church; is not, nor can be understood but of the Congregation of Christi∣ans, though at that time, in common speech, it signified no more than the Con∣gregation of Gods people. For, supposing that our Lord Christ came to con∣tract a New Covenant with those that received him, whereby they became his people on other termes, and to other purpose than the people whom hee had be∣fore; That hee conditioned with them to leave all things and take up his Cross; That hee appointeth those that imbrace this condition to be baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; I say this being supposed, they that before were the Congregation of Gods people, are no more the Congregation of his people upon the same termes, not by the same right or title, though the same persons; The one being his people under a Covenant for the Land of Promise, and the condition of living by Moses Lawes; The other under the pro∣mise of life everlasting, (which the former were not excluded from, though not expresly included in it) upon condition of receiving the Christian Faith and con∣tinuing in it. Suppose wee, that, when our Lord Christ commanded them to baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, his Disci∣ples understood no more by all this, than, that those who should become Prose∣lytes to this new and true Judaisme which our Lord preached, should be initia∣ted unto the same by Baptisme, as Proselytes then by custome were unto the Law, because wee see, after the resurrection of our Lord, how strange it was to them, that the Gospel should be preached to the uncircumcised as such; Sup∣poe
wee further, that all the Nation of the Jewes, whether in Jewry or where∣soever dispersed, and none but Jewes had received the Gospel of Christ, so as the ancient and New people of God to consist of all the same persons; I say all this supposed, shall make no maner of difference in the case: But there shall be as much difference between the Old and New people of God, considered as Societies and Bodies, constituted, and therefore distinguished by the several Co∣venants upon which they subsist, as if they consisted of all several perons. Should a man judge onely by his bodily eyes, and see the people of Rome as it was when the Soveraign Power was in the people, and again after it had been seized by Augustus, I could not blame him to say, that it was the same people. But hee that should look upon that people with his understanding, as a Civil Society, State, and Commonwealth, and ay it was the same, all men of understanding would laugh at him for it, how much soever the interest of Augu∣stus required that it should seem the same to grosse people. Apply this instance to the case in hand, and I shall need say no more. Several things must either have several names, or the same name in several notions or significations. If our Lord took upon him to teach his Disciples the New Covenant hee came to introduce, to make them the New people of God which hee came thereby to constitute, (such is the correspondence between the Old and the New) the old Name served best to signifie the New thing; But in the same sense, it could not serve to represent to his hearers the several termes upon which Jewes and Chri∣stians are Gods people. Be it therefore granted, that the word  and the word , with such additions as the place where they stand requires, signifie that Body, which, at the time when our Lord spoke was Gods ancient people; This signification, if I mistake not, descending from the first bodying of them into a Commonwealth in the Wildernesse, when they might and were all called and assembled together, to take resolution in what concerned their posterity, (as Commonwealths are presumed to be everlasting Bodies) as well as themselves. When, after the return from the Captivity of Babylon, they became dispersed into Aegypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, Asia, and elswhere, (own∣ing still or challenging the same Lawes by owning which they first became one Body) such Bodies of them as lived in Alexandria, Antiochia, Ephesus, Nearda, Sora, Pombeditha, or other Cities, and their respective territories, are by the same reason to be called the Synagogues of Alexandria, Ephesus, and so forth; Being by that name sufficiently distinguished from the Gentile Inhabitants of the same Cities and Territories. Neither is it pretended that there is any thing in the original force of the word  or , why they should not both signifie the same. But suppose our Lord Christ declare an intent of insti∣tuting a New people upon condition of imbracing his Gospel, and use the old word  to signifie this New people, (as, well hee may use it, for the near correspondence between them) necessary it is that his hearers, understanding him, understand by that terme, something else than the Law had declared afore. And very convenient it was afterwards, that, when there fell out not onely di∣stinction but opposition between the two Bodies, they should be divided by names as they were by affections; As the one is signified in all Church Writers by the name of the Synagogue, the other by the name of the Church, to sig∣nifie the distance, which, ought not to be between them, but is. For, though no∣thing is more odious than to quarrel about words; Yet, (as in divers things else) the not appropriating the term of Synagogue to the Jewes, as of Church to the Church, which the Fathers throughly observe, is an argument of not well distin∣guishing between the Law and the Gospel; (Which gives them a privilege in understanding the Scriptures above our times, because, as I said afore, this is, in my judgment, the prime point of it, notwithstanding all the advantages wee have above them for learning) and a means to convey the same confusion to the minds of our hearers. When therefore wee reade in the Apostles Writings, of the Churches of Judaea and Samaria, the Churches of Syria, Asia, Macedonia, and Achaia, when wee reade of the Church of Rome, of Corinth, Ephesus, Philip∣pi or Thessalonica; And again, in other places, finde the name of the Church
absolutely put, without any addition, to signifie the whole that containeth all the Churches named in other places, so often do wee meet with so many demonstra∣tions to common sense, of several bodies signified by those that so speak, as in∣tended to constitute one whole Body of the Church. After which nothing can be demanded, but, whether the intention of the Apostles prove them to be so onely in point of fact, or in point of right, which demand a Christian cannot make. Our Lord in particular, when hee answereth Mat. XVI. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; cannot be understood to speak of building the Synagogue which Moses had built so long afore. Here, I would desire him that thinks it so strange, that our Lord should under∣stand by the Church, something else than the Jewes signified by it, to ask the Author of the Leviathan what reason hee had, when hee acknowledged, that the Church of Corinth, Ephesus, and Thessalonica is the Body of Christians li∣ving in those respective Cities; And whether hee had reason to affirm, that the Church so signified, did do those acts of right which onely Bodies can do, and which hee affirmeth the Church under the Apostles did do. For if these reasons be not reconcileable, it will be worth the considering, what truth there is in that position which is maintained by two, that cannot agree about the reasons upon which they maintaine it. Neither let any difficulty be made from the difference that may arise, who they be, to whom our Lord conmands there to re∣sort, whom hee bids tell the Church; one, or more, or all. For, when it is re∣solved, that the Church is a Body or a Society, it will be by the nature of the subject manifest, that the right of acting in behalf of this Body must, by the constitution thereof be reserved, either to one or to a few, or to the whole in some principal acts, in others, referring themselves to their Deputies, as in po∣pular Governments. And, whosoever they are that this right is reserved to, hee that resorts to them, is properly said to resort to the Church, though our Lord, declaring here the purpose of instituting a Church, declare not whom hee will trust the power of acting for the Church with. Before I go further, I must inferre against the Leviathan; that, seeing the whole Church is signified by the name of the Church absolutely put, without addition, by the Apostles, as the body which all particular Churches constitute; therefore the Church is understood and intended by them, as a Body capable of right, and able to act, though not by all that are of it, yet by persons trusted for it. A thing which hee that had remembred his Creed could not have doubted of. For, though the name of a Church may be said to rest in a number of men not united by any right into a visible Body, yet, one, holy, Catholick and Apostolick Church cannot consist of all persons maintaining the profession thereof, (in opposition to all Societies claiming that name, but not holding the profession requisite) but it must be distinguished by something which it acknowledgeth for Law to ob∣lige it, they do not. Again, if the Name of Church in the Apostles, rest upon the bodies of Christians in the Cities of Rome, Corith, and Ephesus, then can it not now, as of divine right, signifie the several States, Kingdomes, and Com∣monwealths wherein Christianity subsisteth. Not onely because the bounds of Christendom are not, either materially or formally the same, with the bounds of those States under which it is now maintained: But chiefly, because, the signifi∣cation of that name in the Apostles, once resting by divine right upon those Congregations, can never be transferred upon those Commonwealths which subsit not by the same right, but necessarily descendeth upon those Bodies, which derive their succession from them, by visible acts of humane right. Against both I further inferre, that the Church, being signified as one by divine right in the Scriptures, can never be understood now to consist in all those States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths that professe Christianity. First, because several States, Kingdomes, and Commonwealths are not apt to constitute one visible Body, sig∣nified by the name of the Church absolutely put for the Body of all Chrstis▪ For, it is most truly said by Plate, that all States are naturally enemies to all States, but especially those that are borderers. And how should so many ene∣mies
be signified as constituting one Body? Secondly, and most evidently, be∣cause many parts which belong to the unity of the whole Church, and help to make up the whole, are not now governed by Christian Powers, any more than the whole was from the beginning. In fine, whether the Leviathan had rea∣son, so confidently to affirm, that the Church can do no act, I report my self to that which hath been said of the excluding of Hereticks and Schismaticks out of the Church; Seeing it cannot be denied to be the act of the whole Body, (that is to say, of those tha are able to act in behalf of the whole Body) which the whole Body is ruled by and obeyes. For, whether wee have record extant of any Council at which they were condemned; or, whether they were condem∣ned in that Church where they appeared; In as much, as, upon information of the proceedings, by daily intercourse and correspondence, the rest of the Church sentenced the same, (as finding the Rule of Faith and the Unity of the Church so to do) the excluding of them becomes the act of the whole Church. For how else are so many Heresies and Schismes come to an end with their Fathers? Nay, I will boldly say, that, whosoever died excommunicate, because being ex∣cluded by his own Church hee could not be admitted by another Church, who∣soever for fear of this, either submitted to that which any Council ever decreed in mater of Faith, or reconciled himself to his own Church that hee might not be disowned by the whole, whatever instances hereof the records of the Church afford, so many witnesses wee have of the acts which the whole Church either did, or was able to do. CHAP. XV. How the Power of the Church is founded upon the Law. The Power of the Kingdome, Priesthood, Prophets, and Rulers of that people all of divine right. How farre these qualities and the powers of them are to continue in the Church. The sense of the Fathers in this point. That the acts of S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles were not of force by virtue of the Law. What Ecclesiastical Power should have been among the Jewes, in case they had received the Gospel, and so the State had stood. ANd now it will not be difficult to answer; that, though the Power of Ex∣communicating did not belong to the Synagogue by Gods Law, but by humane constitution, providing for the maintenance of Gods Law, and that of secular Power; yet is it of the Churches right by Gods Law, distinguishing the Society thereof from the Commonwealth. But this will not be effectually, nor sufficiently done, unlesse I make the discourse general, and show how the rea∣son holds in other points of that right, upon which the Church is founded. I say then, that, if it be true that S. Paul sayes Rom. III. 21. Now the righteous∣nesse of God (and so his Gospel, which proclaimeth that righteousnesse) is mani∣fested without the Law, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets; then are wee not to think, that either the Church, or any part of that right upon which it sub∣sisteth, can stand by the Law, or be derived from it, otherwise, than as Christia∣nity it self, which destroyeth the Law, may be derived from it, because, as S. Paul sayes, it is witnessed by it. For, the Law will not fail to yield us such ar∣guments of those rights, as, the correspondence thereof with the Gospel, (that is to say, of the Synagogue with the Church) requireth. Consider wee then, that, by the Law, God became King of his people, but under God, Moses his Vicegerent; With this provision for succession, that, hee whom God should raise up in Moses stead should be obeyed as Moses, Deut. XVIII. 15—. Besides, wee know there were XII Princes of the XII Tribes from Moses to David, Num. I. 4-16. II, III, VII. 1 Chron. XXVII. 16. XXVIII. 1. And under these Princes, it seems, the Tribes were divided into Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties and Tens, the Captains whereof were made Judges under Moses during the march through the Wildernesse, Exod. XVIII. 21—. Deut. I. 15. And it should seem, that the people continued to be divided by these Thou∣sands
and Hundreds in the Land, because wee finde, that in Davids time, the whole Land, and not onely the Souldiery were divided so, 1 Chron. XIII. 1, 2, 5. where David, advising with the Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, is said to advise with the whole Assembly of the People. But as for the office of Judges, there is no question but another course is taken by the Law of Deut. XVI. 18. when they should be planted in the Land. For, when order is taken, that Courts be set up in their Cities, it is intimated, that they were to come in stead of those Captains, which had the ministring of Justice in their hands, in the Wilder∣ness. And whereas, besides the assistance of these Captains, Mses is allowed LXX more of the Elders of Israel, upon whom his Spirit is departed, to help him in bearing the burthen of that people, Num. XI, 15, 16, 17; Provision is made for succession by the Law of Deut. XVII. 8-13. That there be alwaies a standing Court at the place where the Ark should rest, to which the more difficult causes should resort, from the Courts of inferior Cities, there to be finally decided. Which being to be the seat of Moses successors Judges or Kings, it is not onely the constant Tradition of the Jews, but of it self evident, that this Court did ex∣ercise and was to exercise that Power, which was first committed to them that were chosen for the assistance of Moses. Though nothing oblige us to believe, that, while the seat of the Ark was either not declared, or n constantly used, it was alwaies in force according to the intent of this Law. Beside these Powers established by the Law for the Government of that Peo∣ple, wee have the Priesthood tied by the Law to the Tribe of Levi, with divers privileges, or pety jurisdictions, in that quality annexed to it. For, when God commandeth Aaron, that hee and his sons drink no wine or strong drink when they come into the Tabernacle, that they may distinguish between holy and com∣mon, between clean and unclean, and teach the children of Israel all the Statutes which the Lord had commanded them by Moses, Levit. X. 8-11; it is manifest, that, by this Law, the people is referred to them for resolution in the cases here intended, though what the cases are that are hereby intended, and what rule their resolution should be tied to, nothing hinders, by other Lawes to be de∣clared, and limited. And those ancient Doctors of the Jewes seem to have reason, that observe the terms of the Law, Deut. XXI. 5. every cause and every plague shall be according to their mouth; inferring that all  (which wee may translate doctrines, but must understand that which the Greek calls , or decrees) must come out of their mouth, Siphri 243. Pesicta Zoterta fol. 91. col. 4. and instanding in the causes to be purged by the ashes of the Red Cow, Num. XIX. not as if none could sprinkle those ashes but a Priest, (which is o∣therwise ruled by Num. XIX. 17. to be any man that was clean) but because they could not be burnt but by a Priest, Num. XIX. 3. which is by their Law any Priest, Maimoni in that Title I. 11, 12. and because part of them was set a∣side for Priests to purifie with, as another part for other Israelites, Maim. III. 4. So, in the causes concerning Wives questioned by their Husbands being jealous, by the Law of Num. V. 15. the causes of murther for which an Heifer was to be killed by breaking her neck, Deut. XXI. 5. And in the plagues of men, hou∣ses and clothes, Deut. XXIV. 8. none of which could be decided without a Priest. In this regard, it seems to mee, the Prophet sayes, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall require the Law at his mouth, for hee is the mes∣senger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. II. 7. and in termes Deut. XXX. 10. , They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Lawes. According to the other Law Deut. XVII. 11. , According to the doctrines that they shall teach thee. Another Power in that people is that of Prophets, which seemeth to be founded upon the Law of Deut. XVIII. 20, 21, 22. where, having commanded that the Prophet which should succeed Moses be obeyed, as Moses, the Law proceedeth to charge them to put to death whosoever should prophesie in the name of strange Gods: And then, giving a rule whereby to discern between a true and a false Prophet, seems to intimate the authority of Prophets. Which was so very great in that people, that, the Kings themselves were to obey them,
so long as they had the reputation of true Prophets, (whereupon wee see how they reprove them, Elias Ahab, 1 Kings XVIII. 17. Elisha the King of Israel, 2 Kings VI. 33. John Baptist and our Lord Christ Herod, Mat. XIV. 4. Luc. XIII. 32. though, when their reputation could by faction be questioned, o often were they questioned, condemned, and killed for the messages they brought in Gods name, as the Apostle saith Heb. XI. 37. and as it befell our Lord Christ) Nay further, that, when they taught, that any particular Law should cease for the time, they were to be obeyed, as Elias commanded to offer sacrifice in another place than at Jerusalem, 1 Kings XVIII. 17. contrary to the Law of Levit. XV. 2-9. the Temple being then on foot. Whereby it appeareth, that the Prophets had their authority immediately from God, not depending so much as upon his Law, further than as the acknowledgment of the authority of it to come from God was a necessary condition to the receiving of them for Pro∣phets, as I said asore; Seeing the mater thereof might cease to oblige, if they should declare the will of God to be such. The Commonwealth then of Israel subsisting by divine right, (that is, by the appointment of God giving them free∣dome, and the command of themselves, upon condition of undertaking the Law) not onely the Kingdom, which is the form of Government limited by the Soveraigne Power placed in one person, whether by the permission of God or his appointment, together with the Ministers thereof, Judges and Magistrates and Officers, but also the Priestly and Prophetical Office, must be understood to stand by the same title. As for the Church, which wee have seen to be the spiritual Israel of God, and maintain to be one visible body, by virtue of undertaking the Covenant of Grace which the Gospel tendreth; It is manifest, that the King thereof is the Lord Christ, who professeth not to govern it by his bodily presence, but by the Law of his Word, and by the invisible presence of his Spirit, which was to com∣mence upon his departure. That, being here, hee appointed XII Apostles as Patriarchs thereof under him, as the XII Princes of the Tribes were under Moses, and LXX Disciples, or Apostles of an inferior rank, under himself also, as they under Moses; But, for the dispatch of such businesse, concerning his Kingdom, as that, which neither the Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, (who were ordained Judges before the LXX were ordained to assist Moses) nei∣ther after them the Judges of particular Cities that succeeded them could de∣cide. And shall wee not conclude all this correspondence to be as competent an argument, as wee are to expect for the New Testament in the Old, for the constitution of the Church, in the institution of the Synagogue? To wit, that, seeing wee see God hath appointed our Lord Christ, hee, his XII Apostles and LXX Disciples his ministers in governing of it, that hee intended it a visible body, to which the visible right of governing the same might be conveyed, by the reasonable voluntary act of those, in whom, placing the power, hee must needs place the right of propagating the same in his own absence. One point indeed of difference there is, wherein, wee should abuse our selves too much, to seek for any correspondence between the Synagogue and the Church. For, wee suppose the intent of God to have been, that the Law should oblige one people, but the Gospel all that are to attain salvation out of all people, so that there is no particular seat of Gods worship according to the Gospel, to which all Christians are bound to resort, as Jerusalem was the seat of Gods worship which all Jewes were to resort to. And, wee suppose our Lord Christ to be in heaven, where the Princes of Israel and the LXX Elders cannot be present, to assist him with their ministery. Therefore wee cannot imagine that hee appoin∣ted his LXX Disciples for a standing Assembly, as, under the Law; But, to be dispersed all over the world, where Christian people should be, though united by the same Rule which all should follow for the preserving of Christendom in u∣nity. Let no man therefore any more imagine, that the title by which any Power is held or pretended to be held in the Church, can be derived from that right which the Priesthood held under the Law; So as from thence to inferre, that the Power which the Priesthood had not under the Law is not under the
Gospel to be ascribed unto the Church, as it is the Church. For, I do of my own accord allege, that, seeing the Priesthood was purely ceremonial, to figure that expiation of sin which Christ should bring to passe, and therefore to expire when it was brought to passe, it is not possible to imagine, that any right of the Church can be founded upon the right thereof, or derived from it. Neither is it otherwise with the Prophetical Office. The authority whereof, as I have showed, was of divine right under the Law, as depending immediately upon the will of God, that raised them up, and gave them authority by those evidences, which his own Law had made legal; And this, that hee might tye his people the more strongly, by their ministery, and by the evidence of his presence among them, to observe his Law. And yet, in as much as all Christians must believe them fore-runners of Christ, sent to give notice of his coming by such meanes, as God that sent him thought fit, (so that hee, by his Office, is the chief Pro∣phet, to whom the Father reserved the full declaration of his will and plea∣sure, concerning the alliance hee intended to hold with men) of necessity their office was to expire in him, neither can it remaine in the Church, further than hee, by a new act, may appear to have appointed. I do not here make any doubt that S. Paul argued very well, when hee said 1 Cor. IX. 13, 14. Know yee not, that they which work holy things eat of the holy? That they who wait upon the Altar, take part with the Altar? So also hath God appointed them that bring newes of the Gospel to live of the Gospel. But, hee that will understand this argument, must make up the comparison, by completing the correspondence, between the brin∣ging of souls to Christ, by preaching the Gospel, and the sacrificing of living creatures to God, by executing the Law. This correspondence the Apostle himself hath delared to our hands, Rom. XV. 15, 16. Because of the grace given mee of God, saith hee, that I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, exercising the sacred function of preaching the Gospel of God, that the oblation of the Gentiles may be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. And Phil. II. 17. Nay, though I be poured forth upon the sacrifice and ministery of your Faith, I rejoyce, and that joyntly with you all. Where it appeareth, that, by submitting to the Gospel, men become a sacrifice to God, in as much as they dye to the world, and that they who bring them to Christianity are the Priests that offer this sacrifice; And by this Priesthood it is, that the Apostle challengeth a right of living upon preaching the Gospel, as the Priests lived by attending upon the sacrifices of the Law. Which if it be true, then is the Apostles office that Priest∣hood under the Gospel, which was to remaine by the correspondence▪ thereof with the Law, and therefor cannot derive any Title from the Levitical Priest∣hood, which it maketh void. As for the Office of Prophets under the Gospel, it is plain by S. Pauls Epistles, that it pleased God, among other miraculous Gra∣ces of the Holy Ghost, whereby hee evidenced his presence in the Church, to stirre up Prophets in those Primitive Churches, by whom, besides, they might be instructed in the more solid understanding of their Christianity, as may ap∣pear in particular by S. Paul 1 Cor. XIV. Which being supposed, can any man imagine, that the Office of those Prophets, and the authority which it import∣eth, can be derived from the Prophets under the Law, whose Office expired in Christ? His act it must be to give authority to Prophets under the Gospel; and, since wee have showed, that the chief authority which hee left in the Church was left with his Apostles, it followeth by consequence, (which by other Scri∣ptures in another place I have showed to have been true) that the Apostles, by their Office, were the chief Prophets of the Church; Though, as, for the con∣tinuance of the gift of Prophesie, under the Gospel there is no promise recor∣ded, as under the Law there is; So, neither any precept requiring obedience to their Office, as then I have showed there was. In fine, God by Christ de∣signed to raise up children to Abraham, which are the new Israel according to the Spirit; Hee hath given the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord that autho∣rity over them, which may answer the power of the Patriarchs and Elders of his ancient people under Moses; Hee hath incorporated into their Office under the Gospel, the authority both of Priests and Prophets under the Law, which
both were to cease with the Law; Therefore wee are not to derive any Powe of the Church from the rights of the Priesthood under the Law, not to argue, that the Church hath no right to that Power, which the Priesthood, as then, was not seised of; But, whatsoever power was in the Prinees of Tribes and their inferiors, in the Elders and Judges of Israel, for the civil Government of that people under Moses, the same wee must inferre to have been in the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, (and, by consequence, in them to whom they may ap∣peare to have committed any part of it) for the government of the Church un∣der our Lord Christ; Saving the difference, which the condition whereupon ei∣ther people are gathered into one Society importeth; Which is, in them, the possession of the Land of Promise upon the observation of the Law, in us, the Kingdome of heaven upon the Faith of Christ. And therefore in them infer∣reth temporal Power in disposing of causes and things of this world, in these, onely the Power of directing in spiritual maters, wherein the Church, by the Covenant of Grace, doth communicate. This opinion may seem to some man not to agree with the doctrine of the ancientest Fathers, who do many times argue, what order ought to be held in the Church, from that which the Law provided for the Levitical Priesthood; As Clemens Ep. ad Corinthios from the order which the Law had prescribed for the Sacrifices prescribed by it, argueth, that the like ought to be kept in the Church, pag. 53. And S. Cyprian, that, as Eleazar was consecrated High Priest by Moses, before the Congregation of the People, so ought Ordinations to be celebrated before the Assembly of the Church. Which kinde of argument seems to have no force, unlesse wee derive the Offices of the Church from the Levitical Priest∣hood; Together with abundance of passages to the same purpose, whereof it shall be enough to have produced these for an example. But this kinde of ar∣gument is easily stopped by one instance. For it is manifest, that the like argu∣ment, of instruction or exhortation to those that claime by and under the A∣postles, may be drawn from divers passages of the ancient Scriptures, wherein the Prophets of the Law are exhorted to do, or reproved for neglecting their Office; And yet no man can go about to derive the right of their authority from the Prophets Office by the Law of Moses. And then it is easily answered, that nothing hinders, the same reason that appeares in the Ordinances of the Leviti∣cal Priesthood to be of evident consequence in the ordering of Gods Church Not because the order of the Church depends upon the Priesthood, but because both are from God, who hath expressed those marks of his wisedom in the el∣der, that may seem to direct the later, though claiming no title from it. This reason is general. There is another more particular, to be drawn from that which hath been showed, that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, as Governors of Gods spiritual Israel, and therefore those that claime a right answerable to theirs, have in them both the Office of the Levitical Priesthood, and of Legal Prophets, in such consideration, and to such purpose as the effect of those Offi∣ces under the Gospel, in the Church, requireth. Whereupon, if at any time the Fathers of the Church do argue, or dispute the Office of those who claime by the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, from those things which are said in the Old Testament, concerning the Levitical Priesthood, or the Prophets under the Law; Much more ordinary it is, to finde them grounding the like instructions and exhortations, upon those things, which are said in the Old Testament, con∣cerning the Rulers and Judges of Israel according to the flesh. What is more ordinary in Tertullian, Origen, S. Cyprian, Clement, Justine, the Apostolical Con∣stitutions, the rest of the most ancient Fathers of the Church, than to draw into consequence the Rebellion of Corah, and the Law of obeying that which the Priests and Judges of every age should ordaine, concerning difficulties of the Law; against Schisme in the Church? Those things which the Prophets, Esay LVII. 10, 11. Jer. 11. 8. III. 15. XXIII. 1-4. Ez. XXXIV. 1-16. pronounce against the Shepherds of Israel; against those that claime under the Apostles in the Church? For the Prophets themselves Esa. LVII. 10, 11. Jer. II. 8. XXIII. 1-4. Ez. XXXIV. 23. do manifestly show, that these Shepherds are the Rulers
of the People, distinguishing them both from the Priests and the Prophets. And the interest of Christianity requires, that the promise of raising up better Shepherds, be understood to be fulfilled in the Holy Apostles. Hee that doubts of the sense of the Fathers in this point, let him take the pais to reade S. Basil upon III of Esay, and see how hee expounds those things which are prophefied against the Rulers of Gods ancient People, against those that offend like them, in ruling Gods Church. And therefore it is utterly impertinent to the Power and right of the Church, which is observed as mater of consequence to it, in the second Book de Synedriis Judaeorum VII. 7. that S. Paul ordained Presbyters in the Chur∣ches, Acts XIV. 22. as himself without doubt had received Ordination from his Master Gamaliel in the Synagogue; For, if the meaning be onely, that hee Ordained them by Imposing hands, as himself perhaps was Ordained, hee tells no newes, for that is it which the Scripture affirmeth. But, if hee mean fur∣ther, that S. Paul did this by authority received from Gamaliel, it will he ridicu∣lous to imagine, that S. Paul, by the Power which hee had from the Synagogue, was inabled to give that authority in the Church, which the Synagogue found it self obliged to persecute, as destructive to it. Besides, it is easily said, that the Apostles, finding that it was then a custome to Ordaine those Elders, which were wont to be created in the Synagogue, for such ends, and to such faculties as the constitution thereof required, by Imposing hands; And, intending to conferre a like Power in Church maters upon the like order in the Church, which by such acts they institute; held fit to use the same ceremony in ordaining them, which was in use, to the like but several purposes, in the Synagogue. In which case it is manifest, that the Power so conferred cannot be derived from that which the Synagogue gave, (and therefore not limited by it) but by that, which the Socie∣ty of the Church, and the constitution thereof requires. As, suppose for the purpose, that, by the Jewes Law, at that time, they created Elders to Judge in criminal causes onely in the Land of Israel; But for inferior purposes, (as of resolving doubts in conscience rising upon the Law, by pronouncing this or that lawfull or unlawfull to be done) in other places; Is it reason therefore to in∣ferre, as it is there inferred pag. 325. that when S. Paul faith, 1 Cor. V. 12. Do not yee judge those that are within? hee must not be understood, of any judgment which the Presbyters of the Church exercised there, because, out of the Land of the Land of Promise, Elders were not ordained for Judges by the Synagogue? I say nothing of the point it self for the present, I say it is no argument to in∣ferre thus, as is inferred pag. 325. the Elders which the Synagogue made were not inabled to judge out of the Land of Promise; Therefore, in the Christian Church, there was no Power to judge the causes of Christians at that time; Un∣lesse wee derive the authority of the Church from the Synagogue. As for that which is argued pag. 328. that; Had they conferred any other power, than the Rules of the Synagogue allowed, they would have been questioned, and perse∣cuted for it by the Jewes, either in their own Courts or before the Gentiles, (in as much as the Christians had then no protection for their Religion, which the Jewes had, but as they passed for Jewes in the Empire) it dependeth meerly upon the opinion the Jewes themselves had of Christianity. For, where the Jewes stood yet at a bay, expecting the trial of that truth which the Gospel pretended, not proceeding to persecute the profession of Christianity, it is not to be imagined, that they should proceed to persecute those acts, which were done in prosecution of it. But where the separation was complete, and enmity declared, no man need bid a Jew persecute a Christian, for any thing that hee did as a Christian, nor a Christian to suffer for that, which a Jew should persecute. All the question onely was, how farre both their Masters, that is, the Powers of the Empire would make themselves executioners of their hatred, (Christianity being hitherto tolerated though not protected) till the Lawes of the Empire had declared against Christianity, which at that time it is plain they had not done. As little do I think it concernes the Right of the Church, which is there observed VII. 4. pag. 287. that, Ordination by Imposition of hands was meerly
of human̄e institution in the Synagogue, and no way derived from the example of Moses laying hands upon Josue, Num. XXVII. 18-23. which, being a singu∣lar case, can no way ground a Rule. For supposing, that, by the Law, a Judici∣ary Power, or what ever inferior Right was to be maintained, and conveyed by the Act of those which were legally possessed of it, or the right of conveying it; Let all limitations whereby the way of conveying it was determined, be counted as much of humane right as you please, the power so conveyed cannot be meerly of humane right, being established by Gods Law, with a Power of limiting all circumstances in propagating of it, which are not against Gods Law, but according to it. As for the Apostles of our Lord Christ, (all whose acts, done with intent to oblige the Church, are of force by Gods act of establishing them) all that can remaine questionable is, with what intent they introduced their Ordinances into the Church, which are unquestionably of force by Gods Law, for whatsoever they intended, whatsoever the Synagogue might intend by the like. As for that voluntary conjecture of pag. 315. which makes the XII Apostles, created with Power of Binding and Loosing, so many Elders to de∣clare what was lawfull and unlawful in Christianity; I admit all, understood ac∣cording to the premises. To wit; that, as there was in those Elders which the Synagogue created, a Power to declare what was lawful or unlawful by the Law of Moses, to make a man capable or uncapable of the society of that people, to which those promises were made, but in every one as his creation limited; So were the Apostles ordained by our Lord, to declare to the world, upon what termes it might be reconciled to God and obtaine everlasting life: And, those whom they prevailed not with, they are therefore said to binde, because they loosed them not. And as they held this Power in chief, and fully to all purposes; So all that claime any part of it under them must claime no more, than the act by which they conveyed it upon them may appear to have limited. But it were too great an impertinence to imagine, that this power depended any way upon that authority which the Law might allow or constitute, even in our Lord Christ, (supposing him a Prophet acknowledged according to the Law) otherwise then as the Gospel depends upon the Law, and the Church upon the Synagogue: in that they give evidence to them, by which they are made void. For, that which our Lord gives his Apostles, is more then the Law was ever able to effect, if the premises be true, though the Law gave competent witness and evidence to it. Neither is there any more force in that which is conjectured in the same place, that the VII, who are created to wait upon the Tables, or common Diet of the Christians at Jerusalem, Acts VI. are also so many Elders, because made by Imposing hands. For, if it be the authority of the Apostles that made Im∣position of hands in force to Christians, (though they had a pattern from the Sy∣nagogue to move them to introduce it) who shall limit them not to use it, un∣lesse they be Elders whom they ordaine? and therefore, who shall conclude that they are Elders, because so ordained? If these things be true, it will be easie to resolve the consequence of that sup∣position, which is propounded in the Preface to that Book. To wit, supposing the Jewes in the Land of Promise had received Christianity at the Preaching of the Apostles, as they ought to have done, and so, that their Estate had continued as it did, (which, for refusing it, was taken away) whether the Civil Law of that people, continuing as it ought to continue, should have had the same Power in Ecclesiastical causes, as it had in ordering all things that concerned the Ceremo∣nial Law. For, if so, then no Ecclesiastical Power could have subsisted among the Jewes, and therefore no cause could be alleged, why other Nations, im̄bra∣cing Christianity; should not reserve the same Power to their own Civīl Law. For, supposing the Covenant under Moses, to be no more in force at such time as the New is on foot, which the Preaching of the Apostles had declared to be the intent of the Old, at such time as Christ should come; it will follow indeed, that the reason why the Nation was taken away, (that is, the refusal of the Go∣spel) ceasing, God might have preserved them in Estate, had hee pleased, but, by the termes of the Covenant which was expired, could not be tied to it. But,
supposing hee had preserved them so, wee must then suppose, that the Civil Law of Moses ought to be still maintained among that people, not by the Co∣venant, which being expired, and the condition of the Land of Promise holding no longer, when the taking up of Christs Crosse is propounded and admitted by receiving Christianity, the obligation of maintaining the same Civil Law can no further hold, than the reason of maintaining Christianity should require; That is; So farr as the quiet of that people, in the privileges which till then they injoy∣ed, would evidently have been for the advancement and maintenance of Chri∣stianity, and the preserving of the Lawes which they were alwaies tied to, as e∣vidently for the quiet of that people. For, suppose at this hour a Synagogue of Jewes, in the Empire, or in Italy, or wheresoever else they subsist, should re∣ceive Christianity; Neither would any obligation of the Law remain upon them, why they should not give it all over to become free denizens of the States in which they dwelt afore their conversion, (which is that, as I suppose, that Chri∣stian States ought to propose to them, to move them to imbrace Christianity) neither is there any thing to difference their case now, from those of our Lords time, that injoyed so much of their own Lawes in the hand of Promise. And, supposing that God had been pleased to preserve them in that estate, wee must also suppose, that God, intending his Church as well of the Gentiles as Jewes, intended both to make parts of it upon the same termes. And therefore, that Power which the Apostles left, for the preserving of unity in the communion of the service of God, for which the Society of the Church stands, that, as well Jewes as Gentiles must have admitted, as a part of the Christianity which they professed, bounding the force of their own Civil Laws, upon the same Terms, as wee show, the Civil Lawes of other Nations that received Christianity are to be bounded with in Church maters. CHAP. XVI. The Church founded upon the Power given the Apostles. What is the sub∣ject mater of Church Lawes. The right of the Church to Tithes and Oblations is not grounded upon the Law, though evidenced by it, and by practice of the Patriarchs. Evidence of the Apostles Order in the Scri∣ptures. The Church of Jerusalem held not community of Goods. The o∣riginal practice of the Church. HAving thus farre showed the foundation of Ecclesiastical Power, in the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord Christ, (whom wee may justly affirm, to have been the Church materially as so many Christians, but, in virtue and force, as much as the whole Church can ever be) it will not be requisite, to those that consider things a right, to argue, that their Acts and Ordinances must of ne∣cessity have the force of Gods Lawes to the Church, as much as those things, which God said alone to Moses in the Tabernacle of Assembling, had the force of Lawes to his ancient people. For, those that consider the beginnings of States from the beginning of the World, shall easily finde, that people were not governed from the beginning by written Lawes, but reasonable and lawfull consent in some person, or quality of persons, (whether of Gods designing or mans chusing) to govern in chief, was a first a Law sufficient to constitute any Commonwealth, as being sufficient to produce all other Lawes, which dissatis∣faction should make requisite for determining cōmon differences, either in wri∣ting, or by silent custome. Thus was the Commonwealth of Israel constitu∣ted under Moses, so soon as that People had received God for their King, and re∣ferred themselves to Moses, for the man, by whom they should understand his will and pleasure. Neverthelesse, because the wisedom of God easily foresaw, how lightly those, who presently received him for their King, would be moved to fall away from him to other Gods; (that which was as easie for his wisedom to do) hee gave them presently such Lawes in writing, both for the Ceremonies wherewith hee would be worshipped, as held the most particular difference from
those which the Nations worshipped their Gods with; and for their civil conver∣sation, as might best distinguish them from all other Nations that were fallen a∣way to the worship of Idols. And all this, besides the secret intent of scre∣telling and figuring the Gospel in and by the same. This was the intent of the Decalogue first, then, of those Lawes which Moses received in the Mount to be delivered to the people, Exod. XXII, XXIII, XXIV. and lastly, of the ref: which Moses received in the Tabernacle from Gods mouth, speaking with him as God faith, face to face. When God the Father had sent our Lord Christ to publicsh his Gospel, and to declare the intent of founding his Church upon it, when our Lord Christ had declared his intent of leaving the world, and the pro∣secution of his Gospel, and gathering of his Church to his Apostles and Disci∣ples, then was the Society of the Church founded in as full force of authority, as ever can have been in it since; Though not yet actually a Church, because the materials of it are not men but Christians, that is, such, as by receiving Christi∣anity, should come into the communion of it. Besides, God intending one communion of all that should become Christi∣ans out of all Nations; And therefore, pretending to maintains the State of this World, and all the Commonwealths in which the Church standeth, on the same termes which it findeth; dischargeth the Church of all that power to force men to obedience by harm of this world, by which all States maintaine them∣selves. Therefore, the Church can pretend no more, than to communicate in some certain particulars, for which the Society thereof is erected, and, in the communion whereof it consisteth. Suppose wee then the Law of Moses to be ceased, as to the outward force of governing the People to whom once it was Law, though not as to the inward intent of introducing the Gospel, to which it was the Preface; Suppose wee the Society of the Church to be ordained, in the communion of those things which Christianity introduceth; I say, those Rules, without which the Unity of the Church cannot be maintained, whatfoever they be called, have no lesse the force of Lawes, than any that Secular States either inact or inforce. Because, as hee that once hath undertaken to take God for his God, under a promise of being a free Israelite, cannot, so long as that pro∣session stands, make question of undergoing the rest of Moses Laws, howsoever troublesome they seem; So hee that once hath imbraced the communion of the Church, in hope of life everlasting, is by the fame reason, obliged to observe such Rules, according to which the communion of the Church is in force and use. But the communion of the Church not consisting in anything of this world, onely in the Offices of Gods service, (for, invisible communion in the faith and love of Christ, and all for Christs take, as Christianity requires, is pre∣supposed to the visible communion of the Church) no reason can require that they should be many, at least at the beginning. Our Lord Christ, having preached and declared unto his Disciples, that Prosession of Christianity, into which hee appointeth all Chrissians to be Baptized, may well be said to have ordained the Sacrament of Baptisme for a Law to all Christians; distinguishing the Ceremo∣ny, by which the Prosession of Christianity is solemnized, from the Prosession it self of Christianity, which, hee that comes to be baptized must have taken upon him for a Law afore. As little question there can be, that our Lord Christ, at his last Supper, instituted, not his last Supper, (for what sense can there be in saying, that our Lord at his last Supper instituted his last Supper?) but the Sacrament of his last Supper, which is the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for a per∣petual Law to the Church. Here then wee have for Lawes to the Church; First the Rule of Faith, containing the prosession, upon supposition whereof the Cor∣poration of the Church is founded: Secondly, the Sacraments of Baptisme and of the Eucharist: Thirdly, other offices of common Prayers and Praises of God, together with the Hearing of his Word, (common to the Church with the Synagogue) which God is to be served with: And therefore thus farre I have proved, that there is a Society of one Catholick Church, founded by God upon the precept, or the privilege of communicating in the service of God, by there offices of Christianity, equally charged upon all Christians; And consisting in
the obligation of maintaining unity, in serving God by the said Offices. Suppo∣sing then a visible authority settled in the persons of our Lords Apostles and Disciples, in behalf of the community of Christians; Supposing this community efected into a Society, visible Body, or Corporation of the Church; what∣soever can become questionable, (not concerning mine and thine, which Civil Government pretendeth to decide, but) concerning communion in those Offi∣ces which God is to be served with by Christians, is virtually and potentially al∣ready decided, by the right of doing such acts, as, being done, oblige the Church for whom they are done; Which therefore are the Laws of the Church. Wee see, that the intent and meaning of Christianity is many times quessionable in ma∣ters of that weight, or taken to be of that weight, that Christians are not to communicate with those, who, pretending to be Chistians, do believe otherwise. Here, wee have none but the Apostles themselves to have recourse to. None but they have convinced Christendom to believe that their word is Gods word. For, though Moses and the Prophets and our Lord Christ all spake by the same Spirit, in as much as they all intended a secret, which was not to be published till the Apostles preached, the recourse wee have to them is, with intent to argue, and discover by their writings the truth of that, which may become questi∣onable in the preaching of the Apostles. What then may appear to be deter-mined by the act of the Apostles, (as the writings of the Apostles are certainly their act) the declaration of the Church, (proceeding no further, than the means provided by God for that purpose will inable the Church to discerne) that this doth appear, will have the force of a Law, to oblige all Christians, not to vio∣late the communion of Christians, upon pretense that it doth not appear. So, the rcason of believing, and the evidence thereof, are both antecedent to the foundation of the Church: But the declaration of the Church, obliging those that are within it, not to violate communion upon pretense of contrary eviden∣ce, that is the effect of that right and power which God giveth his Church. But there are other acts, which the Church will be as often necessitated to do, as it becomes questionable in the Church, how any of those Offices which God is served with by Christians is to be performed. What times, at what places, what persons are to assemble themselves for that service, as of it self it is not determined, so, were it never so particularly determined by the writings of the A∣postles, yet, so long as the world is changeable, and the condition of the Church, by that reason, not to be limited in that service by the same Rule alwaies, the Society of the Church could not subsist without a Power to determine it. The persons especially, that communicate with the Church, if you will have the Church a Society, must be indowed with several qualities, some of them inabling to communicate passively, that is, to joyn in the Offices of Gods service; (For till our time I think it was never quessioned among Christians, whether the same persons might minister and he ministred to in the Offices of Christianity) Then, if some persons be to be set apart for that purpose, of necessity, it may become questionable, by what acts the fame is lawfully done, according to the will of God declared by his Apostles. Further, when it is determined, who, when, where are the Offices of Christianity and the Assemblies of the Church to be celebrated, the least circumstance of matter and form, of solemnity and ceremony, though it make no difference of saith, yet is able to create a cause of separation of communion, that shall be just on the one side. Is it any great Power that is demanded for the Church, by the Original constitution thereof, when it is demanded, that the Church have Power to regulate it self in things of this consequence? Let mee be bold to say, there is never a Company in London so contemptible, that can stand without having the like, excepting the determina∣tion of maters of Faith. And therefore it is a small thing to demand, that the Apostles, for their time, should be able to do it by Power from God, so as to be heard in Christs stead; Those that received Power from them, according to the measure of that Power which they received, though they pretend not their acts to be our Lord Christs, as the Apostles, yet, within the bounds of that Office to which they are ordained, they have power from God, determining their
persons, though not justifying their acts. Suppose then that our Lord Christ assume a Ceremony in use in the Synagogue, at such time as hee preached, of baptizing those that imbraced Moses Law, being born of other Nations, to sig∣nifie and to solemnize the admission of them that undertake Christianity, to the privileges of his New people; I suppose it is the act of our Lord that makes this a Law to his Church, though it was the Power, which God had provided to govern his ancient people, that made it a Law to the Synagogue. It is no more doubted among men of Learning, that our Lord Christ, at his last Supper, made use of Ceremonies practised among the Jewes at their Passeover, in the celebration of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the outward act whereof hee ap∣pointed to consist in those Ceremonies, whereas the inward intent thereof was not known afore; For, whatsoever they knew of Christ, they could not there∣by know, that hee would institute the Sacrament of his Body and Bloud in those Elements. In like maner, it had been alwaies a custome of Superiors in the Synagogue, (according to that of the Apostle, Ebr. VlI. 7. Without all contradicti∣on, the lesse is blessed by the greater) to blesse, and to pray for interiors, with lay∣ing hands upon them, or lifting up hands over them. So did the Priests, so did the Prophets, so Isaac, Gen. XXVII. 4, 7, 12, 19, 21, 22. Jacob, Gen. XLVIII. 9, 14, 17. Aaron, Levit. lX. 22. because a man cannot lay hands upon an Assembly all at once. The Priests blessing, therefore is called among the Jewes listing up of hands, and many scrupulous observations there are among them in doing it.Num. VI. 23, 24, 25. So our Lord in doing cures, (as Naaman thought Elisha would have done, 2 Kings V. II.) in blessing his Disciples, Lue. XXIV. 50. and divers the like. If then the Apostles of our Lord frequented the same Ceremo∣ny, in solemnizing Ordination, (as praying for the grace of the Holy Ghost up∣on those that received it) and in other acts of publick effect in the Church, it cannot be conceived, that any thing but their owne act brought it in force, (though the practice of Gods ancient people gave them a precedent for it) but it must be conceived, that this argues a Society of the Church, where such Ce∣remonies are instituted to celebrate such acts with, as were to provide for the maintenance of it. Here I must not forget the Law of Tithes, and the Title by which they are challenged to be due to the Church. For having made, that this, proved the Church a Corporation, by the power of making Lawes within themselves, of creating Governors, and of Excommunicating; If it be demanded, where is the common stock and revenue of it, (seeing no Corporation can subsist, with∣out means, to maintaine the attendance requisite to those things, wherein it is to communicate) it will be necessary to show, that those who founded the Church have provided for this. Tithes are commonly claimed by the Levitical Law; And, it is not easie to give a reason, why other Lawes of the Church should not come in force, or stand in force, by the Law of Moses, if it be once said, that Tithes are due to the Church under the Gospel, because they were as- signed the Levitical Priesthood by the Law. Truly it deserves consideration, whether they that insist upon the Levitical Law, in the claime of Tithes to the Church, do not prejudice the cause which they pretend to maintaine. For if they look into the tenor of the Law, it will easily appear, that Tithes of fruits of the earth are assigned the Priesthood by God, in consideration of the Land of Promise, which hee gave them; And that therefore, the practice of the Jewes at this very day is due and legal, who pay no Tithes of those fruits, be∣cause the service, for which they are due, is, by the Law prohibited out of the Land of Promise. Besides, it is manisest, that by the leter of the Law, Deut. XIV. 23. XVIII. 4. Num. XVIII. 12. of all fruits of the earth, onelyCome and Oile and Wine are Tithable; Of living creatures, the Tith goes not to the Levites, (who payed the Priesthood the Tenth of their Tithes) but to the Al∣tar, that is, they are to be sacrificed to God. So that by this means, the Priests and Levites themselves paid this Tith, as well as other Israelites, and that, no more to the interest and advantage of the Priesthood, than the Paschal Lambs, which they also sacrificed, for Tithe cattel went to the owners as the Paschal
Lambs did, the Law having provided onely, that they should be holy to the Lord, Levis. XXVII. 32. that is sacrificed to God, their bloud sprinkled upon the Altar, and their flesh eaten in Jerusalem. Which Law, providing also, that this Tith he onely of the Herd or of the flock, that is, of Bullock, Sheep, or Goat, that passeth under the rod, they that will derive the Churches claime of Tithes from the Levitical Law, must, by consequence, tye themselves to these Terms; Which would be, not to abridge the claime, but to destroy it. For, though many kindes besides these were Tithable among the Jewes, by virtue of the Constitutions of the Synagogue, yet, that would not advantage the Church, which, forsaking the Synagogue for refusing Christianity, cannot avail it self of the authority of it. And truly, hee that would insist, that the Law is in force, for the payment of Tithes to the Church, will never be able to give a reason, why it should not be in force for observing the Sabbath,) that is, the Saturday) for being circumcised, and keeping all the Festivals and Sacrifices and Purifica∣tions of the Ceremonial Law, and much more the Civil Law of that people, (as much contrary to the Civil Law of Christian people, as to Christianity) see∣ing that, whatsoever is contained in that Law which is made void by Christiani∣ty, must be understood to be void, till it appear to be contained and imported in that Act, which introduceth and establisheth Christianity in stead of the Law. Indeed, I must not say, that the Levitical Law is the onely evidence that is alle∣ged for the right of Tithes in the Church. For, every man knowes, that Abra∣hams paying Tithes to Metchiseck, the Priest of the most high God, Gen. XIV. 20. and Jacobs paying Tithes, or vowing to pay them, Gen. XXVIII. 22. are al∣leged, (as indeed they ought to be alleged) to show, that, paying of Tithes was in force under the Law of Nature, that is, in the time of the Patriarchs, before the Ceremonial Law. In which regard, God faith, that Tithes are his, Levis. XXVII.30. to wit, by a Law introduced afore. And the consequence hereof seems to be more effectual to the Church, than that which is drawn from the Levitical Law, in that consideration, which the Fathers of the Church do presse with advantage enough against the Jewes, that the Patriarchs were the fore-runners of Christians, and, that Christianity is more ancient than Ju∣daisme, in regard that the same service of God in spirit and truth, by the inward obedience of the heart, was in being in the lives of the Patriarchs, as the Go∣spel requires, before the scrupulous, and precise, and supperssitious observation of bloudy sacrifices, and smoke of fat and incense, and troublesom purifications of the outward man, and the rest of Moses positive Law was required. For, if the Law of Nature, and the conversation of the Patriarchs under it, is indeed the pattern of Christianity and of the life of Christians under the Gospel, expressed by deed, before wee finde it indented for by Covenant; Then certainly, that which ought to be out-done by the Church, is not abrogated by Christianity. But this argument being made, and allowed to be of force, hee that therefore should say, that the Church claimeth this right, by virtue of that Law, whereby it was in force under the Patriarchs, would be presently lyable to peremptory instances, of the difference of clean and unclean creatures, Gen. Vll. 2. Of rai∣sing up feed to a brother deceased, Gen. XXXVIII. II. Of the Polygamy of the Patriarchs, and others, which, though then in force, under the Gospel hold not. Wherefore, it is not to be said, that the Law of that time is the act whereby the Church claimes, but a ground, whereupon the act whereby the Church claimes was done. In like maner, hee that should affirm this right due to the Church, by virtue of the Levitical Law, would meet with these exceptions (peremptory as I suppose) that have been advanced. But, when it hath been said and made good, that the Levitical Law, supposing the Gospel ordained by God to succeed it, yields a sufficient ground to argue, that a provision answerable thereunto was to be established in the Church, as the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel, between the Synagogue and the Church requireth; I say, this being pre∣mised, there remaines nothing in question, but, how the establishing of it may be derived from the act of them, that had the settling of the Church in their hands. Considering then, that provision is made, by the Law, onely for the mainte∣nance
of Gods Ceremonial service confined to Jerusalem; (for a powerfull evidence, that the intent of that Covenant expressed no more than the Land of Promise) that the promise of bringing the Gentiles to Christianity, and the real destruction of the Law, with the Place of this service, inferrs, the service of God in all places, in spirit and truth, to succeed it under the Gospel, and by it; that no order, for all Nations that should be converted to resort to this service, can be maintained, without a Society or Corporation of the Church, visibly tel∣ling them whither to resort for that purpose; Upon these premies, it will be of necessary consequence, that the like provision, for the maintenance of that service of God which the Church professeth, be made, to that which had been made, for the service of God at Jerusalem, during the time of the Synagogue. Now the maintenance of Gods service in the Church, (with the maintenance of the Church, subsisting for no other end than that service) consists in the mainte∣nance of those persons, that are to attend on Gods service. Of which persons there are two sorts: The first is of those that attend, either upon the Govern∣ment of the Church, or else upon the minisring of those Offices, which God is served with by his Church, unto the Assemblies of his people: The second sort is of those, that, to preserve this temporal life, being obliged to attend upon the imployment of it, cannot spare themselves and their time to attend on Gods service. It was therefore necessary, that Christian people should contri∣bute the first-fruits of their goods, in Tithes, and oblations to the Church, by which, those that attended upon the publick government of it, as well as upon ministring the Offices of Christianity, should both maintain themselves, and be trusted to maintain the poor, that, for the necessities of the world, they might not neglect the Osfices of Christianity. And this necessity, necessarily impor∣ted, in the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel, between the Sy∣nagogue and the Church, but evidenced by the practice of all ages of the Church, to be the effect of the first order given out and established in the Church by the Apostles. The first order that wee finde mentioned by the Acts of the A∣postles, to have been held in the primitive Church of Jerusalem, mentioneth expresly onely the provision for the poor. But it is in the first place to be re∣membred, that the Apostles had long afore told our Lord; Behold, wee have left all things to follow thee; And if, as it is said there, Acts IV. 35. Distribution was made to every one as they had need; If their Oblations were laid at the A∣postles feet, to signifie, that they were put into their power to dispose of, as they should think fit; if the seven men whom they ordained to attend upon that Of∣fice, Acts VI. were trusted under them and by them, then is it necessary to conceive, that themselves were in the first place provided for by those Obla∣tions. It will presently be said; That, at that time, the Christians imposed upon themselves a Law to make all estates common, that all might live upon all that every one had: As hath been granted to the Anabaptists; Denying neverthe∣lesse, that it was a Law necessarily obliging all Christians, but an order which which they took up voluntarily, as, being convinced, that it was for the advance∣ment of Christianity, at that time. And S. Basil, it is plain, supposeth that they all renounced their estates, as Monks did afterwards; Otherwise, hee could not have inferred the duty of Monks from this example, as in the beginning of his short Rules hee doth. Besides, wee have Grotius his conjecture, that those Christians took up the Rule of those Essenes which were married. For, besides the Pharisees and Sadduces, whom the Lord in his Gospel so deeply condem∣neth, there was a third Sect of religious people among the Jewes, called Essens, whereof, though some lived continent, some in marriage, yet both, renouncing the property of their goods, contributed all to the maintenance of the commu∣nity into which they betook themselves. And these, being no where repro∣ved by our Lord, hee conceiveth, the Church of Jerusalem then consisted most of, and therefore their order received by the Church, as easily as introduced by the Apostles. But all this is in vain, onely that S. Basils argument stands upon a consequence, the validity whereof must be disputed in due place, that, if bare
Christians did voluntarily part with their goods in that estate, much more are those, that take upon them the profession of Monastical life, bound to do the same. For, nothing can be more evident than this; That no man was bound by any rule, common to the whole Body, to bring in his goods, but every man brought in voluntarily, what his heart prompted him to part with, all being sa∣tisfied, that they were to bring in what the maintenance of the Church, in that estate, should require. At least if wee believe S. Peter telling Ananias, Acts V. 4. Did it not remain thine owne while so it remained? And being sold, was it not at thy disposing? Which could not have been said, had hee been tied to dis∣pose of it otherwise. And Acts V. 33, 34—how it is said, that they had all things common Acts II. 44. is thus expounded; That there was great grace upon the believers, for neither did any of them want, because, as many of them as had houses and Lands sold them, and brought the prices of the things they had sold, and laid them at the Apostles feet. Neither could it have been any particular commendation for Barnabas, which, for his particular commendation followes there, that hee, having a land, did the like with it. Therefore, neither did they professe the communion of Monks, who were married, nor of Essenes, who were tied to no more than other Christians, to contribute of their estate, what∣soever the maintenance of the Church should require, but did contribute whole estates, or parts of estates, as God moved them to do that which they were not bound in that measure to do. Not was it any thing, but, not judging of that primitive estate of Christianity by that which was afterwards practised, though in an inferior degree, that moved men to grant the Anabaptists more than is true, that they were under the Law of community of goods. But I will not here repeat those texts of Scripture which I have produced, nor the arguments which I have made, for the true sense of them, and the consequences drawn, in the Right of the Church, pag. 200-220. which, I suppose to remaine in force, till some body will show mee that they are not. Onely I will particularly stand upon it, that there is no answer for S. Paul 1 Tim. V. 3, 8, 9, 16, 17. Where, the widowes that are so indeed are to be honored with a Pension: The Presbyters that rule well, especially if they labor in the Word and Doctrine, with a double one. Is Timothy commanded to see this done, and no stock provided out of which hee might do it? Why then doth hee not ask the question; Where is the money to do it with? If any Christian man or woman have widowes, (of their near kindred) let them maintaine them, and let not the Church be charged; For, they that take not care for their owne, have denied the Faith, and are worse than In∣fidels. And how shall the Church be charged, if it have no stock, nor none bound to have? Therefore I suppose, I have given a good reason, that S. Peter, when hee saith, , 1 Pet. V. 3. forbids the Presbyters to domineer over the inferior Clergy, whose Pensions were to come by their allowance. For those Pensions, being allotted to their several Offices, are most properly called . And therefore, (in Clemens Alexandrinus his relation of S. John) reported by Eusebius Eccles. Hist. III. 23. , is, to make some one of the Clergy. And Cornelius, of Novatianus, in the same Euse∣bius VI. 43. ; Because it was not lawfull for him that had been baptized in bed, for feare, (of suffering for his Christianity, which to avoid, baptisme was deferred till danger of death) to come to any place in the Clergy. And I may well take up again here, that which I alleged afore of S. John, commending Gaius, for intertaining those brethren whom Diotrephes would not suffer the Church to intertain: And of S. Paul, commanding Titus to send away Zenas and Apollos with care, that they wanted nothing. For, the same question will be fit to be asked; where they should have money to do it, did not S. Paul or S. John suppose a stock of the Church provided to do it with. If this kinde of evidence had been used, it would have been easie to have de∣rived the Title of the Church to Tithes, in the nature of First-fruits and Obla∣tions, whereof they are but a kinde, from the time and practice and constitution of the Apostles, which the History of Tithes findes no evidence for till CCCC
years after Christ: But it would have spoiled the designe of the work, if, as it is commonly thought, the designe was to destroy all title of divine right, which the Church hath, to that which is once consecrated to it. I must touch some testimonies here, because the mater is so questionable. That of Basil shall clear mee in the first place, that I bring in no new interpretation of the proceedings of the primitive Christians at Jerusalem; Hee, in Serm. de Instit. Monachorum, argueth against him, that, having made the profession of a Monk, reserves to himself any thing, either of his own will, or of his worldly good, from the ex∣ample of Ananias and Sapphira, who, having consecrated their Land to God, by professing to give the price of it to the Church, detained part of the price, and, by detaining it, drew upon themselves that judgment of God which wee know. So also, concerning the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. XI. 20, 21, 22. I will allege the passage of S. Ambrose, or whosoever writ the Commentary under his name, to show that I do no new thing, when I argue, that they suppose the right of the Church in First-fruits and Oblations. Hos notat, qui sic in Ecclesiam convenie∣bant, ut munera sua offerentes advenientibus Presbyteris, (quia adhuc Rectores Ec∣clesiis non omnibus erant constituti) totum sibi qui obtulerat vindicaret schismatis causâ. Dissensiones enim inter eos Pseudo-apostoli seminaverant, ità ut oblationes suas zelarentur, (cùm unâ at{que} eâdem prece omnium oblationes benedicerentur) ut ii, qui, ut assolet fieri, von obtulerant, aut, unde offerrent non habebant, pudore corre∣pti confunderentur, non sumentes partem. Et tam citò illud agebant, ut superve∣nientes non inveniebant quod ederent. Ideo{que}, si sic, inquit, convenitis, ut quisque su∣um sumat, domi haec agenda non in Ecclesia, nbi unitatis & mysterii causâ conveni∣tur, non dissensionis. Munus enim oblatum totius populi fit, quia in uno pane omnes significantur, 1 Cor. X. 17. per id enim quòd omnes unum sumus, de uno pane sumere oportet. Hee sets a mark upon those, who, so assembled in the Church, that, pre∣senting their Oblations to the Priests that came first, (Governors not being yet placed in all Churches) hee that offered took all for himself in regard of schism. For the false Apostles had sowed dissentions among them, so that, being zealous of their own Oblations, (whereas the Oblations of all were blessed with one and the same Prayer) they, who, as it is ordinary, had not offered, or had not whereof to offer, were seized with shame and confounded, not getting any share. Therefore, if so yee meet, as eve∣ry one to take his own, these things (saith hee) are to be done at home, not in the Church: where the meeting is not for dissentions, but for unities, and the mysteries sake. For, the gift that is offered becomes all the peoples, because, by one bread all are signified. For, in as much as wee are all one, wee are all to take of the same bread. Here you have both the order of their Feasts of Love, and the disorder which the Apostle corrects. The Oblations of all the Congregation made an inter∣tainment for all, rich and poor. They were all blessed at once, by some of the Priests; This blessing including in it the Consecration of the Eucharist. For hee saith, that they assembled for the Mysteries sake, that is, for the Sacrament, alleging S. Pauls words spoken of the Eucharist; That all are to take of the same bread, because all are one. Hereby they became the Churches goods, to intertain the Body of it. And they that challenged their Oblations for their own, by complying with the Priests who consecrated them, did it out of zeal to their own faction, that they who were not of it might not partake of their Ob∣lations, as those, whom they would not have to be of the Church. What is then the difference between those of Jerusalem and these? There, men laid down estates at the Apostles feet, to maintain this Communion daily, through the year, and continually: As the Scriptures quoted out of the Acts do evi∣dence, that it was practised for the service of God, in the Offices proper to Christianity; Whereupon it is called the daily ministration, Acts VI. 1. Here, at Corinth, the First-fruits of their goods, which they offered from time to time, as the maintenance of their Assemblies and Communion required, served the turn. For, when Christianity was propagated, it was not possible, that all Christians should give that daily attendance upon the service of God, for which, those of Jerusalem are commended in the Acts. Therefore S. Chrysostome in ad Cor. Hom. XXVII excellently reasons; That, as at Corinth, they did not
contribute their estates, as at Jerusalem; So, the reason was, because this Com∣munion was not continual, but upon set dayes; On which, after the Commu∣nion of the Eucharist, the Service being done, they refreshed themselves alto∣gether with a common internment. I confesse, hee saith, that those at Je∣rusalem had all things common, which is to be understood with that abatement which the premises require; So farre as the maintenance of this Communion, required, and, at the good will of those whose hearts God touched to do it. For the rest, that which I say is not mine, but S. Chrysostomes. In the Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians, you may see, the disorder which hee labors to com∣pose grew, about, who should consecrate the Eucharist, and by consequence, about disposing of the peoples Oblations, p. 53, 54. But Irenaeus alone is e∣nough to serve my turn. His words are these; IV. 32. Sed & discipulis suis dans consilium, primitias Deo offerre ex suis creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi nec ingrati sint, eum qui ex creaturâ panis est accepit, & gratias egit, dicens; Hoc est corpus meum. Et calicem similiter, qui est ex creaturâ se∣cundùm nos, suum sanguinem confessus est. Et Novi Testamenti novam docuit ob∣lationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in universo mundo, offert ei qui a∣limenta nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in Novo Testamento. And, (our Lord) counsailing his Disciples to offer unto God First-fruits out of his crea∣tures, (not as if hee wanted, but that they might neither be fruitlesse nor thanklesse) hee took that bread which was made of his creature, and gave thanks, saying; This is my Body. Likewise hee acknowledged the cup, consisting of the creature which wee use, to be his bloud. Teaching the new oblation of the New Testament, which the Church receiving of the Apostles, through all the world, offereth to him that feedeth us the First-fruits of his owne gifts, in the New Testament. So, the pre∣cept of Oblations goes along with the precept of celebrating the Eucharist, as provided for the maintenance of it. Againe IV. 34. Et propter hoc, illi quidem decimas suorum habebant consecratas, qui autem perceperunt libertatem, omnia quae sunt ipsorum ad dominicos decernunt usus, hilariter & liberè dantes ea, non quae sunt minora, utpote majorum spem habentes; Viduâ illâ & pauperculâ hîc totum victum suum mittente in Gazophylacium Dei. And therefore (that there might be a difference between the Oblations of slaves, and of those that are free) they, (the Jewes) had the Tithes of their goods consecrated. (by the Law) But, those who have received freedome, do themselves order all their goods to the Lords use, (as those at Jerusalem did) cheerfully and freely; Not giving lesse, as having grea∣ter hopes; But, that poore Widow throwing into the Treasury of God her whole li∣ving. Againe; Quoniam igitur cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert, justè munus ejus purum sacrificium deputatum est. Quemadmodum & Paulus Philippensibus ait; Repletus sum, acceptis ab Epaphrodito quae à vobis missa sunt, odorem suavitatis, hostiam acceptabilem placent em Deo. Oportet enim nos oblationem facere, & in omnibus gratos inveniri fabricatori Deo, in sententiâ purâ, & fide sine hypocrisi, in spe firmâ, in diectione ferventi, primitias earum quae sunt eis creaturarum offeren∣tes. Therefore, because the Church offereth with simplicity, justly is her Oblations counted a pure Sacrifice: As Paul saith to the Philippians; I am full, having re∣ceived of Epaphroditus the things which you sent, a sweet smell, an acceptable sa∣crifice, pleasing to God. For it behooveth us, making oblations, to be found in all things thankfull to God that framed us; Offering with pure mindes, and faith un∣fained, with firm hope, and servent love, the First-fruits of those creatures which wee have. You see hee qualifieth that which they sent S. Paul no otherwise, than the Oblations, out of which the Eucharist is consecrated. But chargeth the duty peremptorily upon all Christians, which evidently presupposeth, that it was in force through the whole Church: for hee declareth that they did do that, which hee moveth them cheerfully and freely to do; Making the freedome of Christians the reason, why the Gospel declareth not what is Gods, as the Law did, and so, tying them to more. Tertullian in the place afore-quoted de prae∣script. Cap. XXX. saith, that Marcion the Heretick, when hee was admitted into the Church, (out of which hee was excluded afterwards) brought in with him ducenta Sestertia: And, adversus Marc. IV. 4. Adeò antiquius est quod est secun∣dùm
nos, t & ipse illi Marcion aliquando crediderit; Quum & pecuniam in primo calore fidei Catholicae Ecclesiae contulit, projectam mox cum ipso, posteaquam à nostrâ veritate descivit. So is that (Gospel of S. Luke) which wee use the more anci∣ent, that Marcion himself sometimes believed it; When, in the first heat of the Ca∣tholick faith, hee contributed also money to the Church, which was straight cast out with him, when hee fell off to his own Heresie from our truth. How could the mo∣ney, that Marcion had brought into the Church with, be cast out with him after∣wards, but because hee offered it to the treasury of the Church, and, because, be∣ing there, it was with himself disowned by the Church; Which never would admit any offering from any body, that was not admitted to communion with the Church? For how many ancient Canons of the Church are there, in which it is forbidden to receive the Oblations of such and such, to signifie, that they are not admitted to communion with the Church? The Testimonies of Tertul∣lian, Origen and S. Cyprian, I leave them that please to peruse in the History of Tithes, Chap. IV. contenting my self, by these few to demonstrate, upon what ground, and with what intent and conscience Christians from the beginning tendred their Oblations, at the celebrating of the Eucharist: But it will as easily appear, that the Church was owner of goods and posses∣sions, which Christians did contribute to the maintenance thereof, even when it was subject to be persecuted, untill persecution was proclaimed; For then, it cannot be doubted, that the Church goods were seized into the Emperors cof∣fers. And what evidence more any man can demand for the Corporation of the Church, which Idolaters acknowledged, as long as they tolerated Christianity, I understand not. But there can be nothing so eminent as the charge laid to S. Athanasius, in the Council of Tyrus, and ever after, wheresoever his case was questioned, that, going to visit after the Council of Nicaea, and to put the acts of it in execution in the , (which was a Shire of Aegypt next to Ale∣xandria, alwaies part of the Diocesse) and coming with a guard to the Cell of one Ischyras, pretending to be a Priest among the Meletians, (whom the Coun∣cil had commanded to be subject to Athanasius, and the rest of the Catholick Bishops, upon such terms as I have remembred elsewhere) and his Cell a Church, it fell out that there was a glasse broken, which they pretended to be a Chalice. For it can no wayes be imagined, that this case should trouble the whole Church, as it did, so long as it remained questionable, whether Athanasius was regularly removed or not, had not all the Church presupposed, that Chur∣ches, and Altars, and Chalices, consecrated to God, are the Churches goods, and that the irreverence which might be showed them, might charge upon one of Athanasius his rank, a presumption of so much irreverence to Christianity, as should render him unworthy of it. Therefore Athanasius, in his Apology, ne∣ver allegeth any thing to the contrary, but many things to evidence, that there was neither Church, nor Altar, nor Chalice there. The order of the Emperor Aurelian given for the execution of the sentence of the Christian Synod at An∣tiochia against Paulus Samosatenus, is expresse and peremptory to the purpose. How can the Soveraigne acknowledg the House of the Church, (which is in our Language, the Bishops Palace at Antiochia) but hee must be understood to ac∣knowledge, that which the Christians had disposed of to the Church to be done by virtue of their Law, which hee, for that time, conniving at Christiani∣ty, alloweth to be the Churches. The good Emperor Constantine the Great, in restoring to the Church the goods and possessions which had been ravished from it in the persecution under Diocletian, and should then be found in being, (as you may see by Eusebius de Vitâ Constantini II. 36-40. Eccles. Hist. X. 5.) in∣tendeth not hereby to erect the Church into a Corporation, by a secular capaci∣ty of possessing lands or goods without interruption of Law; but, professing to restore that which was the Churches before, acknowledges, as a Christian, that right which Christians acknowledge, of holding Land and Goods, to be in the Church. For, when wee reade afore, in any records of the Church, where the persecution of Diocletian is mentioned, (as in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. IX. 9.) that Churches and Oratories were pulled down, and the books of the Scriptures
burned; were not these Churches and Oratories and Books the common goods of the Church, dedicated to the service of God, but given the Church for the purpose of it? When Constantine writ that famous letter to Eusebius, to pro∣vide fifty Copies of the Bible, was it not to furnish the Churches which hee had erected at Constantinople? There is nothing more ancient in the records of the Church, than the mention of Titles and Coemiteries, belonging to the Church at Rome; nor any thing more effectual to convince this intent, than the name and condition of the same. The maner was at Rome to set marks upon eschetes▪ and confiscations, and all other goods belonging to the Exchequer, whether moveable or immoveable, intimating, that the Exchequet claimed them, and that no man was to meddle with that Title, for so it was called. And truly, the same was the reason, why they set a bodily mark upon souldiers, to signifie them to be the Emperors men, as private men did on their goods, which occasi∣oned the allegory of the character of Baptisme, the reason whereof, S. Austine, by that comparison declares. When therefore a piece of ground or a house was given the Church to exercise their Assemblies in, the name of Title evidences, that a mark was set upon it, (whether a Crosse, as Cardinal Baronius would have it, whether visible to the world, or onely to those of the Church, I dispute not now) to distinguish the Churches goods from the goods of private persons. And therefore what can be more clear, than, that the Church had goods? In the life of Alexander Severus, you have a question about a certain place, chal∣lenged, on one side, by the Christians, on the other by the Taverners, popi∣nariis, (whom, with the like, hee had made Corporations, as the same Life rela∣teth) decreed by him in favor of Christians. It will, perhaps, be said, that it is enough to justifie those that have seized the goods of this Church, that the Tenth part, and those kindes, of which it is to be payed, are not determined by Gods Law. For, if it be once granted, that the act of man is requisite to designe what hee will please to indow the Church with; That the act of Soveraign Power is requisite, to make such or such or all kindes Tithable through each State, it will be in the Soveraigne Power, either to recall its own act, or, to limit or void the acts of particular persons. To this my answer shall be; That all this dis∣pute proceeds upon a supposition, that the men are Christians, to whom it ad∣dresseth. Seeing then it is a part of Christianity, to acknowledge the Church a Corporation founded by God, and so, capable of rights as well as of goods; Whatsoever, by any mans voluntary act it stands indowed with, as the Church of England is with all Tithes, some man may have force, no man can have right to take from it. But, I have showed further, that all Christians, whether publick or private persons, are bound to indow the Church with the First-fruits of their goods: Of which First-fruits, the Tenth hath been the part most eminently li∣mited, under the Lawes of Nature, Moses, and Christ. Therefore, the persons whereof a Commonwealth consisteth may be Christians, in giving their goods, as the necessity of the Church requires, but the Commonwealth it self cannot be Christian, but by securing such Christian acts from violence. Which if it be true, so farre must any State be, from seizing such goods, that the first thought thought should be, to restore the breach made upon Christianity by such feizures, For the intent of consecrating First-fruits and Oblations, (whether presently to be spent, or to make a standing stock) to the maintenance of one Commu∣nion and corporation of the Church, is evidenced by the same means as our common Christianity; That is, by the Scriptures, expounded by the original practice of Ghristians. And therefore, supposing Christian States were mistaken in accepting the Obligation of Tithes as from the Levitical Law, they were not mistaken, either in their duty to indow the Church, or in limiting the Tith for the discharge of it; suppoing it necessary, that all being become Christians, the rate should be limited, and that the Tenth, whether alone, or with other conse∣crations, might serve the turne. And therefore there can be no difference be∣tween the Churches goods, that is Gods, and private mens, but the difference between mans Law onely, and Gods and mans Law both, speaking of those Churches upon which mans Law hath once settled that, which private
or publick devotion hath once consecrated to God. For consider, that there is neither Kingdome nor State to be named before the Reformation, that ever un∣dertook to maintain that Christianity which it professed, wherein there hath not been a course taken, to settle Goods consecrated to God upon his Church, for the maintenance of Gods service, that it might not lye at the casuality, of Chri∣stians behaving themselves as Christians should do, whether the service of God should be maintained or not. For, though, while no man was a Christian, but hee that had resolved to undergo persecution to death, for the profession of Christiani∣ty, it was not to be doubted, that, hee who had given himself up to the Church; would not stick at giving up his goods, so farre as the necessities thereof should require; Yet, when all the world was come into the Church, (whether for love of God, or, of the World that favored the Church) what disorder might have insued, had not a standing provision been made, it is obvious to common reason to imagine: Or rather, what disorder did insue for want of it, it is evident, by the provisions of the Civil Law of all Christian Kingdoms and States, that pro∣ved requistie to prevent it for the future. Whether or no the Tenth part were due by virtue of the Levitical Law, seeing it appeareth by that which hath been said, that, from the beginning of Christianity, a stock of maintenance was due to the Church, out of the First-fruits of Christians goods, offered and dedicated to God, whereof Tithes were from the Law of Nature before Moses one kinde; They might be bad Divines in deriving the Churches Title from the Levitical Law, who had not been good Christians, had they not discharged themselves to it; But they can be neither good Divines nor good Christians, that discharge the Church of the rights so purchased to it. Alwayes, this being the course of maintaining the Church from the beginning, the evidence for the corpo∣ration of the Church is the same with the evidence for our common Christiani∣ty; To wit, the Scriptures, with the consent of all Christians to limit the mea∣ning of it. And therefore, as every Church is a Body by it self, and all Churches not∣withstanding bound to make one Body, by visible communion one with ano∣ther, which Body is the Catholick Church; So is this common stock of the Church provided for the maintenance, first of that Church whose it is, then, of the whole Church, by defraying the charge of those correspondences whereby the unity thereof is intertained. In the place afore-quoted out of my Book of the Right of the Church in a Christian State, you shall finde those Scriptures alleged, which speak of the Collections of other Churches for the maintenance of the Church of Jerusalem, the then Mother Church of all Churches. And in this Book afore Chap. X. you have evidence, that the correspondence between all Churches, by which the communion of all was to be maintained, was institu∣ted and set on foot by the Apostles. You have therefore evidence, that such a stock was requisite, even in regard of correspondence between several Churches, when you see upon what businesse it was spent. Whether this correspondence were exercised in holding of Councils, or by dayly intercourse and intelligence, the case was alwaies the same as at the Council at Ariminum, where the Fathers complained that they were detained against their will, as to the great charge of them, who were to maintaine their Representatives there. And if my memory faile not, the British Bishops particularly in Sulpitius Severus, that their Churches were not able to maintaine them there at the charge which was requisite. For Constantine indeed, at the Council of Nicaea, had furnished not onely the wa∣gons of the Exchequer to convey them to the place, but also the greatest part, if not their whole charge during the action. But his son, intending by duresse to constrain them to decree that which hee intended, (because hee knew, that, if they decreed it not, his authority would be of no more effect to induce the Church to receive it, than the Heathen Emperors had been to induce it to renounce Christianity) using his Soveraign Power in commanding his subjects to assemble and continue assembled, layed for a further burthen and duresse upon them, to continue their at their own charge, that is, at the charge of their Churches. I
will conclude with a memorable passage of S. Gregory Nazianzens, in Julianum I. where hee tells us, that, among other designes os the Apostate to extinguish Christianity, one was, to bring the Lawes of the Church into use among the Gentiles, as the means to propagate and maintain their Idolatry, which was vi∣sibly the means to propagate and maintain Christianity. Indeed it is a testimo∣ny that concerneth all parts of Church Law, and evidences all the parts of Ec∣clesiastical Power that I have insisted upon. But because it mentioneth partly the erecting of Hospitals, for the correspondence of Christians, I have put it here in the last place, where I allege the practice of the Church for the corporati∣on of it: . Hee was ready to set up Auditories (in stead of Churches) in every Ci∣ty, and Presidents of higher and lower States, readings and expositions of the do∣ctrines of the Gentiles, both, which compose mens manners, and the more abstruse. Also in part, the forme of Prayers, and censuring of sinners according to their measure. Of Catechizing also and Baptizing, and other things which manifestly be∣long to the good order that is among us. Besides, to found Hospitals to intertain stran∣gers, and convents of Virgins and Monasteries, and the humanity which wee use to the poore. Also, beside the rest of our order, that of leters of mark which wee give to those that need, when they travail from Countrey to Countrey. Julian belie∣ved not that these Orders came from God, because hee believed not Christianity. Those that can believe as hee did of these Orders, why not of Christianity? Those Christians whose purses maintained the charge of them, would not have been so forward, had they thought themselves left free to themselves, without obligation from our Lord by his Apostles. And, to that which hath been said, to make evidence of this Law, and other Lawes whereby the Church was made a Corporation by the Apostles, I will here desire the Reader to adde all that hee shall finde written by Epiphanius, in the end of his work against all Heresies; concerning the Rules and customs of that one Church, which continueth so only by separating from them. Perhaps, they who can think the Constitutions and Ca∣nons of the Apostles meer fables, because the books were not written by them to whom they are intitled, will not believe that Epiphanius would have writ the same things, had they not been real and visible. CHAP. XVII. The Power of Excommunication in the Church is not founded in the Law. What argument there is of it in the Old Testament. The allegorical sense thereof is argumentative. It was not necessary that the Christians should incurre persecu∣tion for using the Power of the Keyes, and not by virtue of the Law. I Am now come to the point principally insisted on, for all this is premised for a ground to that contradiction which I must frame, to that which hath been said against the Power of Excommunicating in the Church. To which, insisting upon the premises I say; That I am so farr from pretending that right to depend upon the Church by virtue of the Law, that I insist expresly, that there was no such thing introduced by Moses Law, or in force under the Law of Nature in the time of the Patriarchs; And not onely admit, but, as for my Interest, demand all that for truth, which the first book de Synedriis hath proved at large, and saved all them that believe it the pains of doing i again; That Excommunication came in force in the Synagogue after the Captivity, and in the dispersions of the Jewes, when they, (desiring, as their duty was, to maintaine Gods Law by which they were to be governed, and not having the Power of
insticting Penalties requisite to maintaine it, as not being inabled by their So∣veraignes) devised a course that might appear reasonable, because necessary, up∣on upposition of their own Law, and yet lesse presuming upon the Soveraigne Power; Which was, to devest those that should incurr that forfeit, of the pri∣vilege of a Jew, and to banish him the conversation of his native people, either in whole or in part, as the penalty was to be measured by the offense. And truly, I count my self with the world, obliged to him that hath imployed so much learning to show it, and, that it will onely become the wilfulness of them, who neither understand the Scriptures themselves, nor will learn of them that do, to imagine an Ecclesiastical Court distinct from the Secular, under the Law, in which the Priesthood were Judges: And to take paines, to show themselves uncapable of truth, by seeking to maintain that, which hee hath showed to be evidently false. But this being granted, I do not understand what reason can be imagined, why it should follow that, under the Gospel, there should be no such Power in the Church. For, had it been never so clear, never o much granted, that such a Power was in force under the Law, yet, could it not be derived upon the Church, mediately or immediately, from some act of our Lord Christ foun∣ding his Church, it would not have served the turne. The Law of Moses conti∣nuing Scripture to the worlds end, but Law to none but to those whom it was given to oblige: That is, the people that subsisted by receiving it, and that for that time when it was intended to be in force. But if it may appear, that the Church is made one Society and Communion by the act of them that founded it, and that such it cannot be, without a Profession, limiting or uniting the right of that Communion to him that makes it, nor stand such, without power of denying the same to him that visibly makes that Profession and visibly failes of it; Whe∣ther any such thing were in force under the Law or not, under the Gospel it shall not therefore fail to be in force. True it is, that this cannot be true, un∣lesse a competent reason may be made to appear, of something answerable to it under the Law, in the same proportion, as the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel, between the Synagogue and the Church holds. But such a one will not be wanting in this case. They that argue from the excluding of Adam out of Paradise, to the putting of sinners out of the Church, if they argue no more than a figure discernble by the truth, when competent evidence of that truth is made, conclude not amisse. For, though this be before the Law, yet, not before the purpose of God in figu∣ring Chriianity was set on foot. And, that Paradise, as it is a figure of heaven and the joyes thereof, so likewise is a figure of the Church upon earth, is neces∣sarily conequent to the reason, upon which the mystical sense of the Old Te∣stament is grounded. So likewise under the Law, the shutting of Lepers out of the camp of Israel, (answerable in the Jewes Law to the City of Jerusalem, and, supposing the truth of the Gosel, a figure of the visible Church) neither signified any cause, nor produced any effect, but of a legal incapacity of con∣versing with Gods people; But, supposing a spiritual people of God, intitled, by their profession, to remission of sins and life everlasting, a visible failleure of this profession is the cause which, producing invible separation from God, is competent to produce a visible separation from the Church, which is visibly that people. The penalty allotted to the neglect of circumcision is; The childe to be cut off from his people: Which penalty, beginning there, is afterward much frequented by the Law in many cases, the penalty whereof is, to be cut off from Gods people. Signifying, (as hee hath learnedly showed, and saved mee the pains of doing it again) that such a forfeiture should make him that incurred it lyable to be suddenly out off by Gods hand, from the land of his people. And, because it was an evident inconvenience, that a civil Law should leaye such faults to Gods punishment, who never tied himself to execute the punishment, though hee made the transgressor lyable to it, therefore the Antiens of Gods people, according to Gods Law, have allotted to such faults the punishment of scourg∣ing, as next in degree to capital, for grievous. But there are several other crimes mentioned in the Law, which, who incurres, is, by the same Law, cut off from
Gods people by being put to death. I demand now, what correspondence can be more exact, (supposing, the Law that tenders the happinesse of this life in the Land of Promise to them that undertake and observe it, to be the fore-runner of the New Covenant, that tenders remission of sins and life everlasting upon the same terms) than is seen betwixt the invisible and visible forfeiture of the privileges of Gods people in the Land of Promise, and the invisible and visible forfeiture of the Communion of Gods people, as the sin is notorious or not? Nor will it serve his turn to scorn S. Cyprian, urging, (as you may see by my book of the Right of the Church, that Origen and S. Austin do, pag. 27.) that, Excommunication in the Church is the same, as putting to death, under the Law; As proving that by a meer allusion, which, if it have not other grounds, is not like to be received. For, S. Paul saith well, that the Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation through Faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. III. 15. spea∣king of the Scriptures of the Old Testament; Because, without faith in Christ, upon the motives which his coming hath brought forth to the world, they are not able to do it; but, supposing those motives received, do inable a Christian to give a reason of that different dispensation, whereby it pleased God to go∣vern things under the Law; and so, not onely to attain salvation, but with wisedom to direct others in it, and take away stumbling blocks ot of their way to it. And in this case, should a man go about to perswade Christians to ad∣mit such a Power over them, by no other argument than this, well might the mo∣tion be scorned by them to whom it were tendred. But, there being no pre∣tense in this allegation, but, of rendring a reason for a Power of the Church from that of the Synagogue, and the Fathers so well stated in the difference be∣tween the Law and the Gospel, as, not easily chargeable of the indiscretion to use ridiculous arguments; it is to be maintained, that they have given such a rea∣son from the Old Testament as is to be required, by such as would be wise to sal∣vation by it. Indeed, I could not but observe in the late History of Henry the Eight, p. 157. where the Writer imagines what reasons Cardinal Woolsey gave the Pope, for his consent to the dissolving of some little Monasteries, for the erection of his Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich; that hee alleges among others; That the Clergy should rather fly to Tropes and Allegories, if not to Cabbala it self, than permit, that all the parts of Religious worship, though so obvious, as to fall easily within common understandings, should be without their explication. The intent whereof may just∣ly seem to charge the Clergy, to have advanced the mystical sense of the Scri∣pture, as a means to make the Religion they maintaine more considerable, for the difficulty of it. But, I would there were not too much cause to suspect, from o∣ther writings of the same Author, a compliance with Porphyry, Celsus, Julian, and other enemies of Christianity, that have not spared to charge our Lord Christ and his Apostles with abuse and imposture, in alleging the Scriptures of the Old Te∣stament impertinently to their purpose, though here hee charge onely the Clergy for that wherein they follow his and their steps. To mee, I confesse, it smelled so ranck, that I conceived my self bound to cry out upon the venene, that may be so closely couched under the words. But, to those that believe the truth of Christianity, arguments from the mystical sense of the Old Testament must not seem contemptible, (those of our Lord Christ and his Apostles being such) provided, that the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel be preserved upon the right ground, and in the right grain. Provided also, that no more waight be laid upon them, than they are able to bear; To wit, no more than wee can lay upon the Law of Moses, in proving the truth of Christianity. Which, if wee premise not the miracles of our Lord Christ, and his Apostles, done to witnesse their commission from God, together with the excellence of Christianity above Judaisme, even in the ballance of reason; If wee make not good and constant correspondence between both, wheresoever the ground of that correspondence takes place, wee allege a reason that needs a reason to de∣fend it. But if wee do that, wee imprest all the miracles done by Moses to introduce the Law, to depose for the truth of the Gospel: Wee furnish our
selves of a magazine of argument, in all points of Christianity, to convince those who have received it, what, the conitution of Gods ancient people, and the truth then on foot will inferre, upon the correspondence which they are supposed to hold, with Christianity, and with the Church. I do then freely grant, that Excommunication stood not immediately by Gods Law, among Gods ancient people, though by that Power which Gods Law had vested on them that first introduced it; Were it Esdras, (by commission from the King of Persia, as to the Power that inforced it with means to constraine, though by the Law, as to his Title, before and against other men by the Law) or whosoever it were be∣sides. But I will allege evidence for it after the return from Captivity, which, to my knowledge hath not hitherto been alleged; Namely, that which is called in the Greek Bible the third Book of Maccabees, where it is rlated, that, when some of the Jewes at Alexandria had obeyed the Edict of Ptolomee Philome∣tor, commaning to worship an Idol which hee had set up, the rest of the peo∣ple . Abhorred those of them that had turned Aposes, and condened em as enemies to the Nation, depriving them of mutual conversation and the henefit of it. III. 25. Upon the consideration of which pas∣sage I easly conclude, that of 1 Macc. XIV. 38. not to be well understood, n translted, where it is said that Razias : signifying indeed that, in the orer times, (un∣der Antiochus Epiphanes, when so many Jewes departed from their Law) hee had brought in the decree of not mixing Judaisme: That is to say, that hee had been the means of passing a decree, that those who stuck to their profession should not commnicate with the Apoates. These things were done by vir∣tue of the Law, against the will of their Soveraignes, and therefore Philometor complaines of them for it, 3 Macc. III. 16. but it is by virtue of his decree, be∣ing his subjects, that they put them to death aftrwards, VII. 8, 9, 10. I do al∣so grant, that, the putting of a man out of the Synagogue, (which, I admit to have come in by the act of those men, who, nverthlesse, had their authority originally from that act of God; which made them a people under those Lawes) imported a great abatement of the temporal privilege of each Jewes estate, in as much as it is evident, that, whosoever was banished the conversation of Jewes, in whole or in part, was, at the same rate, abated the privilege of a Jew, which they held, by the declaration of their Soveraignes, to maintain them in the use of their own Lawes. For, the privilege which a man holdeth among his people whereof hee is a native, will appeare of what consequence it is, when hee comes to live among strangers. But, I do not therefore yield, that, to be ex∣communicate out of the Church, by the original constitution thereof, and the Law of God, imports the abatement of any secular privilege: Because of the dif∣ference between the Synagogue and the Church, which God appointed to be gathered out of all Nations, under the condition of bearing Christs Crosse. For, such a company refusing their Communion to such as they exclude, can neither prejudice their persons, goods, nor fame; which, being doubtfull to the world, so long as they professe the Religion which the world owns not, returns, by consequence, when they quit that Religion, to return to the Religion of the State. Rather, as the Leviathan truly sayes, they make themselves liable to all the persecution, that may be brought upon them by such, as think they have had ill measure by being put out of the Church. Now, to that which is argued; That, because the Christians went for Jewes a∣mong the Gentiles, at the beginning of Christianity, injoying Jewes privile∣ges, and thereby the exercise of their Religion, therefore, the Excommunicati∣ons used by them must needs be such, as were in force among the Jewes accord∣ing to Moses Law, that is, by the Power which it establisheth; The answer is by denying the consequence. The reason this: The Christians at the begin∣ning communicated with the Jewes in that service of God which they used, as well in the Temple, as in the Synagogue: How should they have opportunity to make them acquainted with the Gospel otherwise? But, as sometimes they
assembled secretly among themselves for fear of the Jewes, Acts XII. 12. John XIX. 38. so also, besides those Offices which they served God with among the Jewes, in the Temple or in the Synagogue, they acknowledged others, which they held themselves bound to, and for which they retired themselves from the Jewes, Acts I. 13. II. 42, 46. III. 23. V. 42. VI. 2. The ground of their Communion with the Jewes, Christians know to have been the hope of win∣ning them to be Christians, (lasting while that hope should continue the ground of serving God in their own Assemblies) the obligation of Christianity for ever to continue. In regard of the conversation and communion which they held with the Jewes, whether Civil or Religious, they were subject to be excommu∣nicated by the Jewes. That is part of our Lords Prophesie, John XVI. 2. They shall put you out of their Synagogues; Nay, the time cometh, that whoso killeth you, shall think that hee doth God service. But, whatsoever the effect of these Excommunications might be; being driven, and confined, in a maner, to the Communion of the Church (by being excluded, or at least abridged the Commu∣nion of the Synagogue,) must they not needs forfeit their Communion, by not fulfilling the condition by which they held it? Or could they forfeit it upon o∣ther gronnds, or to other effect, than those, upon which, and to which they held it? Indeed, I will not undertake to give you many Scripture examples of Excommunications during that time. For, when it appeared, that, the Apostles discerned the secrets of mens hearts, and inflicted death on those that proceed∣ed hypocritically in their Christianity, it is no mervail, that none of the rest durst joyne themselves to them, as S. Lke informes us, Acts V. 13. that is, of those that were not perswaded sincerely to imbrace and untertake Christianity. And, Excommunication is onely for those who appear not to be sincerely Christians, denying it, either by expresse profession, or by consequence of their actions in∣consistent with it. Simon Magus may well be reckoned the first: Who, being sentenced by S. Peter to have nor part nor lot in this Word; that is, in any thing which Christianity pretendeth to give, (because it appeared, that hee had pro∣fessed it out of hope to learn how to do such strange feats, as might advance the credit and ends of his Magick) is by him exhorted indeed to repentance, but so, that the Apostle engages not himself, (that is, the Church) to pray for him, as not satisfied yet of the truth of his repentance and conversion to Christiani∣ty, Acts VIII. 18-24. Which is the very practice of the primitive Church, (as I have showed more at large in the Right of the Church, pag. 17-27.) towards Apostates, Murtherers, and Adulterers, whom many times, and in divers parts they restored not to the Communion of the Church; (As counting it very dif∣ficult for them that had failed so grosly, to give competent assurance of sincere Christianity) though exhorting them to repentance, and giving them hope of forgivenesse from the goodnesse of God, when they found not reason to ingage the Church, by restoring them, to become the warrant of it. In consequence to this passage of S. Peter with Simon Magus, and in consideration of those Texts of the New Testament which I have handled afore, though I acknowledg a Power of excommunicating in the Church, yet I do not imagine that any man could be absolutely excommunicated, further than this severity of Discipline was in force, which refused Penance to some of the most grievous sinnes. For who∣soever was, or might be, by the custome in force, re-admitted upon Penance, is rather excommunicate by his own act if hee refuse it, than by any act of the Church that requires it. But in as much as, whosoever is refused communion till hee perform his Penance, is absolutely refused not performing it, there is never a Penitential Canon in the records of the Church, never a passage mentioning Penance in any of those that writ before the Canons of the Church were in writing, that deposes not for a Power of excommunicating in the Church. As for those whose sinnes were allowed no hope to be re-admitted; though they were absolutely shut out of the Church, yet, in as much as they were sent to God with hope of mercy, they were saved, if saved) by that Key, which, by authority as well as knowledge, let them into heaven by shutting them out of the Church. But suppose this case may be understood otherwise; for the possi∣bility
of the thing, those that were subject to be excommunicated by the Syna∣gogue, are not therefore disabled to excommunicate one of themselvs, (any more, than those who now depart from the Church of Rome, are disabled to excom∣municate one of their own) though wee suppose them to passe for Jewes to the Romanes their Masters, and to injoy thereby the exercise of their Christianity. For so long as their Interest obliged not the Romanes to distinguish between carnal and spiritual Jewes, it is no mervail, if, allowing the Jewes to governe themselves in the Land of Promise, they allowed them also to persecute those whom they took for Apostates, though their own subjects. But, when the per∣secution upon the death of Steven ceased, (whether by the conversion of Paul, or by the death of Herod, or whatsoever might move the Jewes to surcease, not the Romanes to forbid it) no mervail if the Romanes maintained that liberty which the Jewes tolerated, (that is, persecuted) not in those whom they held A∣postates. For, if the Romanes themselves, in after times, did not alwaies perse∣cute Christianity when they allowed it not, is it any thing strange, that the Jewes, who held their own Religion from the meer grant of the Romanes, should finde cause, not to persecute their Apostates, as they counted the Christi∣ans, with that Power which they were allowed by the Romanes? This being the case of the first Christians in Palestine, it will be easie, thereby to take mea∣sure, how it must stand with them in the dispersions of the Jewes, to whom they were to bring the Gospel in the first place. For, suppose it intertained with that repute among them, which might preserve it from being persecuted, the fore-said reason would oblige the Christians to communicate with the Jewes, as well in the service of God in the Synagogue, as in civil converse; Though obliged moreover, as they should be able, to assemble themselves for the ser∣vice of God as Christians. So the Christians of Antiochia, whom Paul and Bar∣nabas assembled in the Church for a year together, Acts XI. 26. were not to forbear to serve God with the Jews in the Synagogue, so long as they, and Christianity could hold so much credit with them, as to give hope of reducing them to it. So, when the same Paul and Barnabas created Presbyters for the Churches which they had founded, Acts XIV. 23. sure they intended them not for the Synagogue, which was provided without them; But, to maintaine the commu∣nion of those Churches in the service of God as Christians. As for the Ro∣manes their Soveraignes, by whose grant the Jewes injoyed all that use of their Lawes which they injoyed, no man will mervail, that they took no notice of the difference between Jewes and Christians, so long as the Jewes complained not, when wee see them refuse to make themselves executioners of their wrath, upon the Christians, when they did complain. Wee must not forget Gallio, Acts XVIII. 12-17. when Paul was brought afore him, taking the difference to be onely about names and terms of their own Law, and refusing to be judge in it, though leaving them to persecute the Christians, as, by their own Customs, namely by scourging, they might do. Nor mervail, that hee at that time, should think no more of it, when wee finde by Origen, that Celsus the Epicurean, wri∣ting against the Christians two hundred years after, takes it for a suit about goats wooll, which is nothing. As for the Edict of Claudius, that all Jewes should depart from Rome, Acts XVIII. 2. the case is plain, that Aquila and Priscilla, and all native Jewes, though Christians, were involved in it, and bound to with∣draw. But, whether or no it layed hold on those that had been converted to Christianity being Gentiles, and had not the legal mark of Jewes, which was Circumcision, upon them, by the text of S. Luke appears not; No, though wee suppose, that which I have showed, in the Primitive Government of Churches, p. 53-57. to be probable, and have still much reason to believe, that the Chri∣stians at Rome lived at first divided into two Bodies, one of Jewes under S. Pe∣ter, the other of Gentiles under S. Paul. For the Jewes, as, in the Land of Promise, they were bound by the Law to protect strangers, (such as, renouncing Idols, should professe to serve the true God) but not to suffer Idolaters to live in it; So, in their dispersions, they must needs finde themselves bound, propor∣tionably, to cherish those that should make the like profession, whom they cal∣led
the Godly of the Nations. But the Empire, and the Ministers thereof, whether they intended to comprise them in the right and privilege of Jewes, because joyned to their Religion, or of Gentiles, because uncircumcised, the text of that Scripture decides not. I confesse, considering the words of Sueto∣nius Claud. XXV. Judaeos, impulsore Chresto assiduè tumultuantes, Roma expu∣lit; The Jewes, raising continual tumults at the moving of Chrestus; hee drove out of Rome; I cannot give a better reason for the tumults, which, hee saith, oc∣casioned the Edict, than the difference between them and the Christians, part of whom were Jewes, others adheered to them as Gentiles converted to the true God. Whether his meaning be, to lay the fault upon the Christians, (sup∣posing that it is our Lord Christ whom hee calls Chrestus, no difference in found being discernable) Or, whether hee meant to say, that one Chrestus, a Jew in Rome was author of those tumults (as some would have it) no reason can be gi∣ven for those tumults so probable. But whether so or not, to our purpose it will be of no consequence. For, as well Gentilish as Jewish Christians being forced from Rome, and seeking shelter among Christians elswhere, would easi∣ly accomodate themselves with the Jewes of other parts, upon the same terms as Christians did otherwise, and yet continue to preserve themselves Christians, and thereby members of the Church, upon such terms as all Christians under∣stood. It should seem, by the Epistle to the Ephesians I. 11, 12, 13. II. 2, 3. 11-20. III. 1-6. that the first foundation of that Church was meerly of Gen∣tiles, the Jewes that may have been converted being so few, that S. Paul held them not considerable to be taken notice of in his Epistle. A thing that agrees punctually with that which S. Luke relates, Acts XIX. 8, 9, 10. that S. Paul, perceiving hee could not prevail with the Jewes by his discourses in the Syna∣gogue, departed, and separated the Disciples, that is the Christians, from them, disputing dayly in the School of one Tyrannus. And this for two years, till the Gospel was known to all Asia, Jewes and Gentiles. (This Tyrannus neverthe∣lesse, holding a School, seems to have been a Doctor of the Jewes Law, so that all Jewes refused not the Faith.) These, I suppose, no man will argue that they used Excommunication as the Jewes did, because they had departed from the Jewes: And yet, it is agreeable to the case under Gallio, to conceive, that they were looked upon by the Romanes, as a sort of men that had broke from the Jewes, whose Religion they had professed afore, and indifferently protected by them, as not concerned in the difference, while no Law was made against Chri∣stianity. The coming indeed of S. John into Asia seems to have inned a very great harvest of Jews into the Church, by that compliance which his successors at Ephesus, and in the rest of Asia, held with the Jewes, for the winning of them to Christianity. But this was afterwards. In fine, before the separation of Christians from the Jewes, the Church seems to have been, as it were, a childe unborn in the mothers womb, which, though it draw the means of subsistence from the mother, yet is it complete in all the same faculties of life which it shall exercise afterwards: So, whatsoever it was fit for the Church to do while it held communion with the Synagogue, it was able then, by the Power of condu∣cting as well as founding it in the Apostles, to do whatsoever it did afterwards, onely the Body was strangely changed which it was to govern.
CHAP. XVIII. The difference between S. Pauls anathema and that of the Jewes. It is not necessa∣ry that the Christians anathema should signifie cursing. That the incestuous per∣son at Corinth was Excommunicated by S. Paul. Jurisdiction of the Church. Telling the Church, binding and loosing, holding him that is bound for a Heathen or a Publicane, signisie the same. The coherence of our Lords discourse. Of Excommunication and Indulgence by private persons in the Ancient Church. That Excommunication and the Power of the Church could not come in force by the voluntary consent of the first Christians. How it may be said to be volunta∣ry. Of the confederacy of the primitive Christians. ANd here, I cannot chuse but mervail, that the Anathema which S. Pauls Epi∣stles mention sometimes, should be made an argument, that the Excom∣munication which hee means by it is the same which the Jews used, because theirs was called by the same name. For the answer is the same that I said afore, of the name of the Church, but, there is more particular evidence for the reason here, in the words of the Apostle. I do, for my part, believe them that conceive, the name by which the Jewes call anathema, that is , to signifie the same that S. Paul means by maranatha. For the Jewes use to call God , that is, the Name. And this, I conceive, they compound with the Verb , signi∣fying to come, and to make of both the Verb , signifying maledixit or execravit, hee cursed by the coming of God. Though they use it to signifie the least degree of Excommunication, whereas, to curse a man by the coming of God, seems to leave him to God to take vengeance of, as incurable and despe∣rate; For every man knows how much difference there is between the original and use of words. Now it is evident by the writings of the Prophets every where, that they use to describe the appearance of God to punish sin, in the stile of Gods coming. And in that stile the passage which S. Jude referreth to, proceedeth, Jude 14, 15. Behold the Lord cometh with his holy myriads, to execute vengeance on all, and to reprove all their wickednesse, for all the wicked works that they have done, and for all the hard words which they have stoken against him as wicked sinners. For these are the words, which Enoch, the seventh from Adam, is brought in speak∣ing in that place, to the old world whom hee preached to, to recall them from that wickednesse, which, in the end, was punished by the deluge. Now, when S. Paul saith, 1 Cor. XVI. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be a∣nathema, maranatha. It is plain, that Maranatha signifies our Lord comes; And so referrs to the second coming of our Lord Christ, which the Gospel preaches. For this learned person, in the first book de Synedriis, p. 214. acknowledges, that it is not in use among the Jewes. And the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel requires, that those things which are prophesied in the Old Testament concerning the coming of God, be understood to be com∣pleted in the second coming of Christ: According to that of S. Paul, Rom. XIV. 10, 11. Wee shall all be presented before the Judgment seat of Christ, as it is writ∣ten; As I live, saith the Lord; To mee shall every knee bow, and every tongue shall give glory to God. Where, that which the Prophet had said of the appea∣rance of God in former judgments concerning his people, Esa. XLV. 23. that, the Apostle affirmeth to be fulfilled in the coming of our Lord Christ to judg∣ment. Therefore, when S. Paul sayes, Let him be anathema maranatha, hee means, let him expect vengeance at the second coming of Christ: At which, S. Jude sayes, that the Prophesie of Enoch against the old world shall be accom∣plished upon those that hee writes against; For how can hee say otherwise; Enoch prophesied against these? And can it be thought, that a Jewish Excommu∣nication can proceed upon supposition of the coming of our Lord Christ to judgment? That were as much a jest, as that of the History of Don Quixote, where hee saith; That the original Historian in the Arabick, being a Mahume∣tane, protests the truth of it, upon the faith of a good Christian. So, when S. Paul saith again, Rom. IX. 3. I my self could wish to be anathema from Christ,
for my brethren, my kindred according to the flesh. I will not dispute that ingenious interpretation of Grotius, which this Learned person, with others, allows; That hee wishes, in stead of an Apostle, and Chief in the Church, to be counted a man unfit for any Christian to converse with: For it punctually agrees with S. Pauls stile, 1 Cor. XII. 12. For, as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so is Christ; That is to say, the Church. And so Gal. III. 27. Wee are baptized into Christ, because into the Church. But, admitting this interpretation, how can it be imagined to signifie a Jewish Excommunication, that cuts of a Christian from the Church? Hee that is put out of the Synagogue, in as much as hee is put out of it, is made Ana∣thema to Moses, not to Christ. That is, hee is cut off from the privileges of a Jew, from the hope of returning into the Land of Promise, and freedom in it from the yoke of forrain Nations; Not from the hope of life everlasting, which they indeed promise themselves by the Law of Moses, but Christians know they cannot have, unlesse they renounce the holding of it from the Law of Moses. And therefore S. Paul, when hee bids Anathema to whosoever shall preach ano∣ther Gospel than that which hee had preached, Gal. I. 8, 9. must needs mean the same as a Christian, which hee signifies to be meant by him that calleth Jesus anathema, 1 Cor. XII. 3. Hee that calleth Jesus anathema, defieth him as reje∣cted by God. Anathema indeed signifieth that which is consecrated to God: But it answers the Hebrew word , as in Levit. XXVIII. because conse∣cration was a profession of abandoning for ever that which was consecrated, im∣plying a curse upon all that should lay hands on it to any other use. And when the Jewes said to their Fathers or Mothers; Be it Korban, whatsoever thou may∣est be the better for of mine; They cursed themselves, if ever their Father or Mo∣ther were the better for any goods of theirs, as much, as if they should give them things consecrated to eat or to drink: Supposing that if they did so, no man was to touch or come near them more than consecrated things. So, when God made Jericho anathema or , whatsoever was not for the use of Gods ser∣vice was to be destroyed; whatsoever might be for his service, hee that laid hands on it to any other use, became himself of the condition of that which was not for Gods service. And such the Apostle professeth to hold him, whoso∣ever should preach any other Gospel besides that which hee had preached. For, I must not allow, that the Church, when it excommunicateth, or the A∣postle, when hee biddeth anathema, intendeth to curse, that is to say, to pray to God, actually to bring those curses upon them which they are liable to; Though I confesse this is not the place to dispute such a question, because the resolution of it will suppose something, which can neither be proved, nor supposed with∣out proof in this place, where my purpose is to settle the Principles of Christi∣an Truth, by which Principles this is to be resolved. It shall be enough to say here, that it is evident, that the Greek Church, following an order or sentence of S. John Chrysostomes, doth, for the most part, insist, that Christians are not to curse Christians; Whatsoever be the practice of the Church of Rome, in the Bull of Maundy Thursday at this time. And yet the very present practice of that Church doth not seem necessarily to import praying for Gods vengeance upon Hereticks, and others who are then cursed; Because it is their custome to pray for their conversion the very next day, that is, on Good Friday. There∣fore it may very well seem, that all their Solemnities of cursing do not amount to signifie, that the Church prayes for mischief upon them whom they declare to be accursed, but by these solemnities expresse how they would have them esteemed by Christians. Though, by that corruption of Christian charity which time hath brought to passe, it be now generally understood no otherwise, than as a Prayer for Gods vengeance; And there may be great reason to think, that the ancient Fathers and Councils did not pronounce anathema against Hereticks in any other sense, or to any other purpose. Nay the words of Vincentius Li∣rinensis, which I quoted afore, make it most evident, that the ancient Christians understood nothing else by Anathema, when hee expounds S. Paul Gal. I. 8, 9. Anathema sit, inquit; Id est, separatus, segregatus, exclusus, nè unius ovis dirum
contagium innoxium gregem Christi venenatâ permistione contaminet. Let him be anathema, saith hee; That is, let him be severed, set aside, shut out, least the dire∣full contagion of one sheep, with any mixture of venene, stain the innocent flock of Christ. Which is enough to show, that therefore it ought not to have been put into the definition of that Excommunication which is pretended to be made by the Power of the Church, that it containeth a curse or curses against them on whom it is inflicted, as you shall finde the first book de Synedriis doth, in the place quoted afore. Because, those that agree in challenging that right for the Church, do not appear to agree in that point. And this will serve for an argu∣ment of difference between the Excommunications of Jewes and of Christi∣ans. For, the first without question were curses, of the second, it is at least que∣stionable, whether it stand with Christianity to take them for curses or not. I do believe that which is said in the first book de Synedriis, pag. 209. that the Jewes did not so cut a man off by Excommunication, as to cast him quite out of their Body; But so, as to deprive him of free conversation with his native peo∣ple; To wit, according to the terms limited there afore, the lesse, that no man should come within his four cubits; The greater, that hee should dwell in a co∣tage alone, and have bread and water brought him, and see no man otherwise. Neither do I finde any third kinde by the Jewes Constitutions, which others would have. But it were a wrong to common sense to extend this to Apostares. Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryphone, and after him Epiphanius haer. XXX. and Je∣rome in Esa. tells us, that the Jewes, shortly after our Saviors time, sent an Or∣der through all Synagogues over the world, to curse the Christians thrice a day, at publick Prayers in their Synagogues. And at that time practised all means possible to stirr up the Empire to persecute them to the death. Neither was it strange they should proceed so farr, against those whom they took for Apo∣states, because the punishments which their own body could inflict would not serve their turn. But this is evidently another thing than that which the great Excommunication by their Rules importeth. In the mean time, here you have cursing to the purpose, in this utmost exigent; But so, that ordinary Excommu∣nication amongst them imported a proportionable measure of the same. That the Apostles should intend to curse, nothing can seem so pregnant as the words of S. Peter to Simon Magus, Acts VIII. 20. Thy money perish with thee. But hee that, in the next words, advises with so much charity; Repent thee of this thy wickednesse, and pray to God, if perhaps this designe of thy heart may be forgiven thee; I suppose was farr enough from wishing, that hee might perish, whom hee seeks to reclaim. Neither is there any reason why hee should wish his money to perish, which the first sound of his words beareth. And therefore it will be requisite to take it for an expression, signifying, that hee held, and would have the Church hold him as certainly in the way and state of perdition, as the money that hee loved was perishable. Much more, when S. Paul wisheth himself anathe∣ma, or him that should preach a new Gospel, or loved not the Lord Jesus, it is not his intent to pray for the evil which anathema signifies upon them, but to in∣duce the Church to take them for such men, as the Church believes to be liable to the utmost of Gods curses. As for the businesse between S. Paul and the Corinthians, thereare in it so evident marks of Penance injoyned by that Church upon the Apostles Order, as no wit, no learning can serve to deface. S. Paul advises them to restore the Offender in these terms, 2 Cor. II. 5. ▪ 11. If any body hath grieved mee, hee hath not grieved mee but in part, that I may not charge you all. Sufficient for such a one is this censure inflicted by many. So that yee are rather to gratifie and comfort him, least such a one should be swallowed up with too much sorrow. Wherefore I pray you settle love towards him. For, I writ also for this end, to know the trial of you, whe∣ther you be obedient in all things. But if you grant any thing, I also grant it. For, if I have granted any thing for your sake, in respect of Christ I have granted it, that Satan get nothing by us; For wee are not ignorant of his devices. What is the censure inflicted by many, but the Penance, which the Church, upon S. Pauls order having injoyned, now desires the Apostle to rest content with; which
hereby hee accords? What is it that hee granteth, because they grant it, but in respect of Christ, willing them also to gratifie and comfort him whom they had censured; But, (upon undergoing this censure) the re-admitting of him to the Communion of the Church? Since Luther first disputed against Indulgences, this Text hath been in every mans mouth. Was there ever any reason to deny, that there is in the Church a Power of abating Penance once injoyned, upon trial of him that undergoes it? Or, that the example of S. Paul in this place is good evidence for it? Had there been any controversie about it, if the Church of Rome had demanded no more under this title? Though, to speak my own minde, perhaps men mistake this Indulgence, because they take not S. Pauls pro∣ceeding to be so rigid, as the strictnesse of discipline under the Apostles re∣quires. They take it commonly, as I said, that S. Paul, hereby, releases him of the Penance that had been injoyned; whereas, it may be, hee onely admits him to Penance at their request, and so, to the Prayers of the Church. Being for∣merly so excluded from the Church, as not to be assured of his reconcilement with God by the warrant of the Church, though not excluded from the hope of it by the mercy of God. Tertullian indeed hath an opinion, that it is not the same man whom the Apostle commanded them to deliver to Satan afore, 1 Cor. V. 5. Because, as I said afore, according to the strictnesse of the Monta∣nis, hee will not believe, that the Apostle would admit such a sinner upon any Penance. But this opinion is excluded by the expresse words of the Scripture; For I writ also for this cause, to know the trial of you; which show that this is the case which hee writ of in his former Epistle. It remains therefore, that, upon S. Pauls first Epistle hee was delivered to Satan, but, upon their submission, and request that hee would be content with the censure which they propose, hee admits him to the comfort of their Prayers. According to this supposition, the Indulgence which S. Paul admits, is not the releasing of Penance injoyned, as afterwards it signified in the Church; but the injoyning of Penance, inferring a grant of the Prayers of the Church, towards the means of reconcilement. But, whatsoever become of this, Indulgence presupposeth the censure which it mitigateth, and therefore, the Communion of the Church, either abated or quite taken from him, whom it restoreth to it. And, what is the mater that S. Paul grants that which hee grants for their sakes, but in respect to Christ, that Sa∣tan, (saith hee) whose devices wee are acquainted with, get nothing by us? Two reasons are rendred for this: The one, in respect of the party excluded, not to drive him to despair of salvation by Christianity, and consequently to Apostasy, or what else that despair might produce: The other, (which I remember S. Au∣stine in some place advances, as the reason, whereupon the Church, in after ages, was driven to abate of that strictnesse that was in force under the Apostles) least those that favored the party excluded, if hee should be refused upon the submission tendred, should make a faction and separate from the Church. Take whether you will of these reasons that have been said, or produce a better that hath not been rendred yet, you shall never make that good which S. Paul saith, 2 Cor. VII. 11. Plainly, yee have approved your selves clear in the businesse; But in this sense: That, whereas before there was a party that bare out this incestu∣ous person in his attempt, upon the coming of the first Epistle, the better part prevailed to do that, which S. Paul saith they should have done afore, 1 Cor. V. 2. Yee are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that hee which did this deed might be taken from among you. For, since it is evident by divers passages of the primitive Church, that Excommunication was solemnized in a fashion of mour∣ning, as for a member whom the Church had lost, what reason can be given, why S. Paul, when hee speaks of mourning in this case, should mean any thing else? At least, for Epiphanius his sake, accept of his reasons before any mans opinion without it. Hee, when S. Paul sayes, 1 Cor. XII. 21. I fear God will humble mee in respect of you when I come, and, that I shall mourn for many, that have sin∣ned afore, and not repented, (by that time I come) of the uncleannesse, whoredome, and wantonnesse which they have done; renders the reason of this mourning of S. Paul, to be for those whom hee should be constrained to put out of the
Church; Either then utterly lost, or for their reconcilement with God, being admitted to Penance. Though Epiphanius distinguishes not between mourn∣ing for the reconcilement of sinners, and mourning for the losse of them, when they were shut out of the Church. Now when S. Paul writes to them, 1 Cor. V. 11. not to converse, not so much as to eat with him that is called a brother, and is a whoremaster, a slanderer, a chea∣ter, an Idolater, a drunkard, an oppressor or the like; Hee that will, may pretend to take this for no more but good counsail: But hee shall not consider what follows; For what have I to do to judge those that are without? Do not yee judge those that are within? And yee shall heave out from among you him that hath done evil. Which good counsail will not serve to do: but Censure or Judgment, call it what you please; Not as of a Court, pretending force to execute the sentence by virtue of the Laws of the Empire: But as every Society or Cor∣poration, so farre as it is so, hath a Jurisdiction answerable to the end and pre∣tense for which and upon which it stands, whereby the Laws must be inforced, without which no such Body can continue. I grant, that Jurisdiction absolute∣ly named, and without any addition, is that of a Civil State, which, by force of lawfull arms is able to execute the sentence which the ministers thereof give. But every State maintaineth the Corporation which the Charter thereof consti∣tuteth. And, all Christian States are to maintain the Corporation of the Church, if constituted by God. And in this regard, both the Rules by which the community of the Church stands, are truly called Laws, and, the Jurisdicti∣on of the Church is the exercise of that Power which executes the same. So Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction is really Jurisdiction, though Jurisdiction according to the Romane Laws is resolved into the Power of the Sword, whereupon it de∣pendeth. When S. Paul writes to Titus III. 10. to avoid a man that is an He∣retick, after the first and second warning; When S. John writeth, 2 John 10, 11. Hee that cometh to you, and bringeth not this doctrine, (of God the Father, and the Son come in the flesh) receive him not home, nor bid him God speed; For hee that biddeth him God speed is accessory to his evil works; When S. John, accor∣ding to this Precept, refused to come into the Bath with Cerinthus, his Scholar Polycarpus to own Marcion otherwise, than as the first-born of the Devil; it is more than good counsail which tied them to forbear even Civil conversation with those, whom, thereby they demonstrated, how farr they would be from communicating with, in the Offices of Christianity. Neither is the objection of that waight as is pretended, that Judas communicated in the Eucharist, at the last Supper of our Lord. For it is notorious to all that understand but a little in Christianity, that it is not sin, but the notoriousnesse of sin that renders a man liable to be Excommunicate: Even as it is not Christianity, but the pro∣fession of it that qualifies a man to be of the Church. The reason of it being this, that others may not think, that such as notoriously act contrary to that pro∣fession, can be capable of the promises to which it intitleth. Which opinion cannot be grounded upon sins that are not publickly seen. For, even when they are seen, there is yet a difference between legal conviction, and that which is onely sensible and reasonable. Neither is any man legally convicted, till hee or they who are to act in behalf of the Body, whatsoever it is, declare them convicted. For though it were to be wished, that all notorious sin could be le∣gally convicted; Yet, because the execution of Laws without discretion mani∣festly tends to the ruine of all Societies; It is also to be excepted, that, neither is the toleration of notorious sins in the Church a just argument, that there is no such thing as Law or Jurisdiction or a Community of the Church, that may put away such sin. To that case then I say, that, neither the knowledge of our Lord, nor of his Disciples, concerning Judas his wickednesse, rendred him un∣capable of the Eucharist, even according to the ordinary Rule of the Church. A legal conviction was requisite over and above, which might either demon∣strate him uncapable of the quality of a Disciple, that is, of a Christian, or be a means to reconcile him to that quality, and so to the society of Christs Disci∣ples. And this conviction, absolutely depending upon the will of our Lord to
publish the sentence, cannot be thought to be had, so long as hee declared no∣thing in it. If any man here object the inconveniences, which the perempto∣ry prohibition of conversing with the Excommunicate must needs cause, in that state of things, which the incorporating of the Church into Christian Com∣monwealths necessarily produceth; let mee desire him to have patience for an answer to this, which I shall have a care to give, before I leave this point, but cannot before I have premised something more. As for that which may be ob∣jected, that S. Paul, by saying; Do not yee judge those that are without; makes the Body of every Church, that is, the people thereof, or the commonalty, judge; It shall be sufficient to remember that which I said afore, that the intent at present being onely to prove a Corporation of the Church by divine right, it is sufficient in this place, onely to show, that there is a right in the Body of the Church, by Gods appointment, to do such things, as the Nature of a Soci∣ety founded upon a Charter of Gods, inferreth: For, whatsoever persons shall be by the same appointment inabled to act for the Church, and to conclude it, (as in no form of Government the whole is able to act by it self) whatsoever is done by those persons is reasonably and legally said to be done by the Church, though I referr it to another dispute to determine, what persons they are, and in what cases. These reasons therefore do satisfie mee, that, the delivering to Sa∣tan which S. Paul condemns the incestuous person to, implies indeed something extraordinary, which the sentence of Excommunication in these dayes produ∣ceth not: And it is this; That, during the time of the Apostles, to manifest the presence of God in his Church, those that were shut out of it became sub∣ject to the visible incursion of evil spirits, plaguing them with bodily diseases; Which S. Paul calleth the destruction of the flesh; Intimating, that Gods end in them was, to reduce him to the sense of that Christianity which hee had professed, that, by inwardly returning to it, the spirit might be saved in the day of Christ, whether or no, by outwardly professing it, hee might be reconciled to the Church, for salvation by the means of it. As for the words of our Lord, Dic Ecclesiae; I will not insist upon the im∣probabilities of Erastus his interpretation, that, Let him be unto thee as a Hea∣then or a Publicane, is no more but this; Be it lawfull for thee to sue him in the Romanes Court. For this I say; It is plain by S. Paul 1 Cor. VI. 1. that our Lords Disciples, that is Christians, might in no case implead one another before the Gentiles, whatsoever Erastus imagine: Which, it is plain, the Jewes also did their utmost to avoid. Nor is the other more probable, that makes it no more, than, that upon his neglect of the Synagogue, hee was free to return scorn, and to avoid him who had scorned the Synagogue. For, would our Lord binde his Disciples to resort to the Synagogue, and yet obtain nothing but leave to scorn him that scorned them first, and afterwards the Synagogue? Besides the inconvenience common to both these interptetations; that, such a precept to his Disciples, that is, to all Christians, should concern them no longer, nor in any other consideration, than that, for which, at the first, Christians were bound to comply with the Synagogue; which compliance, not onely what it was, but, even what it signified, they then understood no more, than hee that understands nothing. But I leave all other advantage, to prosecute the princi∣ple premised: That the Disciples of our Lord acknowledged a new King of Israel, (which, the title of Gods anointed, the Messias signified) a new Covenant by which hee was their King, a new Israel according to the Spirit, not according to the flesh, and, by consequence, new Laws, which a New Common-wealth must needs inferr. And therefore, call it what you will; Synagogue, (which as yet they understood not to be void) or Church, (which they understood must be, but that it should be distinct from the Synagogue understood not) being commanded to tell the Assembly, they must understand it to be an Assembly of themselves, Christs Disciples, which all Jews might be, for any thing they yet understood. And, when our Lord saith; Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man or as a Publicane; though they understood that Heathen men and Publi∣canes resorted to the Temple, as also those that were Excommunicate by the
Synagogue did, (because the Law stood not upon any promise of the world to come, but upon the privilege and sitl of a Jew, to all rights that Jewes were in∣dowed with) yet they underflood also, that our Lord spoke in Parables, contain∣ing sharp speeches, figures and riddles. When hee faith; Hee that smiteth thee on the right cheek, turn him the left; they underflood, that himself no way bal∣ked his own command, when, being smitten by the Jews Ministers, hee an-swered not by turning the other cheek: But, that his meaning was, to have his Disciples as ready to do them good that so should assront them, as if they should pleasure his anger, by turning him another cheek to strike. And when hee faith; Hee that constraineth thee to go a mile with him, go thou twain; His meaning is not, that they should leave their businesse to be counted fools for it: But, to be ready to do him as great a pleasure. So, hee that fees the Jews so to avoid the society of the Gentiles, (and by consequence of publianes, who has ne∣cessary and continual frequentation with Gentiles) that, when they came from the Piazza, they washed their hands before they went to meat, (as polluted by coming near them) hee that fees S. Peter obliged to give account to his brethren the Jewish Christians, why hee did eat with Cornelius and his Company, though worthippers of the true God, and such as had imbraced the Faith; that fees God instruct him so to do, by the vision of earing unclean beasts, as if hee could no more do the one than the other by the Law; Hee, I fay, that considers these things will say, that our Lord, when hee sayes, Let him be to thee as an Heathen man or a Publicane, hath very sharply expressed the fame that S. Paul means, when hee sayes; with such a one no not to eat. And therefore I conclude his meaning to be that which I have concluded heretofore, that his Disciples should carry none of their suits, though concerning mater of Interest, out of the Church, but stand to what it shall determine. For, how should S. Paul de∣mand; Dare any of you, having a cause with another, go to suit before the unrigh∣teous and not before the Saints? I Cor. VI. I. If it had not been a Law known to Christians, that their suits were to be determined within themselves? Re∣ferring my self for further evidence, that this was then in force, to what hath been showed in another place, and having not been contradicted, must needs be in force. And if any man shall object, that this would be the ruine of all States so soon as they prosesse Christianity, if the Jurisdiction of them should be swallowed up in the Jurisdiction of the Church, all causes being, in that case, causes of Christians; For an answer, referring him, not onely to that which I have said already there, but, to that which I purpose to say further before I have done with this point And upon these terms I grant Erastus, that, when out Lord sayes; Let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publicane; Hee sayes in ef∣fect, be it lawfull for thee to sue him in the Court of the Gentiles: Not as if our Lord did allow that which S. Paul forbids; That a Christian should sue a Christian before Gentiles: But because, being to be held as a Heathen or a Pub∣licane, as being Excommunicate, (that is to say, suppposing that to be true, which Erastus would have to be salse) by consequence, and in effect it would become lawfull to sue him before Gentiles, as being no longer a Christian. Now, when it followeth; What forever yee binde on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever yee loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; If wee take bin∣ding and loosing in a general sense, to signifie that Power of giving Law, so that hereeby the Church is inabled to give Law to the Church (setting aside for the present, who of the Church is to give Law, who to receive it) then I say, that, by virtue hereof, the Power of Excommunicating is given to the Church: Because it is nothing else but such a Right established by a Law of God; And, if God give his Church a Power to make Laws, then hee gives it Power to make a Law that shall give force to all the rest, by inacting that penalty that shall be requisite to restrain disobedience. But, if wee take the terms of binding and loosing as they are used among the Jews, (and, by consequence, when that which is unlawfull is done, for declaring what is lawfull or unlawfull to be done to be discharged of it) I say that, admitting the difference between the Law and the Gospel which I have established, the Power of Excommunicating
will follow in the Church. For, supposing the Law not to tender remission of sin in order to life everlafting, but to the remporal privileges of a Jew; to be bound and to be loose will signifie no more, than, to be in or out of possession of those privileges, uncapable or capable of the fame, by doing or not doing what the Law requireth to be done for that purpose. In the mean time, this Power will argue a Common-wealth of Israel, founded by God, by virtue of which foundation, the Power of those who are inabled by the Law to make this declaration takes effect to all purposes contained in the Law. But. suppo∣sing the Gospel to tender remission of sins in order to life everlasting, upon such terms as the Covenant of Grace importeth; To be bound and to be loose will signifie freedom from sin, or the captivity and fervitude of it. And there∣fore the Power of declaring this estare, and, what is to be done for the attain∣ing of it, will necessarily inserre a Society of the Church, founded upon the Power of making that declaration, whereupon, any man may be accepted for such; Neither can it be imagined, that any part, any degree of the fame can be in any man, but so farr, and to effect, as the Community of the Church shall have allowed. It is not now unknown, that divers of those that dispute Con∣troversies for the Church of Rome, do challenge the Power of making Law, for the Church, by virtue of this Power of binding and loosing given by our Lord to his Apostles. And this opinion taketh place by the former interpretation of these words, which being admitted, that consequence cannot be refused. But, taking the Power of binding and loosing to be by virtue of the Keyes of Gods House, which are the Keyes of David, or the House of David, the figure of the Church, (which is that signification which the language of the Scripture re∣quired, when our Lord. having promised his Church, adds, Mat. XVI. 19. Unto thee will I give the Keyes of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in heaven, what soever thou loosest on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.) The Power of binding and loosing in the Church will be correspon∣dent to that, which the Doctors of the Synagogue had, of declaring this or that lawfull or unlawfull according to Moses Laws, and a man tied to do this or that for maintaining his privilege by it. And having said this, I conceive I have done more, than hee that distinguished these two meanings in our Lords words thought fit to do. Hee, distinguishing thus in the first book de Synedriis, pag. 291— hath thought it enough to argue, that neither the one nor the other will serve to ground the Power of Excommunicating in the Church; Wherein, what hee hath proved, I referre my self to that which hath been said. But in what sense the words of our Lord are to be understood, according to his own opinion, hee hath not declared, how requisite foever it had been to do, as I, according to my opinion, indeavor to do. As for that little Objection, that, in Our Lords words, it is not persons but things, that are said to be bound and loose; It is to be underflood, that things are neither bound nor loose of them∣selves; But that, by the way of common understanding of men, and speech, it is attributed to them from the obligations that Iye upon men or persons, by vir∣tue of which obligations, or freedom from them, such things as they import are said to be bound or loose, as lawfull or unlawfull for them to use, who, using them, are either bound or free to such rights, as the using or not using of them inferrs. Though by consequence of this Power, the Power of binding by Law, or loosing, (that is, of leaving free without tying by Law) will naturally follow. For as in Civil Government, whatfoever person or persons are, abso∣lutely and without limitaiton, indowed with the Soveraign Power, must necessa∣raily be indowed with the Power of giving Law, whereby they do but limit themselves what Law they will govern by, which is, before those Laws be de∣clared, their will and pleasure; So, if wee suppose in the Church, a Power of admitting into, and casting out of the Society of the Church, wee must needs suppose a Power of giving Law to this Society, because no Society at all can have Communion with it self, but according to some Rules of exercising the said Communion; which, for the present, are called Laws. Now, our Lord Christ. ha∣ving given his Disciples the Power of binding and Loosing, by opening or shut∣ting.
the doors of his Church, that is, by admitting into, or excluding out of it; hath thereby given them the Power of framing his Catholick Church. Not that they are so properly said to binde those whom they shut out of the Church. For, when Christianity declareth mankinde to be under sin, (not to be freed of it, but by submitting to Chrissianity) the bond is contracted by him that finneth, the shutting of the Church door upon him is but refusing him the cure, whereof hee tenders himself uncapable. But, those whom they admit into the Church, they are properly said to loose, because, though they cannot be loosed without their own act, yet that act is not to be done, without submitting to that authority which is intrusted to require it. And this authority, with those who acknowledge it by being admitted into the Church, is that which consstuteth the Society and Corporation of the Church. For, admitting into the Church, and allowing to continue in the Church, are both one and the fame act, because they proceed both upon the fame, of Christianity, and preserving Unity in the Church. Therefore. at present, I speak of both under one. And, if it be demanded whether the Power of binding and loosing do signifie generally binding by Law, and not hindering; Or particularly, binding by shutting out of the Church for sin, and loosing, by admitting into the Church, or retaining in the Church as free from sin; I answer, that expresly and formally, the Power of binding and loosing signifies the later; But the former, by consequence. For, in the Com∣mon-wealth also, the Power of giving Law is the same in generalls, with the Power of Jurisdiction in particulars; All parts of Soveraignty flowing natural∣ly from that act, whereby it becomes settled upon some person or persons; Whose will is necessarily the Law whereby it is to be governed, in as much as it is not limited by the original establishment thereof, and acts done legally by vietue of the fame. And so, the Disciples of our Lord being prevented by no∣thing but our common Christianity, (which, our Lord Christ having established, left them the framing of his Church) what they, or, those who claim under them shall do to obligue the Church, obligeth by virtue of this Power, of ad∣mitting into, or excluding out of the Church. And it is truly said, that the Power of giving Law to the Church as the Church, by virtue the Power of the Keyes belongs to the Church; Provided that the effect of it belimited to those things, which, after the preaching of our Lord, remained for his Apostles and Disciples, as well as their Assistants and Succcessors to determine, for the framing of Gods Catholick Church. Before I leave this point, I shall desire that the consequence of our Lords dis∣course may be considered. For unlesse the command of resorting to the Church be understood, as sending to binde or loose him to the Church, that is supposed to be bound to sin or loose from it, that which is inferred; Whatfoever yee binde on earth— will be utterly impertinent to that which went before, Tell the Church— But if wee suppose the speech to concerne Excom∣munication, and Penance, by consequence, wee give a good reason why it followes; Againe, I say unto you, that, if two of you agree upon earth, about any thing to be demanded, it shall besall them from my Father in the heavens. For, sup∣posing, (as known by the general and original practice of the Church, whereof mention hath been made in the premises) that the means of loosing from sin was the Prayers of the Church, wee conclude, that our Lord, in the next place, could not inferre any thing more proper and pertinent to that which hee had premised, than this; To wit, how the Penitent is to be reslored to the favor of God, and, upon presumption thereof, to the unity od the Church: To wit, by the Prayers of the Church. For, when hee sayes, the Prayers of two Chrussians will be available with God, hee must needs signifie, that the Prayers of the Church will be much more available. I know, there are some Expositors, Ori∣gen, S. Austine, and Theophylact of old, and Grotius of late, who, when our Lord, having said, Let him be to thee as a Heathen or a Publicane; inferreth, whatsoe∣ver yee binde on earth— do understand, that, hereby, particular Christians do binde and loose particular Christians, when they show them the sin they do, and they that do it will or will not make reparations. And truly, in as much as the
knowledge of sin is a condition requisite to make the bond thereof take firm hold upon the conscience, whosever procures this knowleg is truly said to binde, as hee that shows the means of being loose is truly said to loose him that useth those means. But, if this were here meant, there were no reason why our Lord should send him to the Church, whom hee declares to be thus bound, which this opinion supposeth; Never dreaming of the Synagogue, when our Lord faith, Tell the Church. For, to say, that a private Christian bindeth or loo∣seth him whom the Church hath first declared to be in the wrong, and not other∣wife, is as much as to say, that a private Christian neither bindes not looses, but the Church; Not because hee cannot binde and loose before God. in that sense which I spoke of afore, but because hee cannot binde or loose any man as to the Church, whom the Church had bound afore, by declaring his sin. For this opinion supposeth, that, when our Lord faith; Whatsoever yee binde on earth— hee speaketh of the sins of those that had refused to hear the Church afore. Which being supposed, it will remain manifest, that when our Lord faith; Let him to be thee as a Heathen or a Publicane; immediately adding, whatsoever yee binde on earth.— hee doth not onely teach what the wronged party, but what every Christian is to do; to wit, what the acts of the Church oblige him to do as a Christian and one of the Church, not as one that is wronged, though the discourse, rising upon this cafe, if thy brother wrong thee— end in the mention of him alone, let him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publicane; because of the rea∣son which follows, grounded in the Power of binding and loosing, which all Christians are to acknowledg. These things being proved, I will here repeat, and insist upon that observati∣on which heretofore I have advanced in another place, that our Lord, (whom, from the premises, I suppose to treat here of Excommunication) forbids that course to be held in the Church, which then was used in the Synagogue, namely, that private persons should Excommunicate one another; The effect of such Excommunications reaching no further than themselves, or their inferiors, and not obliging any stranger to take such a person for Excommunicate. Which ob∣servation I oppose to an argument made, from that which was used in the Primi∣tive Church, for Martyrs, and Consessors in bonds for the Gospel, to restore to the Communion of the Church, those that were under Penance. Tertul. de Pu∣dic. XXII. Ad martyras I. Cypr. Epist. X. XI. XII. XIII. XIV. XV. XVII. XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. XXXVIII. and John the Monk of the deserts of Egypt having Excommunicated the younger Theodosius, hee was not satisfied with the Bishops absolution untill the Monk had done the fame. Hence it is argued, that Excommunication in the Church was the same that had been practi∣sed in the Synagogue, because private Christians used that Power, as private Jewes had done. The ansswer is easie to him, that will observe the reason of such Excommunication and obsoulution in the Church. There were in the Church, from the beginning, besides those who had the chief authority of governing it, divers ranks of persons of special esteem: The rank of Widows, honored with publick maintenance from the Church, as wee understand by S. paul orders I Tim. V. 3-16. The rank of Virgins, the Prerogative whereof wee may understand by Tertullians book de Virginibus velandis, Wherein hee disputes, whether they were priviledged against S. Pauls order, I Cor. XI.5-15. of vailing their faces in the Church. of the rank of Marryrs and Consessors, (that is, those, who had abondones themselves to whatsoever the prosession of Chri∣ssianity should inferre, howsoever they escaped) I need say nothing; The e∣steem of them being known to have been such, that it is no mervail, if their desire, or their sentence were counted a Prejudice or Prerogative to the Church. As thus: At the elections of the Romane Magistrates, the Century of the Tribe, that voted first, was counted to have a Prerogative, the Vore thereof be∣ing a kinde of Prejudice to them that followed, to vote the same. So that it was found, that whose carried this Prerogative, commonly carried the whole Vote. Such was the effect of that absolution which Consessors in their du∣rance did sometimes grant Penitents in the Primitive Church; To wit, a con∣fidence,
grounded upon the esteem of their merit towards Christianity, that their act would not be made void by the Body of the Church. Whereupon S. Cypr. Epist. XII. Qui libellos à Martyribus acceperunt, & eorum Praerogativâ apud Deum adjuvari possunt—Those who have received billets from the Martyrs, and may finde help before God by their Prerogative—. The Monks Excommunica∣tion proceeded upon the same ground; That is to say, upon a confidence, that, whom hee, by that sentence declared to have forfeited the Communion of the Church in his judgment, those who had his Holinesse in esteem would not com∣municate with. The Emperors proceeding shows it was not for nothing. Who, being absolved by the Ordinary, rested not content, till hee had satisfied the Monk. The reason, because even then it might be evident, that, the preservati∣on of Unity in the Church, obliged to grant the Communion thereof to such, as there was no reasonable assurance that Gods pardon did go before it; which, otherwise, the restoring of that Communion ought to suppose. Which might move a tender conscience to do more than the Church injoyned him to do. But I intend not hereby to justifie maters of fact in the Primitive Church: It shall serve my turn to argue, that the reason inferred appears not by this practice, be∣cause another reason doth appear. Onely I say further, that nothing of pri∣mitive institution can be argued from a custome, which, they that relate it, Ter∣tullian and S. Cyprian do mark for an abuse, tending, either to abate the severity of discipline, or to dissolve the unity of the Church. And therefore, hee that observes all this, must not forget to observe the reasons, whereby S. Cyprian pro∣tests, that the courses whereby those of his time went about to force the con∣sent of the Church, by the credit of the Martyrs, were seditious, Ep. IX. & XXII. And also the course that hee takes, to referr the mater to the debate and common sentence of other Churches, equally concerned in the cause, Ep. XVII. For, to have recourse to the Unity of the Church, to cure the distemper of a particular Church, had been against common sense, for him that had not known, that those whom hee had to do with acknowledged the same; And, that being acknow∣ledged, it will be more against common sense to imagine, that Martyrs or Con∣fessors of one Church could give Law to the whole; as they must do, if wee suppose, that absolution granted by them in the Church of Carthage, was of it self of force and valid, which, by the same right and title, must extend to all that were in the same case. But there remains a second reason or plea, how a Communion of the Church might be, and so a Power to Excommunicate, (and, by consequence, other Rights, in which it hath been showed, that the Society of the Church subsisted before Constantine) without any title of divine Right, which Princes and States professing Christianity are bound to maintain. For, it is alleged, that Excom∣munication, and Penance which is the abatement of it, was in force in the Pri∣mitive Church, by virtue of the voluntary consent of Christians, consederating themselves, upon such terms as wee finde to have been in use, into a discipline taken up of their own free resolution; Which, by consequence, must be said of the rest of those rights, wherein the Communion of the Church, and the Unity thereof, did consist at that time. To which I must except generally in the first place; That this plea, whether true or false for the present, is not receivable so much as into consideration, untill it be qualified and limited so, that it may be consistent with the former now refuted. For, no man can pretend to advance such a plea for his cause, as consists of two parts, whereof the first destroyes the second. Now, it was pretended afore, that there was no Excommunication in use under the Apostles, but that which was in force in the Synagogue, by virtue of Moses Law, and the Power erected by it, of introducing such Penalties, as the maintenance thereof should require. And here it is pretended; That Ex∣communication and other effects of Ecclesiastical Power came in force upon the voluntary agreement of Christians. Therefore the whole plea, if you will have it hang together, must be this; That the whole Body of Christians did voluntari∣ly agree among themselvs, to receive that Excommunication which was in force by virtue of the Law, and by consequence, such other Rights already in force
by virtue of the Law, as they agreed to be no lesse usefull for maintaining the Communion of the Church, than they found Excommunication to be. And on these termes I admit the two parts of this plea not to be inconsistent. For the effect of the whole will be this; That there was indeed a Society and Corpo∣ration of one visible Church, from the beginning of Christianity to Constantine, such as I now challenge that there ought to be: But not by any order of the Apostles, or title of divine right, but by the free consent of all Christians, which, being the consent of subjects, and subsisting by sufferance of the Soveraign, re∣solves into his will when hee pleases to seize it into his hands. But then I will appeal to the common reason of all men, whether it be consistent therewith in two regards. The first shall be that which I alleged before out of Irenaeus, whe∣ther it be consistent with common sense to imagine, that neither the Churches planted in the Germane Provinces or Spanish or Ganlish, of the Romane Empire, nor those in the East, nor in Aegypt or Africk, nor those that were planted in the middle parts of the world should practice or observe otherwise, than the Communion which de facto I have already showed to have been maintained a∣mong them did require, and all this have no other beginning than their own free and voluntary consent, prevented by no obligation at all, but the dictate of common reason, pronouncing what would be best, for the maintenance of that common Christianity, to which wee suppose them obliged. If there were no more in question but the uniting of seven persons into one of our Independent Congregations, (or as many more as may all hear any man preach at once) I should grant, that such Bodies might subsist for such a time, as the cōmon batred of the Church restrains the peevishnesse of particular persons, from breaking that Communion, which no tye of conscience obliges them to maintain. But, if the experience of divers years hath not brought forth any union betwixt any two such Congregations in England, so farr as I can learn, what was it that u∣nited all Christians from East to West into that one Communion visibly distin∣guished from all Heresies and Schisms, which till about the Council of Chalcedon remained inviolable, supposing no obligation of our common Christianity deli∣vered by the Apostles, to maintain it. Is it possible for any man to imagine, that, with one consent they would have cast themselves into such a form of ob∣servation and practice, as all to acknowledge the direction of the same persons, in several parts; to acknowledge those Rules, which Generally were the same; (though, in maters of lesse moment, differing in several parts) to intertain or re∣fuse communion with them, that were intertained or refused by the Church where they dwelt, for a common cause, had there been nothing but their own fansy to tell them, not onely what was requisite to intertain such communion, but whether it were requisite to intertain such communion or not? If such a thing should be said, the processe of my discourse were never a whit the more satis∣fied, unlesse some body could show mee how the truth of Christianity can be well grounded upon those motives, the evidence whereof resolves into the con∣sent of all Christians; And yet, that which all Christians have visibly made a Law to their conversation from the beginning, to wit, the communion of one Catho∣lick Church, not belong at all to the mater of our common Christianity. And therefore this plea is no lesse ruinous to our common Christianity, the ground whereof it undermineth, than to common sense. For, that, in such difference of judgments as mankinde is liable to, the whole Church should be swayed to unanimity herein, by the Prerogative, as it were, of the Synagogue, uniting themselves, by imbracing the Ordinances thereof, the evident state of the times whereof wee speak will not admit to any pretense of probability; The division between Jews and Christians being then advanced to such a hatred on the Jews part, that it would have been a very implausible cause to say, that Christians ought to follow the Jewes, whose curses they heard every day, whose persecu∣tions they felt, in the tortures, which, at their instance, were inflicted by the Gentiles. A thing so evident, both by the Writings of the Apostles, and the ancientest records of the Church, that I will not wrong the Readers patience to prove it. True it is, that at times and in places, great compliance was used by
Christians to gain them, who, elsewhere, were so ready to persecute their fellow Christians. As at Jerusalem under and after S. James, at Ephesus and in Asia under S. John, there is great appearance to believe. In the mean time, hee that can make a question, whether the separation between Jewes and Christians, and the hatred ensuing upon it were formed under the Apostles, must make a questi∣on of the truth of S. Pauls Epistles, to the Galatians, to the Colossians, to the Philippians, to Titus, and especially that to the Hebrews. Besides that, during the time whereof Irenaeus speaks, Christianity was extended so farr beyond Ju∣daisme, that, a great part of the Church could not be acquainted with the con∣versation of the Jewes, much lesse learn and imbrace their orders. And there∣fore, as I do admit and imbrace the diligence of those learned men, who bestow their paines to show, how the Rules and Customes of the Church are derived from those of the Synagogue; So I prescribe one general prejudice concerning all orders that may appear to be so derived, that they are all, to the Church, Traditions of the Apostles, and by their act came in force in it: And that upon the premises, that, neither they had any force from the Law of Moses, not could be admitted by common consent of Christians, after the separation was formed, that is, after the Apostles time; And therefore, by their authority were intro∣duced into the Church. Having excepted thus much, it will notwithstanding be time to distinguish, that, the orders and customes, and observations of the Church may be said to be voluntary, as nothing is more voluntary than Christianity it self, though there be nothing to which a man is so much obliged. For, though the will of God, and our salvation, and whatsoever God hath done to show that salvation depends upon Christianity, oblige us to it, yet they oblige us also to imbrace it volunta∣rily, so that, whatsoever should be done in respect of it, without an inward in∣ward inclination of the will, would be abominable. In which regard, whatso∣ever our Christianity obliges us to is no lesse voluntary than it is. And, in this sense, I grant, that the confederation of common Discipline, which prevailed in the primitive Church, was by the free and voluntary consent of Christians, who, be freely and voluntary consenting to the profession of Christianity, consented freely to maintain the Communion of the Church, which they knew to belong to that profession, as a part of it. But then, this consent, which is voluntary in regard that the choice of Christianity is free, becomes necessary upon the obliga∣tion of making good the Christianity which once wee have professed; the Com∣munion of the Church, professed by all, obliging every one for his part to maintain it. So, when Pliny reports to Trajan, of the Christians, Ep. X. Soli∣tos Sacramento se obstringere, ne Furta, ne Latrocinia, ne Adulteria committerent, nè fidem fallerent, ne depositum negarent; That they were wont to tye themselves by a Sacrament, to commit no Thefts, Robberies or Adulteries, not to fail of their faith, or deny that which was deposited in their trust being demanded. It is mani∣fest, that all this is the profession of all Christians, and, that the Sacrament of Baptisme is properly the Vow of observing it. And, though I dispute not here, that the Eucharist is called a Sacrament, and Sacramentum in Latine signifies an Oath, yet, in as much as it is the meaning of the Sacrament of Baptisme, I con∣ceive, I understood not Pliny amisse, when I conceived, that hee speaks in this place of the Eucharist, when hee reports, that they were wont, before day to sing Psalms in praise of Christ as God, and to tye themselves to the particulars hee names, by a Sacrament. And, the same Tertullian understood by Pliny, when hee saith hee reports to Trajan Apolog. II. Praeter obstinationem non sacrifican∣di, nihil aliud se de Sacramentis (as Heraldus truly reads it) eorum compe∣risse, quàm coetus antelucanos, ad canendum Christo & Deo, & ad confederandam Disciplinam, Homicidium, Adulterium, Fraudem, Perfidiam, & caetera scelera prohibentes. That hee had discovered nothing of their Sacraments, or Mysteries, (besides obstinacy not to sacrifice) but assemblies before day, to sing praises to Christ and to God, and to confederate their Discipline, prohibiting Murther, Adultery, violation of Faith, and other hainous deeds. For the Eucharist is the Sacrament by which this discipline of Christianity is established; But, farr from being vo∣luntary
to those whom wee suppose Christians. As for Origen in Celsum I. pag. 4. It is manifest that those private Contracts, which Celsus calumniateth that the Christians made among themselves, as against the State, are acknowledged by him to have been those that were solemnized at their Feasts of Love; That is, at the Eucharist, which from the beginning was a part of them; whether then it were so or not. And therefore, the confederacy of Christians among them∣selves, whom these Authors speak of, was no otherwise voluntary than Christi∣anity, and therefore not voluntary supposing it. The words of Origen: . Which I do not admit to be well corrected : As being too obscure an expression for so clear a Writer as Ori∣gen to say, that it was of force to do more mischief than the Bacchanalia; (which for that jealousie were put down, as wee understand by Livy) besides, that hee must have said, , and not have used a general word for a particular. And therefore I suppose hee alludes to the Verse of Homer , meaning , dissolving by private confederacy, that publick League and Bond, wherein the peace of every Com∣monwealth consisteth. Thus then saith Origen; And hee seeks to calumniate the Love (so called) of Christians towards one another, as subsisting at the peril of the Publick, and able to do the mischief of disloyalty. If this will not serve the turn, but it be demanded, that the Communion of the Church was then fre∣quented by voluntary agreement, let mee demand, whether the authority of the Apostles in the Church subsisted upon no other title. For, as to the credit of them in delivering the Gospel, believing what God had given them to evidence it with, it is not possible for any man that pretends to be a Christian to question it. If then it be said, that they who were tyed to believe them con∣cerning the truth of the Gospel, were not bound to receive them as chief Go∣vernors of the Church; let mee demand, how it came to passe, that those were received all over the Church, whom, it was believed, that they had granted their authority to, or what part soever of it. There being no obligation to tye them to receive such afore others; and, the variety of judgment which all men are sub∣ject to being such, as never to agree in the same reason, where nothing obliges. So likewise, whereas it is manifest, that the Church then, both had, and must needs have many Rules, the general importance whereof was received by all, though with particular differences according to times and places; I demand, how any such could come in force, when, neither the Jewes deserved that love, that all should imbrace them for their sake, nor the judgments of all Christians, so different in all things, could concurr in any thing which their Christianity im∣ported not. Especially I demand this concerning the indowment of the Church, because it is evident, that, as Constantine, first, made good by the Empire all the acts of them that had given whatsoever was ravished away by the persecution of Diocletian, then, gave much more of his own; So, all Kingdoms and Com∣monwealths, after the example of that Empire, have proceeded to indow it with the first-fruits of their goods in Houses and Glebes and Tithes and Oblations. I demand then, what imposture could have been then so powerfull, as to seduce all the Christian world, in a mater so nearly concerning their interest, had they not stood convict by the constant practice of Christendom before Constantine, that it was no imposture, more than the Christianity brought in by the same A∣postles. Lastly, whereas it is acknowledged, what strange severity of discipline the Primitive Church was under, by the Rules of Penance which then were in force, (though I have showed in another place, that they were yet stricter under the Apostles, and that the severity of them necessarily abated, as the zele of Christianity under them did abate) I demand, what common sense can allow, that all Christians should agree, to make themselves fools, by submitting them∣selves to such Rules, which, nothing but their own consent could oblige them to imbrace. For, neither can it be said, that they had them from the Jews, nor, had they been extant among them, that the Christians would have received them for their sake.
CHAP. XIX. That Power which was in Churches under the Apostles, can never be in any Chri∣stian Soveraign. The difference between the Church and the Synagogue in that regard. The interest of Secular Power in determining maters of Faith presup∣poseth the Society of the Church, and the act of it. No man can be bound to professe the contrary of that which hee believeth. Every man is bound to professe that Christianity which hee believeth. The Church is the chief Teacher of Christianity through Christendom, as the Soveraign of Civil Peace, thorough his Dominions. Why the Church is to decide maters of Faith rather than the State, neither being infallible. I Shall not now need to say much to those terms which the Leviathan holds, beside that which hath been already said, to evidence the Society of the whole Church, and the foundation thereof, by the Scriptures. Hee that ac∣knowledges in the Church a Power, to judge of true repentance, and accor∣dingly, to binde and to loose; (and that, upon the same score, and therefore to the same effect, as it baptizes) together with the Power of appointing publick persons in the Church; and, the Church in which hee acknowledges the Power, to be the Body of Christians in each City; by what Title doth hee suppose the Church to hold this Power or this Right, the evidence whereof hee fetches from the Scriptures, whereby hee proveth it? For, those Scriptures do not import, by what Act it is established, but onely that it was in force, or use, at the doing of those things which they relate. Can it be imagined to be any thing else than the act of the Apostles, declaring the will of God in that behalf? If then by divine right, (that is, by Gods appointment and ordinance imported by those Scriptures) the Church, that is, the Body of Christians in each City, stands in∣dowed with those rights; how shall the Church, that is, the Soveraign Power of each State, stand indowed with the same rights by the same Title, that is, by Gods appointment, evidenced by the same Scriptures? How shall Gods Law, that in∣ableth the Body of the Church to binde and to loose, to nominate and elect publick persons in the Church, (but requireth the Apostles and those that hold under them to pronounce the sentence, and to impose hands) inable the Sove∣raign Power to do the same, and yet require those that claim from the Apostles to execute? If Philosophers have the privilege to justifie such contradictions as these, then may this opinion passe for a truth. In the mean time, to men of common reason, how reasonable it will sound, that the Apostles, (being imploy∣ed by God to order these things in the Church, and that, for the maintenance of Christianity received) should tye themselves to execute those acts, which the Body of Christians in each City should determine to be for the maintenance of that Christianity, which they knew nothing what belonged to, but what they had learned from them, the Apostles; I am well content to referr my self to judgment. But alwayes there remains, or may remain a difference between the Bodies of Christians in several Cities, and the Soveraign Powers over them; So that the rights of both cannot be derived from one and the same Title. Sad ex∣perience shows, that Churches may continue where the Soveraign Powers are not Christians, as they subsisted before they were. Shall these Soveraign Powers give sentence of binding and loosing, and appoint persons to be ordain∣ed, and those that claim under the Apostles be bound to execute? Shall the Great Turk have Power to officiate, and minister the Sacraments of divine ser∣vice in the Church, because whatsoever a man may do by his minister, hee may do in his own person much more, as this opinion, pag. 297. 298, 299. expresly disputes that the Soveraign may do, and that, imployment or more publick con∣sequence is the onely reason why hee doth not? It is said indeed, pag. 299. that hee that had Power to Teach before hee was a Christian, being Baptized, retains the same Power to teach Christianity. And so, every Soveraign being the Chief Master, to teach all his Subjects whatsoever the peace of his State requires; by
being Baptized, hee gets no new right, but is directed how to use that which wee had afore. But, if the premises be true, the assumption is ridiculous. A Doctor of the Synagogue duely qualified, is not a Doctor of the Church, be∣cause the Church stands not upon the same terms with the Synagogue, Doctors and Disciples being relatives, terms of a relation grounded upon the Society of the Church or Synagogue. The Soveraign Power teaches by Lawes, to keep the Publick peace (though, that it should do no more than teach were ri∣diculous.) The Church teaches the way to heaven, and, for that reason, the bond of Publick peace not the mater of it. And therefore, as no man, by being Ba∣ptized, getteth the right of teaching by Civil Laws; So, hee that hath the right of teaching by Civil Laws, by being baptized, getteth no right to teach Christianity. The Law of Moses was given to one people, which had covenanted with God to be ruled by it, and upon that condition to be maintained in the Land of Pro∣mise. So, the Covenant of the Law, and the obligation of that people to it, was presupposed, before God had declared whom hee would make Soveraign of that people after Moses. But, in as much as the determination of all things that became questionable concerning the Law was to come from those Powers, which were under the Soveraign, it is manifest, that the act of such Power se∣cured the consciences of Inferiors. For, the promise of the Law being the tem∣poral happinesse of the Land of Promise, and, the body of the people being, by the Law, to depend upon the determination of their Superiors, they practising the Law according to such determination, the promise thereof must needs re∣main indefeisible. As for the inward obedience to Gods spiritual Law, where∣upon, as I said, they might and did ground a firm hope of everlasting life under the Law; it concerned not the consciences of the people, how the outward Laws were determined, seeing, howsoever they were determined, this inward obedience to Gods spiritual Law received no hinderance. Though, the consci∣ences of Superiors, from whom those determinations proceeded, were so much concerned in them; that, those who should violate that obedience due to the carnal commandement, by determining it to an unjust intent, could no wayes pretend any inward and spiritual obedience. But Christianity, covenanting for this inward and spiritual obedience, and expressing everlasting life, as the consi∣deration of it, and particular Churches being constituted upon these terms, (and constituting the whole Church, which is nothing but the Communion of all Churches) whatsoever rights are acknowledged to be in particular Churches, (which, the precept of preaching to, and the promise of calling the Gentiles shows, might be under several Soveraignties) being settled in them already by divine right, can never accrue to a Soveraignty, though constituted by right, but, such as God onely alloweth, by commanding Government in general, but ap∣pointeth not, by revealing it self in particular. And therefore, necessarily tend to the constituting of the whole Church, by the concurrence of all Churches, though of several Soveraignties, to the maintenance of that Christianity, in which all had equal interest before any Soveraign was Christian. And now, I cannot mervail, if hee that believes not the Scriptures to be Law to Christians, other∣wise than as they are injoyned by Christian Powers, acknowledge no Power in the Apostles of obliging the Church, or in any body else beside the Soveraign. My mervail is, that hee who had pretended all this, should neverthelesse acknow∣ledge a right in several Churches; that is, in the Bodies of Christians dwelling within several Cities, the Power of Excommunications and Ordinations, and that by the Scriptures, that is, by divine right. For, whatsoever act it was, or whose act soever it was, whereby those rights were settled, upon those Chur∣ches, will hee or will hee not, was a Law to those that stood bound to acknowledg such right; which was really nothing, if no man were bound to acknowledg and to yield effect to it. Neither is it mervail, if hee acknowledg no Law for the indowment of the Church, that acknowledgeth not the judg∣ment of the Levitical Priesthood to have been a Law to the Jewes, but by the will of the Soveraign, under the Kings. But, those that acknowledg that in∣dowment
to be Gods act, not to be voided so long as the Covenant was in force, will have seen as good an argument for the like provision to be made for the Church, as the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel will allow any point of Christianity from the old Scriptures. And then, as it hath appeared, that several Churches are, by Gods appointment, several Bodies capable of in∣dowment, constituting one whole Church, which is the Body of all Churches; So, by the same means it appears, that, what the Church is once indowed with, is as much the Churches, as any mans cloak is his own. And, as the giving of alms in general is not arbitrary to a Christian, but due from all that will be what they professe; So, the indowing of the Church, to those purposes for which the communion thereof standeth, (though called Alms, even by the Laws of this Land) had never prevailed over all Christendom, had not the obligation there∣of been a part of our common Christianity. But now, as concerning the Power of determining Controversies of Faith, I do here insist upon this argument; That, because no Secular Power is inabled by God to determine Controversies of Faith, therefore God hath provided a Soci∣ety of the Church for preservation of unity among Christians, by such determi∣nations, as may reasonably satisfie the consciences of those for whom they are made. Though, not in order to any penalty of this world, pretending by out∣ward force to constrain obedience, but onely in order to the Communion of the Church, that is, to the holding or loosing of it, as a man conforms to the deter∣mination or not; All outward force and constraint being acknowledged to pro∣ceed from the power of the Sword, which the Soveraign beareth. This diffi∣culty onely the Leviathan answers, they who, denying the Power of Excom∣munication, dissolve the Communion of the Church and the Society thereof, in∣to the Community of a Christian Common-wealth, contenting themselves to name godly Magistrates (which term I use not, because incompetible to the So∣veraign) or Christian Powers, (as if their godlinesse or Christianity did intitle them to this Power) though it might have concerned them to show, how the Profession of Christianity comes to oblige Christian Subjects, to the determina∣tions of Christian or godly Powers, if they would not be thought to begg the question which they tye themselves to answer. For, I also say, that all Christi∣ans stand bound to the decrees of godly Powers, because, I suppose, (and the pre∣sumption of piety implies them to suppose) that it is a part of godliness to profess one holy Catholick and Apostolick Church, the unity whereof once professed, ob∣liges a private Christian to be of it, a publick person to maintain it: Which if the Soveraign do, then must hee maintain those persons, who, by the Society of the Church, have right to act in behalf of the Church, both in doing their duty, and in giving force to their Acts. For, I acknowledge (as I have already done) two points of that right, which Secular Power hath, in the acting of Church maters: The first is that which the trust of Secular Power importeth in all ma∣ters; As they hold it not by their Christianity, and therefore not by the Church, so, that they suffer it not to be invaded upon pretense of Christianity, and the Power of the Church. For, as experience hath showed that there may be such pretenses; So, the reasons whereupon I ground the Society and right of Sove∣raign Power, show, that Christianity abridgeth not the Soveraign Power in any thing that may concerne the publick peace. The second arises from Christianity; Which, as it giveth all Christians an interest both in all Christian truth, and in the Communion of the Church, as the common birth∣right of Christians; So it giveth publick Powers a publick interest in the main∣tenance of the same: That is, of all truth, which the Church, by the acts of the Church, (done by the Power of the Church for the preservation of Christi∣anity) stands possest of; and of all Lawes, whereby the Communion of the Church in the service of God according to Christianity is duely maintained. But this interest presupposeth, therefore, a Society of the Church, by the acts whereof, Christian truth, and the unity of the Church is to be maintained; And importeth in the Soveraign, a Right to constrain, even those that act in behalf of the Church, not to transgresse their own profession, that is, either the due power
of determining things questionable, which the Society of the Church inferreth, or the acts which have been duely done by the same. Therefore, not supposing this Society, (that is, such an Act of the Church, as it may be evident, that, the Soveraign may or ought to maintain, because it may be evident, that the Church transgresses not those grounds which it pro∣fesses) and supposing Controversies among Christians about Christianity; I say the Secular Power can have no right to determine them, that is (to oblige those that are under their Power to stand to the determination which they shall make unlesse wee do grant, that, by their Christianity, they may be obliged to believe one thing, and, by their Allegiance, to professe another. For, seeing there be Soveraignes that professe Christianity, whereof some are of the Eastern, others of the Western Church, and, of these, some of the Communion of the Church of Rome, others that are departed from it; some Calvinists, others Lutherans, (and, Socinus his Sect, no man knowes, how soon some Sove∣raign may follow) besides new Religions that appear; how shall the com∣mon profession of Piety or Christianity oblige several Nations to obey those Lawes, whereby, several Soveraignties may establish contrary things in Christi∣anity, but, by obliging them to professe contrary to what they believe? For, what contradictions soever are held among Christians, neverthelesse, they are sensible, that no mans private spirit, that is, any evidence of Christian truth, in the minde of one man, can oblige another man to follow it, because it imports no evidence, to make that which hee thinks hee sees appear to others. What becomes then, of the Christianity of Christian Subjects, obliging them to stand to the Determination of their Soveraignes, in all things questiona∣ble? If the Soveraign Power have right to limit all that is questiona∣ble, this right will create an obligation of professing and doing the con∣trary of that, which Christianity will oblige a man to believe, and to think fit to be done; Unlesse all the Subjects of each Soveraign, have the strange hap to believe as their Soveraigns, in all things questionable. Besides, if the Soveraign Power have right to determine them, it will be impossible to show a reason, why this Power, in him that is no Chri∣stian, should not have the same right; Seeing it is plain, that the common pro∣fession of Christianity, being in Soveraigns that command contrary things, does it not, and the Soveraign Power which remains is the same in those that are not Christians, as in those that are. And therefore I conceive, that the Leviathan hath done like a Philosopher in this, to object unto himself the greatest of those dif∣ficulties that his opinion is liable to; and hath but pursued his own principles, when hee inquires, what a Christian should do, when a Soveraign that is no Christian commands him to renounce Christianity. For, when hee argueth, that every Soveraign, by being a Soveraign, is the chief Teacher of his people, (whom, it is manifest that Soveraigns Teach not, but by their Laws or com∣mands) but, that Christianity onely inableth to use this Power right; Hee must know, that there is no Power that will not oblige when it is used amisse, though not to all purposes, yet to all within the compasse of it. So that, if Christiani∣ty onely inable Christian Soveraigns to determine maters of Religion right, the Power of determining will be the same in the Great Turk, (supposing him a lawfull Prince) as in any Christian Soveraign. And, if his act oblige the Chri∣stians under him, being well used, why not ill used, the Power being the same? But though I commend him, as a Philosopher, for charging his own opinion with the greatest difficulties; When hee answers, that a Christian in that case shall stand bound to reserve the belief of his Christianity to himself, for satis∣faction of his conscience, but to professe or act outwardly as his Soveraign com∣mands; I must so much detest this answer for a Christian, that I cannot con∣ceive any thing so destructive to the foundation of Christianity hath been pub∣lished among Christian people, since the time of Simon Magus and the Gno∣stiaks, who, when Christianity was not protected, would do this, and yet pre∣tend to be Christians. Onely the difference is, that hee does it not, but declares
himself free to do it, if the Soveraign commands it. Which, though it may seem to preserve him the quality of a Christian, yet it is to be considered, that, by so declaring himself, hee recalleth that solemn vow, promise, & profession up∣on which hee was admitted to Baptisme, or made a Christian in the Church of England. For, hee that is free to renounce the Faith at the command of his Soveraign, cannot be bound by the promise of professing it unto death. If therefore, it prove, that this promise is the substance of our whole Christianity, hee will prove an Apostate, if onely part of it, an Heretick. But, I perceive, hee is well enough aware of the Interest of his opinion, for love whereof hee waives the Interest of Christianity. For, as all Divines have made the profes∣sion of Christianity the outward act of Faith, the inward act whereof is to be∣lieve; So, upon this profession (the visible act of Christianity) the visible Soci∣ety of the Church is built, which there is no pretense for if this be not com∣manded, nor against, if it be. This profession, solemnized by the visible though mystical act of Baptisme, (that is, signifying more to the understanding than the meer sight of the eyes can evidence) being, as S. Austine argues, nothing else but the entring or dedicating of a Christian unto God, in that visible body of Religion which the profession of Christianity designs. Which consideration sets right the mistake that is commended to us from a true Principle, that Soveraign Powers are the chief Teachers of their People. For, the relation, Offices, and Interests of Teachers and Scholars do not sub∣sist, but upon supposition of some certain Society contracted between Masters and Scholars; as may appear by the instance of Masters and Apprentices, the so∣ciety between whom is grounded upon a contract of learning the Trade. And no man denies, that there is a Society between Soveraign Powers and their Peo∣ple lawfully to be contracted: And, that this Society makes the Soveraigns Ma∣sters and Teachers, and the People their Scholars, if it be rightly understood: (Though, that it should make them no more, would be an imagination so ab∣surd, that hee is not farr from that absurdity who takes notice of no more, see∣ing all Teachers cannot make their Scholars learn as Soveraigns can do) But, this relation must be limited by the ground of civil Society, which is of necessi∣ty no more than civil life; though the grace of God by Christ addeth unto it a capacity of advancing everlasting life, by maintaining the profession of Christi∣anity, which is meerly accessory to it, as appears by all those Common-wealths that never were Christian. And therefore, that which civil Society teacheth is no more, than that civil conversation, which the maintenance of civil Society requireth. If therefore there be any such thing as a Relation of Teacher and Scholar in Christianity, (which this argument supposeth that there is, seeing that the common quality of Christian is no ground at all of that difference, which the different denominations of Teacher and Scholar suppose) of necessity it followeth, that there must be a Society of the Church, upon supposition where∣of, the qualities and relations of Teachers and Scholars in Christianity are groun∣ded and subsist. Which relations, which Society, did they not suppose Christia∣nity to come from God, but to be a religion, either invented by the Soveraign, (as Mahumedisme, by the first founder of that Power under which Mahumetane Princes now claim) or inforced by the Powers that professe it, (as Heathenisme) then were it essentially a Law of that civil Society, the act whereof is all that obligation by which it standeth. And truly, hee that should believe Christiani∣to be no more, than a Religion taken up as a means to govern people in civil peace, (which is not onely the opinion of Machiavillians, if any such there be, who, by believing no more of that Religion which they professe, signifie, that they believe no more of God, or of Religion at all, but also of those Philoso∣phers, if any such there be, who do admit a Religion of all maxims which nature and reason hath taught all men to agree in, but, that which supposeth revelation from above, onely as the Religion of their Countrey, not as true) I say, hee that should believe this, must necessarily believe nothing of the Church, more than the Soveraign Power shall make it. But, as hee that makes outward Profession to be no part of it, can never give account, how the inward belief of it could be
maintained and propagated to the worlds end, as I suppose all Christians agree; that God would have Christianity; So, hee that leaves the determination of all maters questioned in Christianity to the Secular Power that is Soveraign, (by dis∣solving the Society of the Church into the Common-wealth that is Christian, and that without limitation, because by Gods Law) hee must by consequence oblige men to professe that, as the means of Salvation, which the Interest of State shall oblige every Soveraign to think necessary, for the preservation of it. And that is the answer, that I shall make, to him who shall object the same inconvenience to mee, that the determinations of the Church are subject to fail; To wit, that there are three points of difference between it and the Se∣cular Power, in consideration whereof, it is reasonable to believe, that God should provide a Society of the Church for the maintenance of Christianity, not∣withstanding that hee leaves them subject to fail. The first, because this right cannot be said to be assigned the Soveraign Power by the Scriptures. For, in the Scriptures of the New Testament, there is no mention made of Soveraign Powers that were Christian. And, as for the Old Testament, if any man ar∣gue; That, the Power which the Kings of Gods ancient people had in marais of Religion, the same Christian Princes have in Church maters, not onely ∣wer hath been made by denying the consequence; But also evident reason hath been drawn from the difference between the Law and the Gospel, why the consequence holds not. The second, because, the supposition of a Socie∣ty of the Church, imports in it, means of determining maters controverted in Christianity, which the dissolution of Ecclesiastical Power into the Secular void∣eth. The third, because those means of determining maters of Christianity, will inferre a limitation of that obligation which the determinations of the Church produce in them that are subject to them, meerly upon this ground, that they cannot produce any effect beyond the means upon which they pro∣ceed. And these two differences, as I have begun to open, according as the subject of this discourse hath ministred occasion to do it, (having hitherto re∣moved this opinion, that makes the Church nothing in the nature of a Society, nor the act thereof to have any force but that which the Soveraign Power al∣lowes; and coming now to determine the means of discerning between true and false, in things questionable concerning Christianity, together with the effect of the Determinations of the Church) I shall have occasion to determine more distinctly in that which follows. Which being done, it will be time to limit the due bounds, by the which the Secular and Ecclesiastical Power are to concurre, in the establishment of things to be determined to Christian States and Kingdomes, in the mater of Christianity. Which will be the due place to meet with that objection which is so hotly pursued in the first Book de Synedriis, cap. X. that the Excommunications of the Church have been always thought li∣ble, in Christian Common-wealths, to be limited by the Secular Power; And therefore, that there is no Excommunication by divine right. Which objecti∣on, if it have any force, must hold in all parts and rights of Ecclesiastical Power, as well as in one. CHAP. XX. The rest of the Oxford Doctors pretense. The Power of binding and loosing sup∣poseth not onely the Preaching of the Gospel, but the outward act of Faith. Chri∣stians are not at liberty to cast themselves into what formes of Churches the Law of Nature alloweth. They are Judges in chief for themselves in mater of Religion, supposing the Catholick Church; not otherwise. Secular Power cannot punish for Religion, but supposing the act of the Church, nor do a∣ny act to inforce Religion, unlesse the Church determine the mater of it. NOw, because the Doctor of Oxford might think himself neglected or dis∣paraged, if, having considered the first book de Synedriis, (which in the
point of Excommunication hee hath made his own) and the Leviathan, I should take no notice of that which hee hath added; I will not turn my Reader to him, till I have noted the particulars, in which hee seems to go alone: Putting him first in minde, to advise, how to make his choice, whom of the three hee will follow against all Christendom, who, upon several grounds, have set upon the Church, and the Article of our Creed that professes the same, to destroy it. Hee seems most to ground himself upon a supposition, that the Power of the Keyes extends no further than the converting of a man to become a true Christian, by preaching the Gospel, or rather the convicting of him that hee ought so to be: Resting therefore in the inward Court of the conscience, and not reaching to a∣ny visible effect in the Church, because nothing can be wanting to the salvation of such a one. For him that is loose from sin, by this means, the Church cannot bind, him that is bound by sin it cannot loose. They that are by this means, loos'd from sin, have in themselves every one the Soveraign Power of judging between true & false in Christianity, as to the inward Court; as to the outward, their So∣veraign. They are therefore at their freedom, to joyn in Ecclesiastical Communi∣on, with whom they like best, and, being so joyned, do constitute a Church. And Crches so joyned, may, as they shall finde their proficience in Christianity re∣quire, combine themselves with other Churches, and assemble themselves in Sy∣nods, to take order in maters of common concernment; provided they be tyed no further by the resolutions of them, than every man stands convict, by the light which his loosing hath given him, that they are either just or requisite. By the same right they create themselves Pastors, not with any Power to censure either people or Pastors, further than reproving. And, such Churches as these, hee imagines, the first Synagogues of the Israelites, under the Prophets, to have been, especially in the ten Tribes after Jeroboam; Seeing they could not resort to Jerusalem, & yet resorted to such meetings, for that service of God which was not confined to the Temple. But the judgment of maters concerning Religion in the outward Court, that is, as to the world, belonging onely to the Soveraign, and the Powers derived from him, hee vesteth even in the Heathen Emperors, to the same effect as in Christian, allowing a reason why they do well or ill in the exercise of it, as they do that which the Scriptures allow or not, but main∣taining, that they do not exceed their power, whatsoever they do. So that, Ex∣communications, Decrees of Councils, Ordinations, and whatsoever else may be done in behalf of the Church, being done by virtue of this Power, whether just or not, are valid to y the outward man, either to stand to them, or to un∣dergo the penalty assigned to the transgressing of them; which, being done in the name and the title of the Church, are meer usurpations and nullities. The ground then of this deceit (which Aristotle calls , (or the first mistake) lies in this; That a man is loosed from his sin, meerly by the act of the inward man, acknowledging himself convicted of the truth of Christianity, or producing besides, what inward act of faith this opinion can require. Contra∣ry to that which is settled by the premises, that the outward act of professing Christianity is absolutely requisite to obtain forgivenesse of sins, and other pro∣mises which the Gospel tendreth by the Holy Ghost, the gift whereof the Sacra∣ment inferreth. For, Baptisme, presupposing the profession of the true Faith consigned into the hands of the Church, (requiring it as the condition upon which it tendreth remission of sins, and the promise of the Holy Ghost) infer∣reth also the communion of the Church, unto which it admitteth. Therefore is no body a Christian by believing the Scriptures, nor hath, by consequence, any title to the Kingdom of God, but by being baptized. Nor is it worth the while, a∣mong reasonable people, to except those, who may be prevented, by unavoidable necessity of mortality, of recovering that Baptisme, which, they had utterly re∣solved to submit themselves to any condition, to obtain; The Rule of the Law being a production of common reason, that an exception confirmes a Rule in cases not excepted. Now, if it appear, by the same consent of Christians that evidenceth our common Christianity, that hee who obtains Baptisme by making that profession which the Church requireth, owneth the person of the Church
(for Corporations are persons in Law) for the evidence which hee trusteth in the mater of his Salvation; I shall not need to have recourse to the Article of our Creed, to prove that hee owneth the unity of it, and obligeth himself upon his Salvation to abide in the same. Nor, indeed, have I any need here to repeat the processe, by which I have demonstrated the corporation of the Church. Here I inferre, as clearly gained by it, that the effect of binding or loosing men from sin is limited by God, to a condition of acknowedging or not acknowledg∣ing the Church, for two reasons, and in two cases. For, hee that is admitted to Baptisme upon professing the Faith of the Church, and undertaking to live as a Christian, if hee transgresse this profession, forfeits the communion of the Church which hee attained by making it. And, hee that acknowledgeth the uni∣ty of the Church (which, all that are baptized must needs acknowledge) forfeits his share in it, by doing that which dissolveth it, though hee transgresse not the profession of his Christianity, doing it. Now, it appeareth by S. Paul and our Lord, that Christians under Infidels are forbidden to carry any of their sutes out of the Church, and commanded to end them among themselves. And shall hee not forfeit the benefit of his Christianity, and become bound by the sin hee committeth, in so doing, that doth this? I may therefore grant Erastus and this Doctor, that Let him be to thee as a Heathen or Publicane, sig∣nifies; be it lawful for thee to implead him before Unbelievers; But it must be, as I said afore, upon supposition that hee is first excommunicate, and be∣come no Christian to thee, and therefore to be used as a Heathen or a Publicane. As also I grant him, that, to be delivered to Satan, signifies not to be excommu∣nicate, but supposes it. For if S. Paul, calling the miraculous graces of the Apostles time the manifestation of the Spirit; do teach us, that the world was thereby convicted, That God of a truth was in his Church, as hee saith again, 1 Cor. XIV. 24, 25; then was it to the same purpose and effect, that those who were shut out of the Church should become liable to the incursions of evil Spirits; To wit; To make the difference between the Land of Goshen and the rest of Egypt visible. It was therefore necessary, that the power of binding or loosing, in the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, should be accompanied with the gift of the Holy Ghost, which our Lord breathed upon them. For by them the world was to be assured, upon what termes they might be loosed from sinne, and continue in the Unity of the Church, which if they forsook, they be∣came bound again. But there is not the same reason, why the same should be thought requisite, to the same power in their successors. For, those terms be∣ing once declared and settled, hee that professeth and teacheth them as the A∣postles have taught, is a competent Minister to loose or to bind another: not onely though hee have not that gift of the Holy Ghost, that may make him ap∣pear to be appointed by God to that purpose; but also, though hee be bound him∣self, because hee undergoes not that which hee professeth. Now, if the premises be true, it is a mistake as grosse as pernicious, to ima∣gine, that particular Christians, by the light common to all Christians, are Judges in all things concerning Christianity, or the Scriptures. For, if the at∣taining of Christianity, and Salvation by it, require no more, but to know the Rule of of Faith, and the common precepts of Christian conversation, together with the Offices wherewith God is to be served by his Church; If the gift of the Holy Ghost be promised to those that are baptized, upon undertaking this; then is the understanding of the rest of the Scriptures no further required at their hands, neither have they any warrant for that which they shall do, upon any such presumption as this. The Church, that hath received of God the trust of maintaining unity in this service of God, so as may best stand with the main∣tenance of that profession which it presupposeth; hath by consequence, an obligation upon them, to stand to the resolution thereof, saving that common Christianity which the constitution thereof presupposeth. It is therefore utter∣ly a most poisonous doctrine to be infused into the ears of Christian people, that they are, by their Christianity, free to cast themselves into Churches, as they may meet with those whom they best like to communicate with. It is
therefore a thing to stand astonished at, that they who have hitherto declamed against any thing in Christianity, the reason whereof is not to be derived from the Scripture, not seeing in the Scripture any such thing as a Church, that was not founded by the Apostles; or by commission from the Apostles, not in all Christianity, any thing ever counted a Church, that was not planted by mean authority derived thence to some Church; should now think themselves at li∣berty to build Churches, upon no other foundation, than an arbitrary agree∣ment of seven persons. Suppose I say nothing as yet, in what right and inte∣rest, several Members, or rather several ranks and qualities concurre to the re∣solution of the Church; Suppose I grant the power may be so abused, that se∣veral parts of the Church may stand obliged to provide for themselves without the whole, which is al that the common profession of Reformation importeth; Shall we not be throughly reformed, till we renounce one Catholick Church, as visibly a corporation, as the Baptisme which we received upon acknowledg∣ing of it is visible? If every Church be planted by the authority of the Apo∣stles to that effect, extant and alive in some Church, then is not the commu∣nion thereof with all other Churches (by the means of that which planted it, communicating with all) arbitrary, but a necessary consequence of that obli∣gation to the Unity of the whole, which it gets by being a Church. Nor is there any reason why the acts of the whole, (whether done by representatives in Synods, or resolved at distance of time and place, by intelligence and corre∣spondence of the absent) should any way depend upon the satisfaction of par∣ticular Christians, how just or how requisite. For, neither doth their confor∣mity to them, in any reasonable construction, import any ingagement of their conscience, to the justice or necessity of them. Unlesse it could be said, that a man could not live in society, without binding himself to answer for the acts of that society wherein hee liveth. Which hee that saith, will not find an in∣dependent congregation to continue in for four and twenty hours, or to enter into, onely for one. For, what obligation can all Christians have, to answer for that, which our Christianity, upon profession whereof we are become Chri∣stians, containeth not? Indeed, when the abuse is so visible, that the unity of the Church, provided for the service of God upon supposition of this common Christianity, evidently destroyeth what it pretendeth to maintain; I leave the case at present, for their plea, who cannot obtain the consent of the whole, if they reform themselves. But you see what reason I have to deny, that this Reformation consisteth, in voiding the obligation of the acts and decrees of the Church. For the same reason, the authority of Pastors is as visibly derived from the act of the Apostles in primitive Churches, as their own authority is visible in the Scriptures. And unlesse all Christendom could be cousened or forced at once to admit such an imposture, they can be no Churches further than the name, in which it is derived from the Law of nature and reason, and the liberty left private Christians to dispose of themselves in Ecclesiastical communion where they please. For, of that liberty, neither the Scriptures, nor all Christianity since the time of them will yield one example. I marvel therefore that S. Pauls commission to Timothy, 1 Tim. V. 17. should seem to import no more then a reproof, and that at the discretion of him that is reproved, whether hee will admit it, or return him as good as hee brings. For if S. Pauls commission to Timothy extend no further, what could hee have done more himself had hee been present? And the Apostle, injoyning obedience to those who first brought the Gospel, and to those who presently ruled those Churches, in the same terms, Hebr. XIII. 7, 17. must needs be thought to give the successors their predecessors authority, saving the difference observed afore. So certain is it which I have advanced in another place, that this opinion is not tenable, without denying the authority of the Apostles, in the quality of Governours of the Church. For, as to the exception that may be made concerning the use of this Power, I have already demurred to the doubt that may rest in diffe∣rence, between the succession of Faith, and the succession of persons. In fine, not to insist here, what the respective interests of publick and private per∣sons
in the Church are and ought to be, because it is a point that cannot here be voided; It shall be enough to say, that, of necessity, the authority of publick persons in and for the whole must be such, as may make and maintain the Church a Society of reasonable people, not a Common-wealth of the Cyclopes, in which, , no body is ruled by any body in any thing, accor∣ding to Euripides. As for the Synagogues, that may be presumed, rather then evidenced, to have subsisted in the ten Tribes, during the Schisme; Let him make appear what hee can, hee shall never have joy of it towards his intent, so long as the difference between the Law and the Gospel stands, which I have ettled; that the Church and the State were both one and the same Body under the Law, as standing both by the same title of it; But several under the Gos∣pel, the one standing upon the common ground of all Civil Government, the other upon the common Faith of Christianity, which ought to make all Chri∣stian States one and the same whole Church. For, in the two Tribes, who were at their freedom to resort to the Temple for that service of God which was confined to the Temple, (which all, could neither alwayes do, nor were bound to do) there is no record of any settled order for assembling themselves to serve God, either in the Law, obliging of right, or actually practised accor∣ding to Historical truth. How much lesse in the ten Tribes, being fallen from the Law by the Schism? And, if there wanted not those who had not bowed the knee to Baal; nor Prophets, and schools of Prophets, under whom they might assemble themselves; yet was this far from a Society, formed by a cer∣tain Rule and Order for communicating in Gods service, as I have shewed, the Church is. And therefore hee, who, upon that account, thinks himself free from the Rule of Gods service under which wee now have in the Church of England, must first either nullifie the Gospel, as owning no such thing as one visible Church, or prove the Church in which hee received his Christianity to be apostate. Now, I confesse, our Doctor here makes use of an assumption which I in∣tend not to deny, being an evident truth; That every man hath the Soveraign Power of judging, in mater of Religion, what himself is to beleeve or to do. For, how should any man be accountable to God for his choice, upon other termes? But, hee will intangle himself most pitifully, if hee imagine; That God hath turned all men loose to the Bible, to make what they can of it, and professe the Religion that they may fansie to themselves out of it. Even those who make men beleeve the Infallibility of the Church, must, in despite of them∣selves, appeal to the judgement of whomsoever they perswade, to pronounce, that so it is. And, for the rest, how much soever he referre himself to him that hath intangled him in that snare, it proceeds wholly upon this supposition, to which hee hath once made his understanding a slave. But, if all the world should do as men do now in England, make every fansy taken up out of the Bible a Law to their Faith (not questioning, whether ever professed, owned, or injoined by the Church, or not) it would soon become questionable, whe∣ther there be indeed any such thing as Christianity or not, these that professe it agreeing in nothing wherein they would have it consist. And, for my part, the the mater is past question, supposing what hath been said; That God pro∣vided from the beginning of Christianity, that all Churches should be linked to∣gether by a Law of visible Communion in the service of God, and so to make one Church. For, by this means, to become a Member of any Church, was to become a Member of the whole Church, by the right of visible Communion with all Churches, into which, all Members of any Church were baptized. And this it is which made the Church visible. For, when a man had no further to enquire, but, what Christians they were who in every City communicated with all Christians besides, the choice was ready made without further trial, avoiding the rest for Hereticks or Schismaticks. And, this choice being made, there was no fear of offense by reading the Scriptures, the sense whereof, this choice confined to the Faith and Rules received through the whole Church. So that, speaking of Gods Institution, every man is Soveraign to judge for himself in
mater of Religion, supposing the Communion of the Church, and the sense of the Scripture to be confined within that which it alloweth. But, hee, who, thereupon, takes upon him to judge of Religion out of the Scripture, not knowing what bounds the Communion of the Church hath given the sense of it, shall never impute it to Gods Ordinance, if hee perish by chusing amisse. Now, if it be objected, that wee are at a distance from the Church of Rome, and all who communicate with it, upon a just cause of refusing the Reformation, as all that professe the Reformation suppose; And therefore, that there remains no visible presumption what is true, the ground of visibility being destroyed, by the division of the Church; I shall be far enough from extenuating the force of this objection, or the effect of this division, acknowledging, that, ac∣cording to my opinion, holding both the Reformation, and the Catholick Church, the Church should be visible, but is indeed invisible. Not absolutely, but, as that which is hardly visible may truly be called invisible, because every one whom it concerns cannot attain to discern it, upon clear grounds. For, my intent is to aggravate the mischiefs of division to the highest, which, they who believe not the Catholick Church do not take for any inconvenience. And therefore I grant all, and do acknowledge, that division in the Church necessa∣rily destroyeth that provision which God hath made, for the unlearned as well as the learned (equally concerned in the common Salvation of Christians) to discern by their common sense, where to resort, for that which is necessary to the Salvation of all; and how to improve and husband the same, as their profici∣ence in Christianity calls for more at their hands, then the Salvation of all re∣quires. Whereby it comes to pass, that they are put to make their choice, in maters, whereof it is not possible for ordinary capacities to comprehend the grounds; And so, must chuse out of fansy, education, prejudice, faction, or which is the vilest of all, interest of this world, which is in one word, profit. But, this being a choice that must be made, and though difficult, yet possible to be well made, hee that, without supposing Infallibility on the one side, or Reformation on the other side, would discern between true and false supposing the Original unity of the Catholick Church, must be a madman if hee advise not with the Records of the Catholick Church, though out of date, as to force of Law, on both sides, to tell him wherein Reformation infallibly consisteth. For, by that means, though hee shall not be able to restore that unity which is once violated (the duty of all but obliging to an effect, that cannot take place without the consent of parties) yet hee shall be able so to behave himself; and that Church which goes by this Rule, be it greater or be it lesse, shall be so constituted, as not to make, but to suffer the division which it is charged with. But, hee who preaches original liberty to all Christians to cast themselves into Presbyteries or into Congregations at their choice, bids them sail the main Sea without Ballast; and, besides departing from the Unity of the Church, by be∣coming Members of arbitrary Societies, not parts of the whole by the visible act of visible power in it, expose themselves to the shelves and quick sands of positions destructive to the Faith of the Church. And I am to demand of this Doctor, if the Presbyteries be Churches by association of Congregations, and the Congregations Churches without it, and those which are neither Presbyte∣ries nor Congregations (that is in effect, all the Parish Churches of the land) be Churches no lesse than either of both, (because they have one whom the Triers call a godly man, sent them to preach whatsoever he can make of the Bi∣ble) I say, I must demand of him, what it is that qualifies a man a Member of a Church, or a Church a Church, and how a man, by being such a one, becomes a Member of the whole Church, which hitherto hath been thought necessary to the Salvation of every Christian. For, who knoweth not the dispute that remains between the Reformation and the Church of Rome, which shall be the true Church? Which, if every man be at liberty to become a Member of a Congregation, with any six more that hee likes, (who by that means shall be a Church) is plainly about nothing. And therefore wee are plainly invi∣ted to a new Christianity, part whereof hath hitherto been, to think our selves
Members of the Catholick Church, by being Members of some particular Church, part of the Catholick. So certain it is, that, had not the Creed been first banished out of mens hearts, it had not been banished out of the Church. But, when this Doctor maintaineth further, that, all men having power in chief to chuse for themselves, in mater of Religion, the Soveraign hath Power, not onely to chuse for it self, but to impose penalties upon those which owe no man any account of their choice, if they chuse not that which the Soveraign chuseth; I confesse I find this toucheth mee, and the remnant of the Church of England, to the quick; edifying the Soveraign, to deny protection in the exercise of Religion, to them, who find themselves bound, never to commu∣nicate in the change that is made, and in making, in Religion amongst us. But I find withal, so much inconsequence, and contradiction to his own sense, and the sense of all Christians, in it, that, I hope no Secular Power will be so prodigal of a good conscience, as to make it self the executioner of a doctrine tending to so unchristian injustice. For, if, as hee saith, no man is answerable for the Religion hee chuseth, to any but God, how shall hee be liable to be punished by man, for that, wherein hee offendeth him not? Or, how can any man offend him, to whom hee is not countable? Nor will it serve the turn to say; That, by denying protection in the exercise of Religion, the Secular Power punisheth no man for the judgement of his conscience. For all Chri∣stians, of what profession soever, do generally believe, that they are bound to exercise the Religion which they are bound to professe; That Baptisme, wherein, (by the positive will of God under the Gospel) the profession of Christianity consisteth, truly obliging true Christians, to assemble themselves for the service of God with his Church, according to the Rules of it. It can∣not therefore be said; that it is no penalty, no persecution for Religion, to deny protection in the exercise of Religion, to them who are not punished for the judgment of their conscience. For, whosoever can be supposed to be a good Christian, not onely had rather, but surely had better lose his life, (much more any comfort of it) than lose the exercise of his Christianity in the service of God, whereupon his Salvation so neerly dependeth. Nor will it serve the turn to say, as this Doctor saith, that, in persecuting the Christian Faith, (much more, in denying protection to the exercise of any profession which it infor∣ceth) the Heathen Emperors exceeded not their Power, but onely abused it; having granted afore, that a man is free to chuse for himself, that is, not count∣able for his Religion to his Soveraign. For, if it once be said, that God grant∣eth all men all freedom in the choice of their Religion, it cannot be said, that God granteth the Secular Power any right to punish him for that choice, for which hee maketh him unaccountable. The ground of my reason lies in that which hath been said, against the Infallibility of the Church. For if the sen∣tence of the Church be not of force to oblige any man to believe the truth of it, much lesse can the sentence of any Christian, though never so Soveraign, oblige the meanest of his Subjects to believe that Religion to be true which hee commandeth, because hee commandeth it. And, whatsoever penalty the So∣veraign inflicteth upon those that concurre not to the exercise of that Religi∣on which hee holdeth forth (as when hee denieth them protection in the ex∣ercise of their own, which, as I have showed, is no mean one) implieth a command of exercising his, and is inflicted in consideration of obeying Gods command, which, the Subject is inabled by God to judge that hee hath, a∣gainst all the world to the contrary. So that, upon these terms, the Secular Power, which is inabled to judge for it self upon the same account with the meanest Subject thereof, cannot have power to punish any Subject, for exer∣cising any Religion which it alloweth not. For all Power, as I said afore, is a moral quality, consisting in a Right of obliging another mans will by the act of his will that hath it. Therefore, if a Subject cannot be obliged by the will of his Soveraign, to professe and to exercise that Religion which his Sove∣raign prescribeth, then cannot the Soveraign have power, to impose any penal∣ty upon his Subject, for professing or exercising that Christianity which hee
believeth; All Christianity obliging a man, to the utmost of his ability, to professe and to exercise that Religion which hee believeth to be true. And the reason is manifest. For, Christianity is from God, and the Secular Power is from God, though by several means. Christianity, by the coming of Christ, and the preaching of his Apostles. Secular Power by what means, I will not here dispute, nor yet suppose any thing that is questionable. That which serves my turn is evident to the common reason of all men; That, by another act of God than that upon which Christianity standeth; That Christianity depend∣eth not upon it; That, as I argued against the Leviathan, by a Law which no Secular Power can abate. If therefore God oblige a Christian by his Christia∣nity, to serve God otherwise than his Soveraign commandeth, hee is bound by the same bond to disobey his Soveraign to obey God; which obliged the primi∣tive Christians to suffer death rather than renounce the Faith. But I intend not to say that absolutely, which I say upon supposition of this Doctors sense. Nor do I intend here to dispute that, which I have resolved in another place, what kind of penalties Secular Power is able to inact that Christianity with, which it self professeth. The question is now, how the Secular Power is able, or becomes able to impose penalties in maters of Religion; (which as a Chri∣stian, it is not able to oblige the Subject to acknowledge) not how far these penalties may extend. A question which cannot be answered, not supposing the Church. A question which is no question supposing it. For, supposing that God, sending Christianity, founds, for part of it, the visible society and corporation of a Church, assuring the common sense of all people thereby, what is the condition, upon which Salvation is to be had by communicating with it; What will remain, but to conform to the communion of this Church, la∣bouring to work out, every man his own Salvation, by the means which the communion thereof furnisheth? Which whoso doth not, but pretends to di∣sturbe it, will remain punishable by the Secular Power, (for I have said alrea∣dy, that the Church is not inabled to inflict temporal penalties) not absolute∣ly, because it is Christian, but upon supposition, that it maintaineth the true Church; The acts whereof, as Excommunication, by the original constitution thereof, inforceth; So, did not the Secular Power inforce that Excommuni∣cation, it must of necessity become ineffectual, when the world is come into the Church, and Christianity professed by the State. And this is the resolution that I have given in another place, that the acts of the Church, for the mater of them, are limited by the Church, (that is to say, by persons qualified by the Church, and in behalf of it) but the force that executes them must come from the State. For, supposing the Church to be founded by God, and the power of it resolved into that act wherein this foundation consisteth; What∣soever the Church is by this power inabled to do, will belong to the Church by Gods Law to do, though the mater of that which it doth be not limited by Gods Law, but by the act of men inabled by Gods Law to do it. S. Cyprian, and others of the Fathers have reason, when they argue, that the acts of the Church are the acts of God. For, no man capable of common reason can doubt, that, what is done by commission from superiour Power is the act of that Power which granted the commission, so far as it ownes the execution of it; And, I have sufficiently limited the Power granted the Church heretofore, by the mater of that communion for which it subsisteth, and the supposition of the Christianity upon which it subsisteth. What is therefore done by virtue of this commission, though perhaps ill done, for the inward intent with which men do it, yet, being within the bounds of the Power established by God, is to be accepted as his own act, without contesting whose act of founding the Church, it cannot be infringed. Which if it be true, so far is the Secular Power from being able to create or constitute a Church, (by creating that difference of qualities, in which, the difference between several Members thereof consisteth) that it is not able of it self to do any of these acts, which the Church, that is, those who are qualified by and for the Church, are thereby qualified to do, with∣out committing the sinne of Sacrilege, (in seizing the Powers, which by Gods
act are constituted, and therefore consecrated and dedicated to his own service, into its own hands) not supposing the free act of the Church, without fraud and violence, to the doing of it. CHAP. XXI. How the Tradition of the Church limits the interpretation of Scriptures. How the declaration of the Church becomes a reasonable mark of Heresie. That which is not found in the Scriptures may have been delivered by the Apostles. Some things delivered by the Apostles, and recorded in the Scriptures; may not oblige. S. Austines Rule of Apostolical Traditions. ANd, by this means, I make account, I have gained another principle towards the interpretation of Scripture, and resolution of things questioned in Christianity, either concerning the Rule of Faith, or such Laws and Customs determining the circumstances of Ecclesiastical Communion, as, I showed afore, are understood by the name of Apostolical Traditions. Which principle, that no man mistake mee, pretends not any general Rule for the interpretation of Scripture, even in those things which concern the Rule of Faith; but inferrs a prescription against any thing that can be alleged out of Scripture, that, if it may appear to be contrary to that which the whole Church hath received and held from the beginning, it cannot be the true meaning of that Scripture, which is alleged to prove it. For the meaning, even of those Scriptures which con∣cern the Rule of Faith, must be had, by the same same means, by which, I shall come by and by to show, that the meaning of all Scriptures, whatsoever they concern, is to be had and established. But the being and constitution of the Society of the Catholick Church from the beginning is of force to prescribe this limitation, to the Fansies of all men that take upon them to interpret the Scriptures; that they neither admit, nor impose upon any man, any thing for the true sense of Scripture, whereby, the substance of Christianity, which the Rule of Faith importeth, may become questionable. So that, an evidence of such op∣position, ought to out-shine and supresse any appearance or supposed evidence of truth, in any such sense. The Rule of Faith, (Not to go about to determine, in this place, what it con∣taines, because it is the Master-piece of all the Divines of Christendome, to say, what is fundamental in Christianity and what is not, but to give a grosse descri∣ption of what men mean when they inquire for it) consists partly in things to be believed, partly in things to be done: Hee that holds so much of Christian truth, as may reasonably certifie him of all that is requisite to qualifie a Christian man for remission of sins and life everlasting, which are the promises of the Go∣spel, may well be said to hold the whole Rule of Faith in things to be believed. Hee that holds so much of Christian truth, as may reasonably certifie him, of all that is requisie to preserve all Christians with consciences void of sin, may be said to hold it in things to be done. For, the common Rule of Faith importeth not what is necessity for any Christian, but for all Christians. And, that any thing contrary to the salvation of all Christians should be held and professed by all Christians, is a grosse contradiction to common sense. Whereupon it is no lesse evidently true, that the Catholick Church of all ages and places is utterly infallible; In as much as it is a grosse contradiction, to suppose a number of men to attain salvation, who all do hold some thing destructive to the salvation of any one. So much difference there is between the whole Church, which is the Catholick Church of all times and places, and the present Catholick Church, respectively to those ages, in which the Communion of the whole was not in∣terrupted by any breach, but effectuated by actual correspondence. For, the act of the Catholick Church, in this sense, which I call the present Church, if it be lawfull, obligeth all that are of it; But it self stands obliged to the Faith of the whole Church, as that, which, the being & privilege of a Church▪ resupposeth to be rofessed by it. And of this I cannot conceive how any question should remain.
The difficulty that remains is, how it may appear, that all this is not a fine no∣thing, how it may reasonably seem to signifie something towards the limitation which I prescribe, to the interpretation of those Scriptures which may be alle∣ged, in mater concerning the Rule of Faith. And the answer is, that, seeing it hath appeared, that the Apostles of our Lord Christ established from the begin∣ning one Catholick Church consisting of all Churches, by the will of God and his appointment; (and that, in consideration of that which was made to appear afore, that all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians, though evident∣ly extant and discernable in the Scriptures, are not neverthelesse evidently dis∣cernable by all them whose salvation they concern) that therefore the unity and Communion of the Catholick Church was provided by God, as the deposi∣tory of his truth, the acknowledgment whereof should be necessary to obtain life everlasting. So that, the effect of this trust, deposited by God in the Church, to be at least thus much; That, whatsoever was advanced in any part thereof, as belonging to the Rule of Faith, being condemned where first it was advan∣ced, and, in consequence of that condemnation, by all other parts of the Church, to that effect, as to render those that held it uncapable of the Communion of all the whole Church; That this, I say, might be accounted a reasonable mark, to discern such doctrine to be destructive to the Rule of Faith. And thus were all Heresies marked for such by the Church, and, upon this ground, those marks were receivable, not onely before Constantine, but, so long as it may be visible that nothing hindred this correspondence, wherein the actual unity of the Church consisted, to operate and have effect. For, if this be the reason and ground which made these marks reasonable, as grounded upon it, then, hee that suppo∣ses this reason either actually interrupted or impeached, cannot presume upon the like effect. And therefore, the justifying of these marks requires the evi∣dencing of this correspondence of the Church, and no more. And truly, I could not but admire, to finde it alleged by Crellius the Socinian, (in his answer to Grotius concerning the satisfaction of Christ, where hee argues, that no Ec∣clesiastical Writer ever profest that opinion) I say, I admired to finde him an∣swer, that Pelagius the Heretick maintained the same. For sure it is not much more pertinent, than, if hee should allege, that the Jewes professe our Lord Jesus not to be the Messias, or that the Gentiles do not worship one true God; In as much as, though they be further from the faith of true Christians than Pelagius, yet an Heretick is no lesse excluded from the Communion of the Church, than a Jew or a Gentile: And the whole reason, for which the testie¦monies of Ecclesiastical Writers is receivable, to evidence maters concerning the Rule of Faith, (to which they can give no credit, but are, by acknowledging the same, receivable for Christians) is the Communion of the Church, which make it evident, that, what such men professe in the Church is not against the Faith of the Church. And this, in the second place, may be a reasonable presumption or evidence of that which belongeth to the Rule of Faith, when a thing is so ordinarily and vulgarly taught by Church Writers, that there can be no reaso∣nable presumption made, by the doctrine of any of them, that the contrary was ever allowed by the Church. So then, I do not tye my self to this, that, if any thing be found in the writings of any of those whom wee call commonly Fa∣thers, it is therefore not contrary to Christianity, or to the Rule of Faith, that is, either expresly, or by consequence; For, who will or can think it reasona∣ble, that the Church should be thought to avow all that hath been written by any of the Church, and is come to the hands of posterity by whatsoever means? Or who will think it strange, that a Christian should not understand the Rule of his Christianity, though the right understanding thereof should have been the condition requisite to the making of him a Christian? If the profession made by the writing from which posterity hath it, were evidently so notorious to the Church, and the maintenance thereof so obstinate, that the Church could not avoid taking notice of it and contradicting it, without quitting the trust of the Rule of Faith deposited with it; then, and not otherwise, I do admit, that the contrary of that which is regularly and ordinarily taught by Church Writers is inconsistent with the Rule of Faith.
Besides this, another presumption or prescription, limiting the interpreta∣tion or Scriptures in such things as concern the Traditions of the Apostles, wee may be confident to have gained, from the Society of the Church, demonstra∣ted by the premises; To wit, that, if any thing be questionable whether it come by Tradition from the Apostles or not, there can no conclusion be made in the negative, because it is not expressed in the Scriptures. Here, I desire all them that will not mistake mee, to take notice, that I intend not here to conclude, or inferre, what force those Traditions, which I pretend may come from the Apostles, though it be not certified by the Scriptures, may have, to oblige the Church, which question, I found it requisite to set aside once afore. But, that which here I affirme onely concerns the question of fact, that it is not impossible to make evidence, that some Orders, or Rites and customes of the Church had their beginning of being brought in for Laws to the Church, by the Apostles, though not written in the Scriptures. Confessing neverthe∣lesse, that the proving hereof, which no reason can hinder mee to proceed with here, will be a step to the resolving of that force, which the Traditions of the Apostles (whether written or not written in the Scriptures) have and ought to have, in obliging the Church at present, when it shall appear to be common to written and unwritten Traditions, to have their authority from the Apo∣stles. And, the evidence of this prescription depends upon a more general one, limiting the interpretation of Scripture, in mater of this nature (that is, concerning the Laws of the Church, how far they were intended by the Apo∣stles to tye the Church) not to exceed the practice of the Church succeeding the times of the Apostles. The demonstration whereof consists in certain in∣stances, of things recorded by the Scriptures of the New Testament, either e∣videncing onely mater of fact, that is what was then done (and therefore im∣porting no precept what was to be done for the future) or importing such pre∣cepts, as no man will stand to be now in force. It is manifest, that the Scriptures report, how the Disciples, under the Apo∣stles, were wont to assemble themselves to serve God by the Offices of Chri∣stianity, upon the first day of the week called vulgarly Sunday, after the Re∣surrection of Christ, John. XX. 19, 26. Acts. XX. 7. Con. XVI. 2. Apoc. I. 10. Speaking of the banishment of S. John, conforming himself to the times of the Church for the service of God, and thereupon ravish'd in Spirit: Which no man questions. It is said indeed in this case, as it is said by others in the question of Tithes, that the first day of the week is commanded to be kept holy of Chri∣stians by the fourth Commandment. But I demand of any man that can tell seven whether the first day of the week and the seventh day of the week be the same day of the week or not; And if this be unquestionable, I demand further, whether the Jews were tyed by the fourth Commandement to keep the last day of the week or not: Assuring my self, that, whosoever believes the Scriptures, and reads the Commandement, that obliges them to rest all that day, in which God rested from making Heaven and Earth, can no more doubt, that they were bound to rest on Saturday, than, that God rested from making Heaven and Earth upon that day. I demand then, whether the same precept, that obliged them to keep Saturday, can oblige Christians to keep Sunday? And do conclude that it can no more be said, then, that the same word signifies both the seventh and the first day. So wide an error so small a mistake can cause, when faction hath once swallowed it. A man would think it a very easie mistake to understand the seventh day of the week, which God commands to be hallowed, as if it signified one of the seven and no more. Which if it were true, then were the Jews never tied to rest on the Saturday by Gods Law, but might have chosen which day of seven they would have rest∣ed on, notwithstanding that God rested on the Saturday, which is, to make the reason of the precept impertinent to the mater of it. I intend not to de∣ny, that the reason and ground, upon which the Christian Church came to be enjoyned to keep the first day of the week, is drawn, and to be drawn from the fourth Commandment. But I say further, that, the reason and ground of
a positive Law makes it not a Law, but the act of him that hath power to give Law, signifying that hee intends to inact it for a Law, whether hee expresse the reason or not. And thus I say, as I have hitherto said, concerning other Ordinances which have the force of Law to oblige the Church; that they can no more stand, by virtue of such Ordinances, as I acknowledge to have been torrespondent to them under the Law of Moses, than Christianity by the vir∣tue of Judaisme, or the Gospel by virtue of the Law; which though it bear witnesse to the Gospel, yet, hee were a Madman that should say; That hee who was bound to be circumcised, by virtue of that circumcision should be bound to be baptized, supposing him of the number of Christians, who agree, that, Baptisme coming in force, circumcision could no more continue in force. And surely, those simple people, who of late times have taken upon them to keep the Saturday, though it were, in truth and effect, no lesse than the re∣nouncing of their Christianity, yet, in reason, did no more then pursue the grounds which their Predecessors had laid, and drawn the conclusion which ne∣cessarily followes upon their premises; that, if the fourth Commandment be in force, then, either the Saturday is to be kept, or the Jews were never tied to keep it. Besides this particular, it is manifest, that the Apostles observe the third and sixth, and ninth hours of the day, for the service of God, Acts II. 15. III. 1. X. 3, 9, 30. And this, according to an Order then in force among Gods peo∣ple, according to the Scriptures, Psal. LV. 18, Dan. VI. 11. As the very words of these Texts, and common reason, with the Testimonies of Tertulli∣an, de Jejuniis cap. X. Epiphanius, Heresi XXX, S. Hierome upon the Text of Da∣niel, S. Cyprian de Oratione Dominica, and divers others import. And again, Acts XIII. 2. wee see, that the Christians at Antiochia assembled themselves in fasting, for celebrating the service of God, when they were to send away those, that by Gods appointment were to carry the Gospel to further parts. As the Church, according to this example, hath, of ancient ages, had a cu∣stome of Fasting before Ordinations. But, whether or no those things are to be observed by the Church, as Laws introduced and begun by these practices, this, whether true or false, whether questionable or unquestionable, is not to be concluded by the words of those Scriptures which barely relate what was done. Again: At the institution of the Passeover, it is expresly commanded, that it be eaten with their loins girt, shoes on their feet, and staves in their hands, Exod. XII. 11. which notwithstanding, it is manifest to all that believe, that our Lord did eat the Passeover, that hee did eat it sitting at the Table, or leaning on his side, as then they did eat at Table, Mat. XXVI. 20. Mar. XIV. 18. Luke XII. 14. in which posture, neither were their loins girt, nor their shoes on their feet, nor had they staves in their hands: And yet, so sure as our Lord knew what the Law required, so sure is it, that his intent was to observe the same. And therefore, knowing this to be Scripture, hee knew neverthelesse that it obliged not, and every one that practised it knew the same, and by the Scriptures could not know it. See the like at the last Supper of our Lord. Our Saviour, instituting the Sacrament of the Eucharist at his last Supper, command∣eth his Disciples to do that which hee had done. And the Disciples of our Lord, in pursuance of this Commandment, are reported by the Scriptures, to have celebrated the Eucharist at Supper, as our Lord had instituted it, and held those Assemblies, at which they served God with the Offices of Christianity for that purpose, the rich bearing out the poor in the charge of it. This, I have shew∣ed afore more at large, to be the meaning of those Scriptures, wherein men∣tion is made of these their Assemblies, Acts II. 42. 46. VI. XX. 7. 1 Cor. XI. 20, 21, 22. 33, 34. Jude 12. 2 Pet. II. 13. By all this wee find not, that the Eucharist was instituted by our Lord to be celebrated at the publick service of God, where this Supper of our Lord is not celebrated, as Tertullian acknow∣ledgeth, where neverthelesse hee affirmeth, that it was delivered to the Church by the Apostles so to observe it. de Cor. III. Eucharistiae Sacramentum, & in tempore victus, & omnibus mandatum à Domino, etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec
nisi de manu Praesidentium sumimus. Wee receive the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist which our Lord instituted at the time of meat, and for all, at our Assemblies a∣fore day also, but, onely at the hands of our Presidents. Though I have indeavo∣red in another place to show, that this is to be gathered from some circumstance of the Apostles writings; (to wit; That, in point of fact it was so practiced under them) yet it is manifest, that the bare words of the Scripture, Do this in remembrance of mee, and the Scriptures, that relate onely what the Apostles did, do not determine, whether it ought to be celebrated otherwise than at Sup∣per, as our Lord instituted it, Further. The Apostles Acts XV. 29. decree; that those who were then con∣verted to Christianity of Gentiles, should abstain from things offered in Sacri∣fice to Idols. Which, being done to comply with the Jewes, manifestly signi∣fies, that they were to abstain from those meats, as meats of Gods making, not∣withstanding that the eating of them implied no communion with the sacrificing to Idols. For, it is a thing certain, by the examples of Daniel and his fellows, Dan. I. 9. of Tobit, I. 11, 12. and Judith, XII. 2, 3, 4, 19. that the Jewes, from the time of their captivity, when they could not avoid conversing with the Gen∣tiles, had taken upon them to abstain, not onely from things really sacrificed to Idols, but from most things that came out of Gentiles hands, because there was some presumption, that a part of most kindes, (for First-fruits) had been conse∣crated to Idols, the rest being by those First-fruits polluted, as dedicated to I∣dols. Therefore, in those places alleged, it appears, that they forbore all meats and drinks that came from the Gentiles. Neither can there be reason to think it a folly which the Jews tell us, that Nehemiah, being Cup-bearer to the King, was dispensed with for drinking the wine of the Gentiles. For, why should wee think him lesse scrupulous of the Law than those afore-named? About this wine of the Gentiles, and consequently, other kindes, there are many nice and scru∣pulous decisions in the Jewes Constitutions, the ground whereof, you may see by the premises, is more ancient than the beginning of Christianity. And this is that wherein the Apostles order the Gentilish Christians to comply with the Jewish, to satisfie them, that there was no intent of falling from that God who gave their Law, in those that turned Christians. And this decree S. Paul deli∣vers to the Churches of his foundation to be observed, Acts XVI. 4. Which notwithstanding, writing to the Corinthians, hee manifestly distinguishes be∣tween eating things sacrificed to Idols materially, as Gods creatures, without inquiring whether so sacrificed or not, and formally, when notice must needs be taken that they are such, 1 Cor. VIII. —. instancing in two cases; First, when this is done, nor onely in the company of Idolaters, but in an house of Idols, 1 Cor. VIII. 10. Secondly, when a man, being invited by Idolaters, knowes that they intertain him with the remains of things sacrificed to Idols, part of which, as the First-fruits, whereby the rest was consecrated, were first consumed upon the Altar, whereby they that made these Feasts professed to communicate with their Altars, that is, with their Idols, which were Divels, 1 Cor. VIII. 19-30. In these two cases then, the Apostle, forbidding them to eat things sacri∣ficed to Idols, (lest they might give occasion to those that uncerood not what they did, to cōmunicate in Idolatries) manifestly allowes them, when that con∣sideration takes no place, to eat that which the Apostles had forbidden to eat, intending to forbid the meats of the Gentiles, for compliance with the Jews, in the distance they kept from Idolaters. And truly the same is manifestly to be gathered from that which hee orders among the Romans, XIV. 2, 3, 20, 21. neither to condemn one another for not observing that difference of meats, which, by the Law, then obliged; nor yet to use such meats, in case it might scan∣dalize those that were of the Law, to think, that Christianity stands not with it. Whereby, it is evident, that hee allowes them that which the Apostles had for∣bidden, because it is evident, that this is one of those differences, which Jews, by the Law, were bound to make. If therefore there be this difference in the Scriptures, it is manifest, that the leter of them doth not determine what obli∣ges. So again, the same Apostle, 1 Cor. XI. 1-16. disputeth at large, that
men ought not, but women ought to cover their heads at praying or prophesy∣ing in the Church. For the intent whereof, though it hath been the subject of whole books in this age, I conceive, I need go no further than Tertullians book de Velandis Virginibus; who, living so much nearer the Apostles, knew better the custōms of their Churches, than all the Criticks of this time. Hee disputes the case in question then, whether Virgins had a privilege not to vail their faces at Divine Service; by arguing, that they cannot be excepted from S. Pauls words, and alleging the example of the Church of Corinth, where, at that very time, the Virgins vailed their faces at Divine Service as other women did. Which whether it tye the Church or not at this time, it will scarce be granted by those who now practice it not. And in another place, 1 Tim. V. 3-6. hee show∣eth, that there was then an Order of Widowes, whose maintenance hee order∣eth to come from the stock of the Church, as likewise, how they are to be quali∣fied, and how imployed; Of which Order, there is no where any step remaining in the Church at resent, though nothing be more imperative than the Order concerning it. So, the precept of the Apostle serves not to oblige the Church at present, though by Scripture. And if I may use the argument ad hominem, upon the supposition of those that I dispute with, who intend not to take any thing for true which I prove not, as debating the principles of Christian truth; it is manifest, that the Apostle, James V. 14. appointeth that the sick be anoin∣ted with oil, together with prayers, as well for the recovery of their health, as for the forgivenesse of their sins. Which, it is manifest, that it cannot appear not to oblige the Church at this time, by virtue of that Scripture which injoy∣neth it. And therefore, to say nothing at present, whether it do indeed oblige the now Church or not, those that believe it doth not oblige, cannot be able to give a reason why it obligeth not, by the Scripture alone. And this is the argu∣ment whereby I prove, that the interpretation of Scripture, as concerning ma∣ter of Law to the Church (or the means to be used in determining what obli∣geth what not) cannot transgresse the tradition and practice of the Church: Because, that which is propounded in the Scriptures as meer mater of fact may oblige, and that which is propounded as mater of precept creating right, may not oblige, the Scripture not determining whether it intend that ob∣ligation to be universal or not. For, having showed afore, that the Church is a Society instituted by God, to which these Rules are given, as Laws to govern it, in the exercise of those Offices wherein the Communion therof consisteth; all reasonable men must grant, that, as the intent and meaning of all Laws is to be gathered from the primitive and original practice of that Society for which they were made, so is the reason of all Orders delivered to the Church by the Apo∣stles, and by consequence their intent, how farr they were to oblige, to be mea∣sured by the first and most ancient practice of the Church, which first had them to use. Whereunto let us adde these considerations; That the Orders delivered the Church by the Apostles were of necessity in force, before mention can be made of them in their writings; That the writing of them is neither the rea∣son why they oblige, nor a thing thereunto requisite, but meerly supervenient to the force of them; And, that there is sufficient evidence, that those motives to believe which the Scripture recordeth but cannot evidence, are neverthelesse true; and, that the truth of those motives cannot be evident, but by the Society of the Church which the said Laws do maintain. For, upon these conderati∣ons, it will appear necessarily consequent, that, as there be Apostolical Tradi∣tions which the Scripture evidently witnesseth, so evidence may be made of them without Scripture. The Rule of S. Austine, how to discern what Traditions do indeed come from the Apostles, is well enough known to be this; To wit, that which is ob∣served over all the Church, though it cannot be discerned when, where, or by whom it came first in force, (that is, in his times, by the authority of what Sy∣nod it was settled) that must be deemed and taken to come from the authority of the Apostles themselves. I will not use the terms of Synod or Synods, be∣cause I conceive, the Church was from the beginning, by virtue of the perpe∣tual
intelligence and correspondence settled and used between the parts of it, a standing Synod, even when there was no Assembly of persons authorized to consent in behalf of their respective Churches; Such things as became requi∣site to be determined in any Church being thereby so communicated to the rest, as the order taken in one, either to be accepted by them or redressed. Nei∣ther will I say, that the Rule is so effectual as it is true. For, I cannot warrant, how general the practice of every thing that may come in question can appear to have been over the whole Church, nor whether it may appear to have begun from some act of the Church, to be designed by some place or persons, or not; which in S. Austines time, I doubt not, might be made to appear, and being made to appear, would maintain the Rule to be true. Nor have I need of any such Rule, as may serve to discern whatsoever may become questionable, whether it come from the Apostles themselves or not: It shall suffice mee here to presume thus much, that no man can prescribe against any Rule of the Church, that it comes not from the Apostles, because it is not recorded in the holy Scri∣ptures. And therefore, that nothing hindereth, competent evidence to be made of the authority of the Apostles, in some Orders of the Church, of which there is no mention in the Scriptures. Correspondently to that which was settled afore concerning the Rule of Faith, that no man can prescribe against any thing questionable, that it is no part of it, because it is not evident in Scripture; or, because such arguments may be made against it out of the Scriptures, which every one, whose salvation it concerns, is not able evidently to assoile. And, all this being determined, I intend neverthelesse, that it still shall remain que∣stionable, how farr these Orders of the Apostles oblige the Church: Because I intend not to prescribe from all this, that those Orders which shall appear to have been brought in by the Apostles may not become uselesse to the Church. CHAP. XXII. The Authority of the Fathers is not grounded upon any presumption of their Lear∣ning or Holinesse. How farr they challenge the credit of Historical truth. The pre-eminenee of the Primitive. The presumption that is grounded upon their ranks and qualities in the Church. Of Arnobius, Lactantius, Tertulli∣an, Origen, Clemens, and the approbation of posterity. THese things being said, wee have got ground for a resolution, in the dispute concerning the authority of the Fathers in maters questionable concern∣ing Christianity, and the interpretation of the Scriptures. For truly, did the credit of those things which they affirm consist in the reputation of their holi∣nesse or learning, whether or no the premises be true, the consequence would be lame. Hee that could make a question of the godlinesse and of the Christiani∣ty of those persons, to whom wee owe the maintenance and propagation of Christianity under God, (by preserving Christs flock from the contagion of He∣resies, by intertaining the unity of the Church, and by laying down their lives for the truth) must, by consequence, question, though not that Christianity which hee hath sansied, yet that which was delivered by the Apo∣stles. Which notwithstanding, if the Holy Ghost, that was in them to save them, by saving the common Christianity, hath not given the Church evidence, that hee was given them to preserve them from error in understanding the Scriptures, wee wrong them, and the Holy Ghost in them, if wee take the truth of their doctrine upon their credit. For, though the having of the Holy Ghost presup∣poseth the profession of Christianity, as I have showed, yet that importeth no evidence to warrant the truth of all that they might say, in defense or interpre∣tation of it. And though their learning, in that which is proper to Christians, that is, their skill in the Scriptures be such, as these ages, that boast so much of learning can never equal, because they made it in a maner their whole businesse of study; And though some of them, as Clemens, Tertullian, Origen, and S. Hi∣rome, that looked about them for further helps to the defense and interpretation
of Christianity, may well challenge the curiosity of these times for great know∣ledg; Yet, because mans wit is alwaies fruitfull in that which it is imployed a∣bout, and may still be well imployed in clearing the true intent of Christianity and the Scriptures, so long as there are contrary opinions and sects which cannot all be true; I will not create any prejudice to the learning of this time upon that score, which, it is evident, may and doth imploy more helps of learning, than they ever did imploy towards the understanding of the Scriptures. Two privileges there are, belonging to the Fathers of the Church, which, no man that writes in these dayes can pretend to, how godly, how learned soever hee may be. The first is that of their age and time, creating an infallible trust, in point of historical truth, concerning the state of Christianity during those ages in which they lived, or which they might know. This is that, which, nei∣ther Pagans, nor Jews, nor Mahumetanes can refuse them any more, than Chri∣stians can refuse to believe them in maters of fact, which they relate, not as things done in private, (which themselves with a few more may pretend to have had means to know) but which were visible to the world at such time as they writ, and wherein, had they been otherwise, they might have been reproved, as imposing upon the world, not the belief of that which doth not appear to be true, but of that which doth appear to be untrue. Neither do I demand, that, upon this score, their credit be admitted any further, than that which I have pre∣mised will inforce. For, if I have well concluded, that the Church is a Society instituted by our Lord Christ and his Apostles, in trust, for the maintenance and propagation of Christianity, contained in the holy Scriptures which hee depo∣sited with it; then is the sense of that time which is nearest the age of the Apo∣stles a legal presumption of the truth of that which it was trusted with. And as all Writers, that relate things subject to the sense of all men as well as their own, have the credit of historical truth, and Church writers, in maters of fact con∣cerning the Church of their respective ages; (the state thereof being alwaies visible) So those that write under the first ages of the Church, though compe∣tent authors for the truth of nothing in Christianity, (for then why should not Christianity be believed upon their credit?) yet must be admitted, as unquesti∣onable witnesses of that Christianity, which came hot and tender from the forge of our Lord and his Apostles. Nor do I complain, that any man refuses them upon this score. But when I see, how many, pretending to search the Scriptures, and the truth of things questioned in Christianity, never make use of any infor∣mation they might have from them, to argue thereupon the true sense of the Scriptures, (who, if they were to expound any Author of humane learning, would count him a mad man that should neglect the records of those Authors that lived nearest the same time, and perhaps do themselves imploy the writings of Jewes and Pagans in expounding the very Scriptures) I cannot chuse but take it as a mark of prejudice against some truth, that men care not to be infor∣med of the primitive Christianity, least consequences might be framed against some prejudices of their own, which, supposing onely the credit of historical truth, might prove undeniable. And here, I must needs mervail at the Cardinal of Perrons demand, that the trial of what is to be thought Catholick, (or, universally received in the whole Church of God) should proceed chiefly, or at least necessarily, upon the testi∣monies of those Writers which lived about the fourth century of years from Christ, as that which flourished most for number and learning of Writers. For, seeing the authority of Church Writers is not grounded upon presumption of their learning; And, that the credit of historical truth cannot be denied even the single witnesse of those, that writ, when they were more scarce, and lesse knowing, at least in Secular studies; But, what is primitive, what accessory, is not to be discovered, but by the state of those times which were before additions could be made; hee that demands to be tryed by the times of three hundred years distance from the original, (wherein, what change may have fallen out, not presumption but historical truth must determine) I say, hee that demands this tryal, demands not to be tryed. Not that I would deny the Writers of that
age, and such as follow, the credit which their time, in the consideration now on foot, allowes; But, that the resolution of what is original and primitive must not come from the testimony thereof, but from the comparison of it with the testimony of those ages that went afore. The second consideration, in which the writings of the Fathers are valuable, cometh from that which is now proved, that is, from the Society of the Church, and the unity thereof, from whence it follows, that, what is found to be taught in the Church by men authorized by the Communion thereof, and qualified to teach, and that without contradiction, is not contrary to the Rule of Faith, but, if it be taught with one consent, it is part of it. Without contradiction, I mean here, when a man is not charged to transgresse the Faith of the Church, in that which hee teacheth, much lesse disowned by the Church for teaching it. Not, when no man is found to hold a contrary opinion, which alwaies falls out in things disputable. For, the Communion of the Church necessarily importeth, that a man qualified with authority in it, professe nothing contrary to that Faith, the profession whereof qualifies all to be of the Church: Though, other things there be many, wherein a man may be allowed, not onely to believe, but to professe contrary to that which another professes, and yet qualified, not onely to be of the Church, but to bear that authority which the Society thereof con∣stituteth. The name, therefore, of Fathers importeth at least some part of that superiority, which the Society of the Church giveth; And therefore belongeth not properly to those that are not so qualified, though they that are not so qua∣lified may be the authors of such writings, as have the lot to remain to posteri∣ty. But, the authority of Fathers which is grounded upon this presumption, that persons qualified in the Church teach nothing contrary to the Faith of it, be∣cause their quality in the Church would become questionable if they should teach that which agrees not with the Faith of the Church; This authority, I say, cannot appear in the writings of private Christians; Because the Church is no further chargable, by allowing him the Communion of the Church, who declareth to believe onely that which indeed contradicts the Rule of Faith, then of taking no notice what a private man professes to think, out of that igno∣rance, which may beseem a capacity of being better informed. Hereupon it is, that I think it no exception to the due authority of the Fa∣thers, that Arnobius or Laectantius should be utterly disdained in some particu∣lars. The one, known to have been a Novice in Christianity, when hee writ, and writing, as S. Jerom testifies, to declare himself a Christian, by trying his stile (as being Master of a School of Eloquence) in defense thereof, a∣gainst the Gentiles, had, it seems, the ill chance to light upon some writings of the Gnosticks, according to Saturninus, or Basilides; and, taking them for Chri∣stians, because they affected to go under that name, translated their monstrous opinions into his work, as points of Christianity. The other, whether a novice or no I cannot say, marked neverthelesse by S. Jerome, as one more able to refure Gentilisme, than to give an account of Christianity, (and therefore, to have been converted to Christianity, but not to have learned it) what presumption a discreet man can make of Christianity by his Book, let every discreet man judg. I will not say the like of Justine the Martyr, a man who hath deserved farr more of Christianity, by renouncing the world, and taking upon him the profession and habit of a Philosopher among the Gentiles, thereby to gain opportunity of maintaining Christianity on all occasions which the Heathen Philosophers took, to maintain the positions of their several sects. A resolution truly gene∣rous and Christian. In the mean time, having in him more of a Philosopher than of a Scholar, and gathering his knowledg rather from travail and conver∣sation than from reading, it is no mervail, if hee hath suffered many impostures, at least in maters of historical truth, which, hee that should demand that the Church should answer, as allowing his books to be read, would be very unrea∣sonable; When as, bearing no rank in the Church above that of all Christians, for any thing I can perceive, if hee should have mistaken himself in any thing, neerly concerning the substance of Christianity, his eminent merits towards
the Church might have been of force to have drowned all consideration of them, and given his writings passeport to posterity notwithstanding. I will not extend this consideration to the writings of Clemens Alexandrinus, of Origen, and of Tertullian; The last whereof, that is Tertullian, belongs not to this rank, having put himself out of the Communion of the Church, by making a party against the Church of Carthage, upon the pretenses of the Montanists. The second, that is Origen, whatsoever opinions hee had, cannot be said, either to have held them so resolutely, or to have professed them so publickly, that those that were nearest him could be thought accessories to them. And there∣fore, as his very great merits of the Church otherwise, held him in his rank in the Church during his time, so his extravagancies cannot impeach that authority, which others, and hee also in such things as hee agrees with them in, do truly purchase by the allowance of the Church. The same is to be said of his Master Clemens, whose writings as they are not so many, so neither his extravagancies so great and considerable. But even these eccentrical Writers, by being mar∣ked for positions particular to them, besides the credit of historical truth, (which, in times nearest the Apostles, is of great consequence to inform us of the pri∣mitive state of Christianity, and therefore of incomparable value towards the settling of a right judgment in all things now questionable) I say, beside that which is common to them with all Writers, they get, by the exceptions which are made against them, the advantage of a Rule of Law in the rest; that is to say, that, setting aside those points in which they are excepted against, they are according to the Rule of Faith in things not excepted against, against. In fine, the authority of the whole Church is found to be expresly ingaged, in all things, that have passed into effect, either from the determination of Synods, (which, having been assembled by the free consent thereof, have been received by the like free consent, whether all or part were present at the Synod) or, from the act of any particular Church; the proceeding and grounds whereof, hath been approved of, and received into effect by the whole. Which, in some measure, may be said of the writings of particular Doctors: In as much as it is manifest, that extravagant doctrines may have been published in several parts of the Church, which particular Doctors may have imployed their pens to contradict, before any Church had imployed any censure to condemn. As, by Epiphanius in the Heresie of the Origenists, it appeareth that Origen was contradicted by Methodius. If therefore such extravagances so contradicted be extinguished, such writings have continued cherished by the Church, it is evidence enough that the Church it self is ingaged in the condemnation of those extravagances, which have been suppressed by the means of such writings. And all this serves to maintain and evidence the Society of the Church, and the influence of it in those acts, whereby Christianity hath been maintained and propagated from our Lord and his Apostles. But, for the present, the question concerning onely the Rule of Faith, that which hath been said shall suffice to ground this prescri∣ption; that, whatsoever the Church may appear unanimously to have agreed in, and to have allowed no contradiction to it, that may, and doth as evidently ap∣pear to belong to the Rule of Faith, as evidently it may and doth appear, that the Society of the Church, freely acted by it self, hath given such consent. And therefore this prescription will inferr nothing, when it may by any means, ap∣pear, that the consent of the Church, and the freedom which is requisite to the validity thereof, hath been anticipated or over-swayed, by any means interce∣pting that intercourse and correspondence by the which it appeareth. In the mean time, the interpretation of the Scriptures is to be confined within the bounds of that which the whole Church from the beginning hath taught, when as, by the means hitherto demonstrated, it may be evidenced, in things that be∣come questionable.
CHAP. XXIII. Two instances against the premises, besides the objection concerning the beginning of Antichrist under the Apostles. The general answer to it. The seven Trum∣pets in the Apocalypse fore-tell the destruction of the Jewes. The seven Vials, the plagues inflicted upon the Empire for the ten persecutions. The correspon∣dence of Deniels Prophesie inferreth the same. Neither S. Pauls Prophee nor S. Johns concerneth any Christian. Neither the opinion of the Chiliasts, nor the giving of the Eucharist to Infants new Baptized, Catholick. BEfore I leave this point, I must here take notice of two instances against that which I have said. The first is the opinion of the Millenaries, which is said to be the general opinion of the primitive Fathers, Justine the Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Victorinus the Martyr, Lactantius, and I know not how many more. So that universal antiquity will prescribe no∣thing in mater of Faith, when wee see so general an error of the most ancient corrected by their successors. The other, in the custom of giving the Eucharist to Infants, as soon as they were baptized, pretended to be so general, that no practice of the Church can conclude any thing to come from the Apostles, to him that avoweth this to have been well and duely changed by the Church that is. There is besides these a more general objection against the testimony of the Church in any mater of Christianity, rising from S. Pauls Prophesie 2 Thess. II. 2, 7, 14. that the mystery of iniquity was then on work, till hee that hindred were out of the way, not to be revealed. Which is pretended to be the corru∣ption of Christianity by such as professed to be of the Church, then begun, not to be declared, till the rise of the Papacy, by the fall of the Empire: Or, as the Socinians will have it, till after the death of the Apostles, at what time, as Hegesippus in Eusebius witnesseth, the Church, that, till then, had continued a Virgin, was defloured and defiled by mixing with adulterate doctrine. This ob∣jection I have produced elswhere, and repeat it here, in the first place, to be con∣sidered, as pretending here to make fuller answer. I excepted heretofore thus; That, unlesse they that make this objection tye themselves to demonstrate, wherein that corruption consists, which the Apostle sayes was then on working under-hand; it will be as free for Socinians to pretend, that hee means this cor∣ruption to consist in the Faith of the Trinity, and the Satisfaction of Christ and Original sin, as in any thing peculiar to the Papacy. And that with so much the more reason, because, if wee make the Pope Antichrist by virtue of this Scripture, wee must make him so for that which is peculiar to the Papacy, where∣as, the corruption here spoken of concerns the whole Church, as well as that of Rome. Now I except more strongly, that, supposing the purpose of S. Paul to concern the corruption of the Church, that corruption cannot consist in any thing, which, by sufficient testimony may appear, to have been received in the Church from the beginning. That is to say, to this bare surmize of S. Pauls meaning, I have opposed all the reason that hath been alleged to prove, that, whatsoever hath been received in the Church from the beginning, is either of the Rule of Faith, or some custome introduced by the Apostles. But because still, this is but an exception in bart to the objection, not in resolution of the difficulty which groundeth it; I will proceed further, to show, that neither this Prophesie, nor the Revelation of S. John is meant of those that professed Chri∣stianity, either in corrupting it, or in persecuting Christians, but of the professed enemies thereof, who persecuted the profession of it, to wit the Princes of the Romane Empire. To which purpose, having observed, that the whole Prophesy of the Reve∣lation, from Chap. V. to XX. consisting in the Vision of a Book sealed with se∣ven Seals; at opening the seventh whereof, seven Angels are seen to blow se∣ven Trumpets; at blowing the seventh whereof, seven Angels come forth, and pour forth seven viols of Gods Judgments upon the earth; I now say further,
that the seven Trumpets signifie the Judgments of God poured forth upon the Jewes in Jewry, for refusing and persecuting the Gospel. The evidence hereof is first, in that of Apoc. VII. 4. 8. where there are sealed CXLIVM, of every Tribe XII M. to be preserved from the plagues of the seven seals, to wit, the Christians of whom our Lord had said, Mat. XXIV. 31. Mar. XIII. 20. that for the elects sake, those dayes should be shortned. For it is evident, that this Vision is presented S. John upon occasion of the like, which hee had read in Ezekiel IX. 4, 5, 6. in the like case, where the Angel is first commanded to mark those that should be saved from the destruction which hee prophesieth. And therefore, where, in the beginning of the Chapter, hee seeth four Angels standing at the four corners of the earth, who are forbidden to hurt it, till the servants of God be marked; it is manifest, that this earth is not the world, but the land of Jewry. Again, when it is said, XI. 1, 8, 13. that the Gentiles shall trample the outer Court of the Temple; and that therefore S. John should not measure it, as hee is tyed to measure the inner Court and Temple; That the carkasses of the two witnesses should lye in the streets of the great City where our Lord was cruci∣fied, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; That there was a great earthquake, which cast down the South part of that City, and killed seven thousand; hee that would see men pitifully crucifie themselves by racking the Scriptures, let him look upon them that ingage themselves not to understand by all this, the City of Jerusalem and the Temple there. Further, what is the meaning, that the CXLIVM are seen standing with the Lamb upon mount Sion, XIV. 1. if they belong not to that people? What is the meaning, that afterwards XIV. 19, 20. when the Angel with the sickle had made the Vintage, and cast it into the Wine-presse of Gods wrath, this Wine-presse is trode without the City, and the bloud over-flows to the space of XVI C furlongs; But, that the City of Jerusalem is meant, and the Judgment executed in the destruction thereof ex∣pressed by the Wine-presse of Gods wrath, which over-flowed all that compasse without the City? If these things cannot be, unlesse the sounding of the seven Trumpets, Chap. VIII and IX be understood to proclaim the same vengeance; Let mee ask, what is the reason, that, having related what the founding of them produced, hee addeth, IX. 20, 21. The rest of men, that were not slain with these Plagues, neither repented of the works of their hands, so as not to worship Devils, and Idols of gold, silver, brasse, stone and wood, which can neither see, nor hear, nor go: Nor of their murthers, and witcheries, and whoredoms, and thefts. For, the Jews not being chargeable with Idolatry at that time, nor the consequences thereof, how should the rest be chargeable for not repenting of the same? For, to say, that covetousnesse of silver, gold, and goods of brasse, stone, or wood, is the Idolatry, and these the Idols here meant, is to strain the Scripture to an improper sense, whereof there is no argument in the words. But if wee say, that the rest of men, that were not slain with the Jews, are the Gentiles, to whom God by destroying Jerusalem, sent a warning to turn them from their I∣dols to Christianity, for persecuting whereof they saw the Jews destroyed; wee say, that the main scope of the whole Prophesie is touched in these words; And from hence wee shall be able to give a reason, why, having propounded (in the twelfth and thirrteenth Chapters) the subject of that vengeance which hee seeth God to take, by the Vision of the seven Viols, in the fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters; hee returneth to remembrance of those CXLIV M that were mar∣ked to be saved, and of the destruction of the rest of the Jews, XIV. 1-5, 14-20. of which, I shall not easily believe, that a reasonable account can be gi∣ven otherwise. For, having fore-told the persecution of Christians in those two Chapters, the twelfth and thirteenth, what could be more pertinent, than, that hee should return to the remembrance of the saving of those that were marked, and the destruction of Jerusalem, as a patern of comfort to Christians, to incourage them to indure, and of terror to the Gentiles to refrain that fury? And therefore, as before, IX. 20. this intent had been signified, so it is most ex∣presly repeated by the proclamation of three Angels one after another, XIV. 6, 8, 9-11. warning all to worship God alone, not the Beast of Chapter
XIII. and fore-warning of the fall of Babylon for her Idolatries. Now I am to remember you, that, after the sealing of the CXLIVM Jew∣ish Christians, there appears before the Throne of God, so great a multitude as no man could number, of all Nations, Tribes, people, and Languages, cloa∣thed in white Robes, and singing praises to God. Which, afterwards, are expounded by the Angel to be those that come out of the great tribulation, and had washed their Robes white in the bloud of the Lamb, VII. 9. 14. that is to say, Martyrs. And further, that these are they, who are seen at opening the fifth Seal, standing beneath the Altar, and calling for vengeance upon their bloud, VI. 9, 10. Which vengeance begins to be executed by the seven Trumpets. And the Angel that throws down those coals of vengeance upon the earth, from the Altar above, is said to put incense to the prayers of the Saints, VIII. 3, 4, 5. So that the same Censer, sends up perfume, that is those prayers, to the throne, and vengeance down upon earth. Seeing then, that it is manifest to all, that at opening the first Seal, our Lord goes forth upon a white horse to make warr, VI. 2. Who, after victory and revenge upon his enemies, appears in the same likenesse again, as triumphing over his enemies, XIX. 11-16. it will be re∣quisite, to understand the Vision of opening the six Seals to be a general propo∣sition of the whole Prophesie, signifying the publishing of the Gospel, and the prevailing thereof, through the vengeance which God would execute upon the persecutors of it, Jews first, and afterwards Gentiles of the Romane Empire, who would not take warning by the destruction of Jerusalem, to turn from persecuting the Gospel, to imbrace Christianity. And therefore the signification of the rest of the Seals is common to both. For, when hee feeth a Red Horse to signifie warr, a Black Horse to signifie famine, and a Pale Horse to signifie pesti∣lence, VI. 3-8. it is manifest, that all this agrees wonderfully with that which our Lord had fore-told should come to passe in Jewry, as a preface to the de∣struction of Jerusalem, of warrs, famines, earthquakes and pessilences, so as, notwithstanding, the end not to be yet, Mark XIII. 5-10. Mat. XXIV. 6-15. Luke XXI.—8-20. And yet it expresseth as punctually, those calamities of the world, which, those of the Empire did impute to the sufferance of Chri∣stianity, when as God indeed intended thereby to punish them that imbraced it not. Antiquity is copious in this subject, that, when these calamities fell out, the Romanes cried out upon the Christians, as the onely cause of them. The beginning of Arnobius his dispute against the Gentiles will satisfie you of it. When as, therefore, the persecution of Christianity was both begun in Jewry, (as the Acts of the Apostles inform us) and prosecuted in the Empire, it will be against the truth of the case, to restrain the cry of the Souls under the Altar, upon the opening of the fifth Seal, either to those that suffered by the Jewes, or by the Empire. Now hee that peruseth that which is said to have come to passe upon the opening of the sixth Seal, Apoc. VII. 12-17. might have cause to think that hee reads the destruction of the world; but that it is evident, both, that the destruction of Jerusalem is prophesied by our Lord by the like expres∣sions, (which the Prophets also of the Old Testament do use in describing the vengeance which God taketh upon the Nations) and also, that this Prophesie expresses a large time for Christianity to continue in the world, after this ven∣geance taken by God upon the enemies of it. And therefore wee must believe that those have reason, who referr the effect of it, no lesse to the great change that fell out in the world, upon the ceasing of the persecution of Diocletian, and the coming of the Empire into the hands of the Christians, than to the de∣struction of Jerusalem. For, when could it be said more justly, that the world was in an earthquake, that the Sun became like hair cloth, and the moon like bloud, that the starrs fell to the earth, as a fig-tree shaken with a great winde casts her figs, that the heavens passed away as a book folded up, and the Mountains and Islands were removed out of their places, (if ever such things could justly be said by the Prophets to expresse great alterations to fall out in the world) then when those Tyrants, and by consequence all their ministers, for shame that they were not able to root up Christianity, gave up the design with their power, and left the
Empire to strangers, which, in a few years, fell into the hands of Constantine, and the Christians his Ministers? When could it be mōre justly said, that the Kings and great Ones of the earth, the rich, the Captains, and the Nobles, the bond and the free, hid themselves in caves and rocks of the Mountains, saying to them, fall on us and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Then, when the Persecuters, some gave up the design, others proclaimed the hand of God upon them, and all their Ministers saw Christianity, which they had persecuted, to flourish, and their powers possessed by Christians? Which how strongly it inferreth (especially if you take the premises along) that, the Trumpets sounding the vengeance taken upon the Jews, the Viols must signi∣fie the like upon the Empire for the ten persecutions raised upon the same pre∣tense of rooting out Christianity (not by those that professe Christianity, though indeed they corrupt it) I leave to all the world to judge. Especially, if wee consider that which is often repeated from the beginning of the Prophesy, that the mater of it must come to pass shortly, that they are happy that shall read and observe it, and that to that purpose it is sent to the seven Churches of Asia, as concerning them deeply; Which, if it concern vengeance to be taken of the blood of those that suffered by the Papacy, by consequence of the premises is yet to come, at least the vengeance prophesied, and ten thousand chances to one if ever it do come, while those that rack the Prophesy to signifie it, are forced to prophesie themselves, without evidencing any commission for it; and the seven Churches in a maner suppressed by Infidels, far enough from being any thing of the effect of it, or any of those to whom S. John can be supposed to speak when hee sends it. And truly, supposing that the sound of the Trump∣ets concernes the Jews, which no reason refuses, no modesty denies; and sup∣posing again, that S. John was not banished into Patmos till Domitians dayes, which is the original and more probable report of Irenaeus (though some sup∣pose hee was sent thither afore, when Claudius his Edict commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, because Epiphanius sayes, that hee prophesied under Clan∣dius, and the Pro-consul of Asia might, as it was ordinary, command the same for that Province which the Prince had at Rome; For, what probability can there be, that S. John should be forbidden Asia, when S. Paul was permitted Achaia, as wee find by the Acts? I say supposing this, a very good reason is to be given, why the calamities of the Jews, then past, are represented to S. John by the vi∣sion of the Trumpets; to wit, for the assurance and incouragement of the Chri∣stians, for the terror and conversion of their Persecuters, who, knowing that which was come upon the Jews, prophetically described by the sounding of the seven Trumpets, might, both the better understand that part of it, and better in∣ferre the meaning of the seven Vials; together with that which goes afore, to prepare the way for the pouring of them forth, and follows, to show the con∣sequence of it. And, I must adde farther, that, though I say, that the destruction of Jerusalem was past when S. John was banished into Patmos; yet this Prophe∣sy of it, and of the seven Trumpets, might be revealed to him before, accord∣ing to Epphanius, affirming that hee prophesied in Claudius his dayes. For, what hindreth that which concerned the Jews onely to be revealed while Jerusalem stood, the visions of the seven Seals, and seven Vials, (concerning the Gentiles either in part or onely) being reserved to the persecution under Domitian, in which S. John is commanded to write that Letter to the seven Churches, which hee is commanded to send the whole Prophesy with? Let mee now desire the Reader to look upon that interpretation which I have given in the Review of my Book of the Right of the Church in a Christian state, to that which is prophesied of the Raign of the Saints, that is the Christians, with their Lord Christ, for a thousand years, Apoc. XX. which, they they that referre the seventh Trumpet, and the seven Viols, in which it is accomplished, to the judgments to come upon the Papacy, cannot avoid to inferre the opinion of the Millenaries, condemned long since, and suppressed in the Church, in so much that the most learned of them hath professedly set up the Standard to revive it. I
will not here suppose any thing, how prejudicial this opinion either is, or, as it is held, may be to Christianity. This I will say, that those which read the Hi∣story of the Successors of Alexander, Kings of Syria and Aegypt, so expresly prophesied Dan. XI. that many particulars of it might have been buried in obli∣vion, had not the exposition of it inforced S. Hierome and his Predecessors to have recourse to those Histories which now are lost, and out of them to relate such passages as the Prophet points at; I say, I shall count them strange men, if, seeing the rest agree with the Story, when they come to Antiochus Eppha∣nes, and those things which the Prophet foretells of his acts in a continued Narrative, they can perswade themselves, that they were not fulfilled under him, but must belong to the coming of Antichrist. I know S. Jerome is charge∣able with it: But it is one thing for him to follow some Predecessors, in expound∣ing that which hee knew not how to expound otherwise, another thing to im∣pose such a doctrine upon the Church, upon no ground, but such an interpreta∣tion as that. I must say farther, that, the Visions of the VII and VIII Chap∣ters of Daniel of the four Beasts, and the ten horns of the fourth, and the little horn that blasphemed God and made war against the Saints, VII. 8, 9. Of the Rame and the Goat, and the little horn thereof which made war against God and his people, Dan. VII. 9-14, must of necessity be understood of Antiochus Epiphanes, because of the taking away of the daily sacrifice so expresly foretold; That Nebucchadnezzars vision of the Statue, which represents four Kingdomes, the last whereof is evidently that of Syria and Aegypt, whereof both in their turns had the command of the Jews, Dan. II. seemeth to have no other aim but to introduce the Prophesie of their sufferings under Epiphanes. The purpose of these Visions toward the Jews being the same, with that of the Apocalypse to∣ward the Christians, to comfort them with resolution to adhere to the Law, un∣der to great trials, the good success whereof, the same Prophesie which foretold the Persecutions assureth. It is not my businesse here to enter into any farther exposition of the particulars, presuming that, the reasons which confine the In∣terpretation being so concluding, those that will look into the writings of those that walk within the bounds of Epiphanes his time, especially Grotius the latest and ablest, will find a more proper sense within those times, than any can be i∣magined otherwise. If therefore the Persecutions then related be fulfilled in the sufferings of the Jews under Epiphanes, then the Kingdom which there is soretold to be given the Saints and People of God, after vengeance executed upon him, Dan. VII. 18, 22, 27. XII. 2, 3. must also of necessity be understood of that Dominion which that Nation attained by freeing themselves from the Dominion of the Macedonians under the Maccabees. Now, there being such correspondence, not onely between the main intent of both Prophesies, but also between the particulars of them, in very many things, which, no man can read both with diligence but must observe (though it is true, that many figures are used in S. Johns Revelations which are found to cor∣respondent purposes in the Visions of others of the Prophets concerning Gods ancient people) I conceive no man will be able to reprove the consequence; that, both the Persecutions which pretended to make the Christians renounce Christ, as Antiochus pretended to make the Jews renounce the Law, are intend∣ed by the fifth Seal, and also the coming of Constantine to the Empire, whereby the Government of the world came into the hands of Christians by the sixth Seal; As well as the Dominion of the Maccabees succeeding the persecution of Epiphanes, by the raign of the Saints foretold by Daniel. From whence I ar∣gue, that S. Pauls Prophesie cannot intend any that should professe Christianity with an intent to corrupt it, because of the terms which hee useth; Hee that exalteth himself against all that is called God, or to be worshipped, so as to seat himself in the Temple of God, showing himself that hee is God; Being the same in which Epiphanes is described, Dan. XI. 36, 37. And the King shall do what him list: Hee shall exalt himself, and magnifie himself against all that is God, and shall speak marvelous things against the God of Gods, and shall prosper till the wrath be accomplished: For the determination is made. Neither shall hee regard the God
of his Fathers, nor the desires of women, nor care for any God: For hee shall mag∣nifie himself above all. For who is it that magnifies himself above all that is cal∣led or accounted God, and worshipped for God, though by his own Predecessors, but hee that appoints the Jews, whom they shall worship, for their own, the true God, in the Temple? But hee that appoints the Christians to whom they shall sacrifice? Which, as, of all other Princes that had the Jews in their pow∣er, none did but Epiphanes, so, all the Emperours that raised persecution against the Christians did necessarily do. For, as it is manifest, that, both the Macedo∣nian Kings and Roman Emperours were themselves worshipped for Gods by their Gentile Subjects; so can none be said to advance himself above all that is called or worshipped for God, but those that, first, forbid the worship of the true God, then, of false Gods, allow or disallow the worship of whomsoever their own fansie directs, which is a thing common to Antiochus Epiphanes with the Roman Emperours. For the saying of Tertullian is well enough known; Apolog. V. cap. Nisihomini deus placuerit, deus non erit; Spoken in regard of the Power that State used, to allow or disallow the Religions and the Gods which they pleased; Whereupon hee rests and sayes; That such Gods, if they have not man to friend, must be no Gods. And besides, the Emperours by assu∣ming the Legal power of Pontifex maximus, were invested with a Civil Right, of allowing or disallowing whomsoever should pretend to be worshipped for God, within the bounds of the Empire. Whether then that wee suppose, that the Prophesie of S. Paul to the Thes∣salonians, and the Revelations made to S. Iohn do concern Antichrist or not; (seeing the Scripture no where saith, that either the one or the other intendeth to speak of Antichrist.) And for the present, omitting the dispute, whether that Antichrist whom S. Iohn in his first Epistle II. 18, 19. IV. 1, 2, 3. admitteth to be appointed to come, though other Antichrists were come afore; whether I say that Antichrist be such a one as by persecution should seek to constrain Christians to renounce Chirst, or such a one as by professing Christianity should induce Christians to admit the corruption of Christianity, and thereby to forfeit the benefit of it; I say, omitting to dispute this for the present, out of the premises I shall easily inferr, that there is neither in S. Pauls Prophesie, nor in S. Iohns Revelations, any thing to signifie, that they are intended of any that should bring in the corruption of Christianity, by making profession of it. Whereupon it followeth, that, though wee suppose the mystery of iniquity which S. Paul foretelleth to be the same that S. Iohn saw, (as truly I do suppose) and both to begin with the preaching of Christianity, yet from thence no exce∣ption can be made to the interpretation of the Scriptures, and the determination of things questioned in Christianity, from that which may appear to have been received by the whole Church from the beginning. Onely I will adde, that it is a very barbarous wrong that is done the Church, whether by the Socinians, or by whosoever they are, that allege the testimony of Hegesippus in Eusebius, acknow∣ledging; That the Church, which, during the time of the Apostles was a pure Virgin, after their departure began to be adulterate with the contagion of pesti∣lent doctrines; to argue, that this being the mystery of iniquity which S. Paul prophesieth, is also the corruption of the Papacy, which, beginning so early, leaves nothing unsuspected that can be presumed upon the consent of the Church. For, it is manifest, that Hegesippus speaks of the abominable doctrines of the Gno∣sticks, which, as it is manifest by the writings of the Apostles, that they were on foot during their time, so may wee well believe Hegesippus, that, upon their death, they spread so sarr, that, in comparison of what succeeded, the Church of the A∣postles may well be counted a pure Virgin. It is also manifest, from the premi∣ses, that the Gnosticks could finde in their hearts to counterfeit themselves as well Christians as Jewes or Gentiles, to secure themselves from punishment, and winn followers: But it is also manifest, that, as they were discovered by the Church, so they were put out of the Church, and forced to range themselves a∣mong their own respective Sectaries. So that, to impute the corruption of their damnable inventions to the Church, because they mixed themselves with the
Church till they were discovered, is the same justice that the Gentiles did the Christians, in charging them with those horrible incests and vilainies, which the Gnosticks only were guilty of, because they, so farr as it was for their turn, affect∣ed to shelter themselves under the profession of Christians. I shall have occasion in another place to inquire further, concerning the ring of the Gnosticks du∣ring the time of the Apostles. In the mean time, because I see those, who know not how to yield to the truth when it is showed them, stand in the justification of the wrong that is done the Church, by expounding, of the corruptions of the Papacy, that which Hegesippus saith of the Gnosticks, it shall be enough to give you his own words in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. III. 32. R. Steph. . Hegesippus saith; That till that time, the Church remained a pure Virgin and undefloured; Those that indeavored to adulterate the true Rule of that preaching which saveth (the Rule of Faith, which I said so much of afore) lur∣king in obscure holes of darknesse till then, if any such there were. But, the sacred quire of the Apostles having found the several ends of their lives; And, that gene∣ration of men being past, that were vouchsafed to hear the wisedom of God with their own ears, then did the confirmation of atheistical error receive beginning, through the deceit of false Teachers; Who now, none of the Apostles remaining, undertook, bare-headed, for the future, to preach that Knowledge which is falsly so called in op∣position to the preaching of the truth. For, here you have, in expresse terms, that Knowledge falsly so called, from whence the Church, after S. Paul, calls all those Hereticks Gnosticks, as pretending to have got it by such means, as our Lord had not discovered to his Apostles. You have also the difference between their lur∣king under the Apostles, and their open preaching after their death, in terms so expresse, that, hee must have a good will to it, whoever oversees. I shall be ob∣liged to referr my self to these same words in another place. Now, to that which is objected concerning the opinion of the Millennaries, I answer first, that it cannot be thought ever to have been Catholick. For, Iu∣stine the Martyr, who first mentions it, in his dispute with Trypho the Jew, not many years after the Apostles, expresly testifies, that it was the opinion of the most orthodox Christians: (to wit, in his judgment) but withall, that it was contradicted by others, who were neverthelesse Christians, even in his account, that is, of the Communion of the Church. Which, as it is a peremptory ex∣ception against the Universality, so is it a reasonable presumption against the O∣riginality of it; Seeing that, in so few years between him and the Apostles, those that believed not all which they had delivered for the common Christiani∣ty can, in no probability, be thought to have injoyed the Communion of the Church. And truely, had it not been contradicted elsewhere, that excellent Pre∣late, Denys of Alexandriae, that suppressed it in Egypt about CXXX after, as you may see in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VII. 23, 24, 25. would have found a hard text of it. For, the intelligence and correspondence then in use between all parts of the Church, would easily have confirmed those of his charge even a∣gainst him. The reason of atchieving the work was, because the rest of Chri∣stendom insisted not on it. Neither is the number, or repute of Writers ex∣tant, the reason to conclude any thing Catholick, if the premises be true; But the evidence which may be made, (sometimes from the disputes of able Writers, but much more, from the acts which past in the Church, according or against that which they dispute) that their doctrine was received or not received by the Church, in whole or in part, as necessary, or not. And therefore secondly I say, that the mater of this position concerneth not the Rule of Faith common∣ly obliging all Christians, but the interpretation of a true Prophesie indeed,
but, the true understanding whereof, whoso would make necessary to the salvati∣on of all Christians, should tye all Christians, upon their salvation, to understand the Apocalypse, which who does? To justifie this opinion, it hath been showed that the Jewes have this opinion, that their Christ shall raign M years when hee comes, which seeing they cannot be supposed to have received from the Christi∣ans, it makes a just presumption, that they had it even in S. Iohns time. The Jewes have a Tradition which they attribute to the School of one R. Elias, men∣tioned in many of their writings, by name in Baal haturim upon Gen. II. and which is also the conceit, not onely of Lactantius, VII. 14. Tychonius the Do∣natist in his V Rule for expounding the Scripture, and the Epistle anciently in∣titled to S. Barnabas and lately published, but also, (as you may see in the late Lord Primates Latine Discourse of Cainan) That, as there passed II M years before the Law, under the Law, (counting from Abraham) II M years, so the dayes of Christ should be II M years, and after that the everlasting Sabbath. But whether or no the Jews of S. Iohns time could expect this thousand years for the complement of the Sabbath or work of VIIM years, which this Tradition promised; Whether or no Christians may expect the end of the World at the end of VII M years, the Sabbath that shall succeed being eternity; (according to that of S. Peter and of the Psalm, that M years are as a day in Gods sight) let them that have nothing else to do inquire; Certainly it will not concern the meaning of the Apocalypse, unlesse it could be said, that the M years there fore-told are to begin after II M years of our Lord are finished. Indeed, this wee see, that the Jewes whom King Alphonsus imployed to make the accounts of the Celestial motions, in appointing the motion of the fixed Starrs from West to East to come rome round in XLIXM years, the irregularity of that motion to come round in VII M years, (and that, not being obliged to it by any observations) made the like account of Sabbaths of thousands of years, and VII thousands, as the Law doth of dayes, or years, or Sabbaths of years. But if these Jewes be pitifully put to it, when, to excuse their not believing in Christ who came when the World was about IVM years old, according to their own Tradition, they are fain to say that it hath failed a small mater, of almost XVII C years, for their sins; Among the Christians what can be said more, but, that it pleased God to promise them M years of prosperity and raign, which the Jews, forsaking Christ, promised themselves to no purpose? Seing the beginning of them cannot be tyed to the end of VIM years from the beginning of the world. And truly no more than this can be thought requisite to the purpose of the whole Prophesie, of incouraging them to continue con∣stant in the profession of Christianity, notwithstanding all persecutions, as fore∣knowing the issue. Now, hee that continues constant in Christianity, and never knew this Prophesie, shall want nothing necessary to his salvation, though hee want so nething very effectual to the having of that which is necessary; To wit, of perseverance in Christianity; The intent of this Prophesie being to per∣swade them to it. Which is enough to show any man a difference, between the right understanding of this Prophesie, and any part of the Rule of Faith. As for the custome of giving the Eucharist to Infants so soon as they were baptized, I answer, that, the evidence which I will give you, that it was never used out of an opinion of necessity to Salvation, as the Baptisme of Infants was, seemeth to be an exception sufficient against the universal use of it, as sup∣posed to come from the Apostles. Hee that will shew mee any Writer of the Church, by whose testimony it may be presumed, that the Church did not bap∣tize Infants, out of an opinion that they could not be saved without it, (I speak not now of the truth of this opinion, but onely of the point of fact, whatso∣ever may be argued from thence by virtue of the premises) I will yield him, that the same Writer did believe, that the giving of the Eucharist to Infants up∣on their Baptisme, was commanded by the Apostles. I acknowledge it is the opinion of Tertullian (for which there is no mark upon him as ever a whit the lesse Catholick) that it was not expedient to baptize Infants, because of the danger of years under discretion, to seduce them from the fulfilling of their
profession, before they could throughly understand what it imported. But I de∣ny that this was, because he, or any body then believed, that they could go out of the world unbaptised, and yet be saved. For, when the vigilance of Pa∣rents, and the diligence of all, might assure them, not to fail of Baptism in case of necessity; it is no marvail, if the reason alledged might move men to de∣fer it to the years of manhood, beleeving no lesse the necessity of it. Now in the writings of Fulgentius, a worthy African Prelate, there is extant a little piece, in answer to a Letter of Ferrandus, a Deacon of his, it seems, about a certain Moore, who being converted, and having divers times made profession of Christianity, as the custome of the Church then required; after that, being taken sick, was baptized, without being able, by speaking, to make the like profession as the rule required all at their baptism to make. Upon other considerations, the Letter desires resolution of the salvation of this Moore; But, upon this also, because he survived not to receive the Eucharist, which is clearly answered in the affirmative, upon as good reasons of Scripture, as a good Christian can desire. Which is without exception, to show, that they had not that opinion of the necessity of the Eucharist, as of Baptism, sufficient to argue a severall beginning of observing them both. And truly, seeing it is granted on all hands, that it is no inconvenience in Christianity, that the Church, or any part of it, mistake the true meaning of some Scriptures, the alledging of our Lords words; Ʋnless yee eat the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drink his blood, yee have not life in you, Joh. VI. 53. seems to argue, that this came to be an or∣der from some new act of the Church, or part of it; rather then, that it was practised as coming from the Apostles. Whereunto if we add that which here fol∣lows; though it appear (chiefly by S. Cyprian, de lapsis) to have been frequented in Africk, though it were practised in the Western and Eastern Church, yet perhaps it will appear to comeshort of S. Austins rule, of discerning what comes from the Apostles, as affording appearance, that it was neither Original, nor Catholick: as for how prejudiciall, this is not the place to determine it. The words of Innocent I Pope, out of which it is commonly taken for grant∣ed, that this custome was in use at Rome, are these, Epist. XCIII. Apud Au∣gustinum: Illud verò quod eos vestra fraternitas asserit praedicare, parvulos aeternae vitae praemiis etiam sine baptismatis gratiâ posse donari, perfatuum est. Nisi enim manducaverint carnem filii homins, & biberint sanguinem ejus, non habebunt vitam in semetipsis. But, that which your brotherhood affirms that they publish, that Infants may have the reward of eternal life given them even without the grace of baptism, is very foolish: For unlesse they eat the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drink his blood, they have not life in themselves. Where it is plain, that eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ, which he makes necessary to salvation, is that which consists in being baptized; but of giving them the Eucharist, not a word more then this. The same fense (concerning the eating of the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ in and by baptisme, and that onely necessary to salvation) S. Austine also most manifestly delivers in a passage alledged by Gra∣tain, de Consecrat. dist. 2 Cap. Quia passus est dominus, out of a certain Homily, de infantibus, which Bede also hath, in 1 ad Cor. X. Nulli est aliquatenus dubi∣tandum, unumquemque sidelium Corporis & sanguinis Dominici tunc esse partici∣pem, quando in baptismate membrum efficitur Christi? nec alienari ab illius panis calicis{que} consortio, etiamsi antequam panem illum comedat calicem{que} bibat, de hoc seculo migraverit, in unitate Corporis Christi constitutus. No man is any way to doubt, that every believer then becomes partaker of the body and blood of Christ, when he is made a member of Christ by baptism: Nor does he become a stranger to the communion of that bread and cup, though before eat that bread, and drink that cup, he goes out of the world, estated in the unity of Christs body. And thus he expounds also the eating of Christs flesh, and drinking his blood, de pec∣catorum meritis & remis. III. 4. And so he is likewise there to be understood, Cap. XX. And, to this purpose, all those passages of his are in force, whereby he requireth nothing but Baptisme to the salvation of Infants. And, in this sense, Hypognost. ad Art. V. Quomodo vitam regni coelorum promittitis parvulis non re∣natis
ex aqnâ & spiritu, non cibatis carne, at{que} non potatis sanguine Christi, qui fusus est in remissionem peccatorum? Ecce non baptizatus, vitali etiam cibo po∣culo{que} privatus, dividitur à regno coelornm, ubi fons viventium permanet Chri∣stus. How do ye (Pelagians) promise little ones, not born again of water and the spirit, no fed with the flesh, nor drenched with the blood of Christ shed for reission of sins, the life of the Kingdom of heaven? See, the unbaptized, deprived also of the bread and cup of life, is divided from the Kingdom of Heaven, where Christ the well of life remains. So, it appears that the African Church had this custome, but held it not necessary to salvation as Baptism; But by Gennadius, de dogma∣tibus Ecclesiasticis, Cap. LII. It appears to have been a custome of the Church, when Hereticks were reconciled to the Church by confirmation, to give their little ones the Eucharist presently upon it. And Ordo Romanus de Baptismo, prescribes it after the solemn Baptism before Easter, which the French Capitulary, I. 161. and Alcuinus also, de divinis officiis provideth for. And in the Eastern Church, Dionysius in the end of the booke de Hierarchiâ Ecclesiasticâ. In the mean time it is to be considered, that, there being no order that all should be baptized Infants; nor at what age: (Whereupon St. Gregory Nazianzene, Orat. XLII. in Sanctum Bapt. advises at three or four years of age) it cannot be said to have been a generall custome of the Church; Nor, that it could be o∣riginall from the Apostles, because the solemn times of Baptisme, at Easter and Whitsontide, cannot be thought to have been settled, till Christianity was grown very vulgar. For, as for those that were baptized upon particular occasi∣ons, or in danger of death, it cannot be thought, that the Eucharist was cele∣brated for their purpose; nor doth any example appear, that it was ever brought them from the Church. On the contrary, when the times of Baptisme came to be disused, because it was found to be for the best, that all should be bapti∣zed Infants; upon this occasion, the receiving of the Eucharist came to be deferred as much longer then was fitting, in my opinion, then it was given too soon in S. Cyprians time, according to the example related by him in his Book de Lapsis; where the Child, whom the Pagans had given bread dipped in the wine that had been consecrated to their Idols, (because too young to eat of the flesh of their sacrifices) receives the Eucharist in the Church. CHAP. XXIV. Two sorts of means to resolve whatsoever is resolvable concerning the Scripture. Upon what terms the Church may, or is to determine controversies of Faith. And what obligation that determination produceth. Traditions of the Apostles oblige the present Church, as the reasons of them continue or not. Instances in our Lords Passeover and Eucharist. Penance under the Apostles, and afterwards. S. Pauls vail, eating blood, and things offered to Idols. The power of the Church in li∣miting these Traditions. I May now proceed, I conceive, to resolve generally, upon what principles any thing questionable in Christianity is determinable; and as franckly as briefly do affirm, that there are but two sorts of means to resolve us in any thing of that nature: Tradition and Argument, Authority and Reason, History and Lo∣gick. For whatsoever any Artist or Divine hath said, of the great use of the lan∣guages, in discovering the true meaning of the Original Scriptures, by the ancient Translations, as well as the Originalls, (which I allow as much as they demand;) they must give me leave to observe, that, seeing all languages are certain Lawes of speaking, which have the force of signifying by being delivered to posterity upon agreement of their Predeoessors, all that helpe is duly ascribed to Tradi∣tion, which we have from the Languages. Indeed this is no Tradition of the Church, no more then all History and Historicall truth, concerning the times, the places, the persons mentioned in the Scripture, concerning the Lawes, the Customes, the Fashions, and orders practised by persons mentioned in the Scriptures in all particulars whereof the Scripture speaks; which, whether it be de∣livered
by Christians or not Christians, as far as the common reason of men al∣loweth or warranteth it for Historical truth, is to be admitted into consequence, in inquiring the meaning of the Scriptures; and without it, all pretense of Lan∣guages is pedantick and contemptible, as that which gives the true reason to the Language of the Scripture, whatsoever it import in vulgar use. This helpe being applied to the Text of the Scripture, it will be of consequence, to confi∣der the process of the discourse, pursuing that which may appear to be intend∣ed, not by any mans fancy, but by those marks, which, cleared by the helps premised, may appear to signifie it; Which is the work of reason, supposing the truth of the Scriptures. And whereas other passages of Scripture, either are clearer of themselves, or, being made clearer by using the same helps, may seem to argue the meaning of that which is questioned: whereas, other parts of Christianity resolved afore, may serve as principles to inferre, by conse∣quence of reason, the truth of that which remains in doubt (not to be impu∣red therefore to reason, but to the truth from which reason argues, as believed and not seen) this also is no lesss the work of reason, supposing the truth of the Scriptures. But whereas there be two sorts of things questionable in Chri∣stianity; and all that is questionable meerly in point of truth, hath relation to, and dependance upon the rule of faith, as consequent to it, or consistent with it, if we will have it true; or otherwise, if false: I acknowledge in the first place, that nothing of this nature can be questionable, further, then as some Scripture, the meaning whereof is not evident, createth the doubt. And therefore, that the determination of the meaning of that Scripture, is the determination of the truth questionable. For, seeing the truth of Gods nature and counsails, which Christianity revealeth, are things which no Christian can pretend to have known, otherwise then by revelation from God; and that we have evidence, that whatsoever we have by Scripture, is revealed, but, by the Tradition of the Church, no further then all the Church agreeth in it; (all that wherein it agree∣eth, being supposed to be in the Scripture, and much more then that) It follow∣eth, that nothing can be affirmed as consequent to, or consistent with that which the tradition of the Church containeth, but by the Scripture, and from the Scri∣pture. So that I willingly admit, whatsoever is alleadged from divers sayings of the Fathers; that, whatsoever is not proved out of the Scriptures, is as easily rejected as it is affirmed, limiting the meaning of it as I have said. But, whatsoe∣ver there is Scripture produced to prove, seeing we have prescribed, that no∣thing can be admitted for the true meaning of any Scripture that is against the Catholick Tradition of the Church; it behoveth that evidence be made, that, what is pretended to be true, hath been taught in the Church so expresly, as may inferre the allowance of it, and therefore is not against the rule of Faith. But this being cleared, so manifest as it is, that the Church hath not the privi∣ledge of infallibility, in any express act, which is not justifiable from the uni∣versall originall practice of the Church, whither in prescribing what is to be believed, what is to be professed, or what is to be done: So manifest must it remain, that nothing can be resolved by plurality of votes of Ecclesiasticall Writers, as to the point of truth. For then were the priviledge of infallibility in the votes of those Writers, which themselves disclaim, from the substance of what they write. And it is to say, that, what had no such priviledge when it was written, if it have more Authors survive that hold it, shall be and must be held infallible. Which consequences being ridiculous, it followeth, that, for the tryal of truth within the bounds aforesaid, recourse must be had to the means premised. And the effect of those means every dayes experience witnes∣seth. For, the obligation which all men think they have, firmly to hold that, which by these means, they have all concluded from the Scriptures, is the conse∣quence of these principles in expounding the same. Which obligation, though sometimes imaginary, in regard that between contradictory reasons the conse∣quence may be equally firm on both sides; yet that it cannot be otherwise, he that believes the truth of Christianity must needs imagine. For, true principles truly used, necessarily produce nothing but true consequences.
Which if it be so, why should any question be made, that the Church may and sometimes ought to proceed, in determining the truth of things question∣able upon occasion of the Scriptures, concerning the rule of Christian faith? or which is all one, that the exercise of this power by the Church, produceth in those that are of the Church, an obligation of submitting to the same? Indeed here be two obligations, which sometimes may contradict one another, and therefore, whatsoever the matter of them be, the effects of them cannot be con∣traries. The use of the means to determine the meaning of the Scriptures, pro∣duceth an obligation of holding that which followeth from it; which obliga∣tion no man can have, or ought to imagine he hath, before the due use of such meanes; whither his estate in the Church oblige him to use them or not. But, the visible determination of the Church, obliges all that are of the Church, not to scandalize the unity thereof, by professing contrary to the same. And to both these obligations the same man may be subject, as the matter may be, to wit, as one that hath resolved the question upon true principles, not to believe the contrary; and as one of the Church, that believes the Church faileth in that, for which he is bound not to break the unity thereof, not to professe against what the Church determineth. For I am bold to say again, that there is no so∣ciety, no communion in the world, whether Civill, Ecclesiasticall, Milita∣ry, or whatsoever it be, that can subsist, unlesse we grant, that the Act of superi∣our Power obligeth sometimes, when it is ill used. In the mean time, I say not that this holds alwaies, and in matters of whatsoever concernment; nor do take upon me generally to resolve this, no more then what is the mater of the rule of Faith, which, he that believes may be saved, he that positively believes it not all, cannot. It shall be enough for me, if I may give an opinion, whether that which we complain of, be of value to disoblige us to our superiours, or not: As, concerning what is questioned amongst us, whither it be of the rule of Faith or not. But this I shall say, that, to justifie the use of this power towards God, re∣quireth, not onely a perswasion of the truth, competent to the weight of the point in question, in those that determine for the Church; but also a probable judgement, that the determination which they shall make, will be the meanes to reduce contrary opinions to that sense, which they see so great Authority pro∣fess and injoyn. For, without doubt, there can be no such means to dissolve the unity of the Church, as a precipitate and immature determination of some∣thing that is become questionable. (For, effectually to proceed, to exercise Ecclesiasticall Communion, upon terms contrary to that which hath been received afore, is actually to dissolve the unity of the Church) The in∣gagement to make good that which men shall have once done, being the most powerful Witcheraft and Ligature in the world, to blind them from seeing that which all men see besides themselves; or at least, from confessing to see that which they cannot but see. But if we speak of things which concern the communion of the Church, in those offices which God is to be served with by Christians, or that tend to maintain the same; besides the meaning and truth of the Scriptures, there re∣mains a further question, what is or ought to be law to the Church, and oblige them that are of the Church; (seeing that whatsoever is in the Scripture, obligeth not the Church for Law, though obliged to beleeve it for truth) the resoluti∣on whereof, will require evidence of the reason, for which every thing was done by the Apostles; (for as it holds or not, so the constitution grounded upon it, is to hold, either alwaies, or onely as it holds). And this reason must be e∣videnced by the Authority of the Church, admitting that reason into force, whither by express act, or by silent practice. When the Israelites are command∣ed to eat the Passeover in haste, with their loins girt, and their staves in their hands; there is appearance enough, that the intent of it was onely concerning that Passeover which first they celebrated in Egypt, not for an order alwaies to continue, because then the case required haste; and because then the Angell passed over their houses, upon the door-posts whereof the blood was command∣ded to be sprinkled, that by that marke he might passe over them to smite the
Egyptians. For, though Philo would have the Passeover to be celebrated at home, and not at Jerusalem, (though perhaps onely by those of the dispersions, those that dwelt in the Land of promise, being all tied to resort to Jerusalem) yet all that acknowledge the Talmud, think it not lawfull to celebrate it but at Jerusalem; contenting themselves with the Supper, and abatng the Lambe, as one of those sacrifices which the Law forbiddeth every where, but before the Ark. But had not the practice of the Nation, and the Authority of the Elders, trusted by the Law to determine such matters, appeared in the businesse; our Lord, who, according to his own doctrine, was subject to their constitutions, had not had a rule for his proceeding. So, in the infancy of Christianity, it is no marvail, if the Christians at Jerusalem entertained daily communion, even at board also, among themselves; and, that they gave their estates to the mainte∣nance of it, not by any law of communion of goods, but, as the common ne∣cessity required; For what could make more towards the advancement of Chri∣stianity? And when, at Corinth, and in other Churches, the communion was in use, though not so frequent, nor giving up their estates, but offering the first fruits of them to the maintenance of it; yet still was the Eucharist frequented at these occasions, as it was first instituted by our Lord, as, by the express words of Tertullian, we understand that it was, even in his time. But, when the num∣ber of Christians so increased, that the use of the like communion could not stand with the maintenance of the world, which Christianity supposeth, when the same discipline could not prevail in so vast a body, which had ruled at the be∣ginning; is it then any marvail to see these Feasts of love laid aside, (whether with the Eucharist, or without it) and the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord become so unfrequented at Supper, that it is strange to the rest of Christendom, to see it so used in Egypt, on Maundy Thursday, in remembrance meerly of the primitive custome? What shall we say of the order of Widows, whereof S. Paul writeth? Is it not manifest, that there was then a necessity of such persons, as might give attendance upon the sick, and poor, and impotent of every Church? that might minister hospitality to those strangers that should travail by every Church, and were to receive entertainment according to the custome? And is it not manifest, that when, Christianity increasing, daily oblations could not serve for this purpose, but standing indowments were to be provided; this course could not serve the turn, nor the office continue necessary, when the work cea∣sed? There is nothing more evident, then that which I have said in another place, concerning the rigour of Penance under the Apostles. Nothing to inti∣mate, that they forbade any sinne, how grievous soever, to be admitted to re∣concilement with God by the Church. Many evident Arguments, that they left it in the power of the Church to grant it or not. But, the increase of Chri∣stianity, abating the sincerity and zeal of Christians, made it so necessary to abate of that rigour, and to declare free access even for Adulterers, Murtherers, and Apostates to the worship of Idols; that Montanus first, and afterwards the Novatians, are justly counted Schismaticks, for departing from the Church, upon that, which the change of times made necessary for the preservation of unity in it: Which the Donatists remain much more liable to, breaking out af∣terwards upon a branch of the same cause. Yet is nothing more evident, to them that use not the unction of the sick, then that instance. For what is, or what can be alleadged, why an expresse precept of the Apostles, backed with the unin∣terrupted practice of the Church, should not take place, but the appearance, that the reason for which it was commanded ceaseth; the miraculous curing of bodily sickness no more remaining in the Church, and so drawing after it the ceremony which signified & procured it? But, in S. Pauls dispute of womens co∣vering their heads in the Church, the case is not so clear, unless we admit two suppositions, both evident upon the credit of Historicall truth. The first, that neither Jews, Greeks, or Romanes, ever used, or knew what it meant, to un∣cover the head in sign of reverence. What use soever they made of Hats or Caps, as they had use of them (though not to continue all as we have) seeing you never find that they put them off in sign of reverence; it is impossible, that
keeping them, on should be understood among them for a sign of irreve∣rence. And therfore, that the whole dispute nothing concerns the question, of preaching with a Hat or a Cap on in the Church. The second is, that which we learn by Tertullians Book, de Velandis Virginibus: The subject whereof being, that Virgins are not exempted, by any priviledge, from vailing their fa∣ces in the Church, is argued by consequences drawn from this dispute of S. Paul; And namely, it is alledged, that, in the Church of Corinth at that time, according to S. Pauls order, they vailed their faces. Whereby it appears, that S. Paul was understood to speak of a vail, which, covering the head, came down before the face, which S. Paul therefore one while calls, , another while, , signifying, that which is so upon the head, as it comes down before the face; in English, a vail. And so Clemens Alexandri∣nus and others, understand it. This being the case, what is the reason, which ceasing, the precept thereupon may be thought to cease? Surely, nothing else, but, because those Christians which overcame the Romane Empire, did not think, that civility, and the modesty of women, required them to keep their fa∣ces vail'd; as the opinion and custome of Jews, Greeks, and Romanes, to whom S. Paul preached, did require. And though he argueth, that nature, which teacheth women every where to let their haire grow at length, teaches them to vail their faces, because, even unclothed, they are provided of a vail; yet, when he addeth; If any man be contentious, we have no such custome, nei∣ther the Chuches of God: It is manifest he intends no law of Nature, but an inference, which, civility making from Nature, was fit to be maintained by the custome of the Church, as that custome, for the unity of the Church. But when those Nations, whose civility had not made the same inference, received Chri∣stianity, is it marvail that Christianity should not impose that upon them, which, being no part of Christianity, had no ground, unlesse they would be bound to receive the civility of other Nations upon the account of the common Christi∣anity? In the decree of the Apostles at Jerusalem, prohibiting the Gentilish Christians things sacrificed to Idols, strangled, and blood, it appeareth by the dis∣putes of sundry learned men, admitting the Jews Tradition; that all the Sonnes of Noe received seven precepts from God, which, when other Nations fell a∣way to Idols, remained visible onely in the practise of such, as, not being Jews nor circumcised, are neverthelesse, in sundry places of the Law, allowed to live among them in the Land of promise, under the name of the stran∣ger within the Gates: For, this allowance was, upon condition of undertaking these seven precepts. When therefore Gentiles were admitted to Christianity with Jews, and the question resolved, that they were free of the Law of Mo∣ses, and yet an expedient was requisite, not to scandalize the Jews by the use of that freedom, that Jews and Gentiles might the more kindly joyn in one Church; it appears, that the precept of blessing the name of God, that is, wor∣shipping God, was sufficiently provided for by the Christian faith: The precepts of maintaining Courts of Judicatures, and of forbearing rapine, were suffici∣ently provided for by the Government of the Empire; and the precept of the Sabbath out of date under the Gospel. It remaineth therefore, that, by pro∣hibiting things sacrificed to Idols, and fornication, with that which was stran∣gled, and blood; the Apostles establish such compliance between Jewish and Gentilish Christians, as was in use between Jews and strangers, Proselytes, in the Land of promise. Not as if Christians had not sufficiently renounced Ido∣latry in receiving the faith; or, as if it were not free for them, being Christi∣ans, to Gods creatures, which perhaps might have been sacrificed to Idols: But because, as I said afore, the Jews had a custome not to eat any thing, till they had inquired, whether sacrificed to Idols, or consecrated, by offering the first fruits thereof; which scrupulosity those who did not observe, they counted not so much enemies to Idols as they ought to be; which opinion of their fellow Christians, was not so consistent with that opinion of Christianity which was requisite. Not as if fornication were not sufficiently prohibited by Christianity, but because, simple fornication being accounted no sinne, but meerly indiffe∣rent
among the Gentiles; all the professions, and all the decrees that could be made, were little enough to perswade the Jews, that their fellow Christians of the Gentiles, held it in the like detestation as themselves. Now, though we find, that the Christians did sometimes, and in most places forbear blood, and things strangled, and offered to Idols, even where this reason ceased; and that perhaps out of an opinion, that the decree of the Apostles took hold of them, in doing which they did but abridge themselves of the common free∣dom of Christians) yet, seeing the Apostles give no such sign of any intent of reviving that which was once a Law to all that came from Noe, but for∣gotten and never published again; it followeth, that the Church is no more led by the reason of their decree, then those Churches of Rome and Corinth were, whom S. Paul licences to eat all meats in generall, (as the Romanes) or things sacrificed to Idols expresly, (as the Corinthians) excepting the case of scan∣dall, (which our common Christianity excepteth) setting aside the decree of Jerusalem, which S. Paul alledgeth not, and naming two cases, wherein that scandall might fall out, as excepting no other case. But in all these instances, (and others that might be brought) as it was visible to the Church, whether the reasons for which such alterations were brought into the Church, continued in force or not; so was it both necessary and sufficient, for them that might que∣stion whither they were tied to them or not; to see the expresse act, or the cu∣stome of the Church for their assurance. For, what other ground had they to assure their consciences, even against the Scripture, in all ages of the Church? For, if these reasons be not obvious, if every one admit them not, much lesse will every one find a resolution wherein all may agree, and all scandall and dis∣sention may be suppressed. CHAP. XXV. The power of the Church in limiting even the Traditions of the Apostles. Not eve∣ry abuse of this power, a sufficient warrant for particular Churches to reforme themselves. Heresie consists in denying something, necessary to salvation to be be∣lieved. Schism, in departing from the unity of the Church, whether upon that, or any other cause. Implicite Faith no virtue; but the effect of it may be the work of Christian charity. SUpposing now the Church a Society, and the same from the first to the se∣cond coming from Christ, by Gods appointment; Let it be considered, what is the difference between the state thereof under the Apostles, and under Con∣stantine, or now, under so many Soveraignties as have shared these parts of the Empire; And let any understanding, that can apprehend, what Lawes, or what Customes are requisite to the preservation of unity in the communion of the Church, in the one, and in the other estate; I say, let any such understand∣ing pronounce, whither the same Lawes can serve the Church, as we see it now, or as we read of it under Constantine, and as it was under the Apostles. He that sayes, yea, will make any man that understands, say, that he understands not what he speaks of; he that sayes nay, must yeeld, that even the Lawes given the Church by the Apostles, oblige not the Church, so farre as they become useless to the purpose for which they are intended, seeing it is manifest, that all Laws of all Societies whatsoever, so farre as they become unserviceable, so far must needs cease to oblige. And the Apostles, though they might know by the spirit the state of the Church that should come after; yet, had they intended to give Laws to that State, they had not given Laws to the State which was when they lived and gave Laws. The authority therefore of the Apostles remaining unquestionable, and the Ordinances also by them brought into the Church, for the maintenance of Gods service according to Christianity; the Church must needs have power, not onely to limite and determine such things as were ne∣ver limited nor determined by the Apostles, but even those things also, the de∣termination whereof made by the Apostles, by the change of time, and the
state of the Church therewith, are become evidently uselesse and unserviceable to the intent for which it standeth. And if it be true that I said afore, that all power produceth an obligation of obeying it in some things, (I say not in all, as afore) even when it is abused, in respect of God, and of a good Consci∣ence then is the act of the Church so farre a warrant, to all those that shall follow it so farre, even in things which a man not onely suspects, but sees to be ill ordered by those that act in behalfe of it. This is that, which all the va∣riety and multitude of Canons, Rites, and Ordinances, which hath been in∣troduced into the Church, before there was cause of making any change with∣out consent of the whole, evidenceth; being nothing else, but new limitations of those Ordinances, which the Apostles either supposed or introduced for the maintenance of Gods service, determining the circumstances according to the which they were to be exercised. For, if there were alwayes cause, since the beginning, for particular Churches, (that is, parts of the vvhole) to make such changes, vvithout consent of the whole, as might justly cause a breach between that part and the whole; then was there never any such thing as a Catholick Church, which all Christians profess to believe. And truly, the Jews Law may be an argument, as it is a patern, of the same right; which, notwithstand∣ing an express precept, of neither adding to it, nor taking from it, unlesse we admit a power of determining circumstances not limited by the letter of it, becomes unserviceable, and not to be put in practice: as may easily appear to any man that shall peruse the cases that are put, upon supposition of those precepts which determine not the same. Whereupon a power is provided by the same Law, of inflicting capitall punishment upon any, that, not resting up∣on the determination established by those that have authority in behalfe of the whole, shall tend to divide the Synagogue. Iintend not hereby to say, that the power of giving Law to the Church, can∣not be so well abused, that it may at length inable, or oblige parts of the Church, to provide for themselves such an order in the communion of Christi∣anity, as may stand with the Scriptures, and the unity of the Church, though without consent of the whole Church of the present time. For it is evident, that this disorder may be so great in the Laws of the Church, as to make them uselesse and unserviceable, not onely to the profession of the true faith, or to the service of God, for which the communion of the Church standeth, but even to the unity of the Church it selfe, which is the prime precept, that all which the Church does, ought to aim at. It is evident also, that this is the true cause which the reformation hath to dispute against the Church of Rome. But this I say, that, though particular Churches must necessarily have their parti∣cular Lawes (which are the differences which severall Churches observe, in the exercise of the same Ordinances) yet may not any particular Church make it selfe any Law which may tend to separation, by disclaiming the unity of the whole Church; or, either expresly, or by due construction denying the same. This is done by abrogating Apostolicall Traditions as inconsistent with Christia∣nity for the mater of them; not because the reason and ground of them is cea∣sed. For, they who disclaim the Authority of the Apostles, cannot acknowledge the unity of the Church: And they who make Apostolical Ordinances inconsi∣stent with Christianity, do necessarily disclaim the Authority of the Apostles. The same is done, by abrogating the constitution of the Church, done by vir∣tue of the Authority left it by the Apostles. For, to disclaim the Church in this Authority, is to disclaim the Apostles that left it. And though this Authority may be so abused, that particular Churches, (that is to say, parts of the whole Church) may thereby be authorized, yea obliged to provide for themselves without the consent of the whole; yet not against the authority of the whole, that is to say, of the Apostles from whence it proceedeth: Nor is every abuse thereof a cause sufficient to warrant the scandals, that such proceedings necessa∣rily produce. And this shall be enough for me to have said in this place; Ha∣ving, I suppose, established those principles, by the right application whereof, he that can make it, may judge what is the true plea, whereby that separati∣on,
which the reformation hath occasioned, must either be justified, or be thought unjustifiable. From that which hath been said, the difference between Heresie and Schisme, and the true nature of both crimes, in opposition to Christianity, may and ought to be inferred in this place; because it ought not to be forgotten, (which ought daily to be lamented that at) the beginning of the troubles, it was questioned in the Lords House, whether there were any such crimes or not, or whether they were onely bug-bares to scare Children with; and that, hereupon, every man sees England over-run with both. The word Heresie signifies nothing but Choice, and therefore the signification of it is sometimes indifferent, importing no more, then a way of professing and living which a man voluntarily chuseth, as S. Paul useth it, when he saith; That he lived according to the most exact He∣resie of the Iewes Religion a Pharisee, Act. XXVI. 5. For it is known, that, besides the necessary profession of the Jews Law, there were three sects, which no man by being a Jew was obliged to, but by his own free choice, the Phari∣sees, the Sadduces, and the Essenes; which being all maintained by the Law, as it was then used, the common name of them cannot signifie any crime a∣mong them, to whom S. Paul then spoke, whatsoever we believe of the Sad∣duces. And thus it sounds among them, who use it to signifie the Sects of the Grecian Philosophers, allowed by those who imbraced them not: As in the Title or Lucians discourse, . But because it is too ordinary, for men, of their own choice, to depart from the rule to which they are or ought to stand obliged; thereupon, the word is most part used to signifie the free choice of a rule of living, contrary to that rule wch they stood obliged to before: In which sense, Adam is called by Tertullian the first Heretick, as he that first departed from the will of God, to live according to his own. Supposing now that Chri∣stianity obliges, both to the rule of faith, and to the society of the Church, by virtue of that rule; (because the beliefe of the Catholick Church is part of it, as hath been declared afore) it is manifest, that, whosoever dis-believes any part of that rule, the beliefe whereof is the condition upon which a man becomes a Christian; and thereby forfeits his interest in those promises which God hath made to Christians, doth or may either lead others or follow, in living according to that belief which he chooseth, whether, professing it, as a Christian ought to profess his Christianity, or not. And, in this sense it seems to be used by S. Paul, when he sayes, Titus III. 10. 11. A man that is an He∣retick, after the first and second admonition, avoid. Knowing that such a one is turned aside, and sinneth, being condemned by himselfe. For, when he speaks of admonishing them, he signifies, that he speaks not of such as had actually de∣parted from the communion of the Church, but sheltred themselves under the common profession of Christians, doing every thing as they did, that, by such means, they might inveigle such as suspected nothing, to admit their infusions; which, I showed before to have been the fashion of the Gnosticks, whose Do∣ctrines the Apostle, 1 Pet. II. 1. calls, , Pestilent Heresies: And whom S. Paul must needs speak of in this place, because there were no other on foot, so as to be mentioned by their writings. Such a one then the Apostle saith is condemned by himselfe, in the same sense, as the Councills and Chuch-Writers say of one in the same case, in seipsum sententiam dixit; He hath given sentence against himselfe; because, by refusing the second admoni∣tion, he hath declared himselfe obstinate, in that which the common Christiani∣ty maketh inconsistent with the communion of the Church. And this more proper to the circumstance of this text then S. Jeroms interpretation, of those that condemn themselves to be put out of the Church by voluntarily leaving the communion of it; though that also is not farre from truth, concerning them who are properly signified by the generall name of Hereticks. For, it is very evident, that, when S. Paul saith, 1 Cor. XI. 17. There must be Heresies among you; his meaning is onely of such factions as tended to Schism, whereof he admonisheth them, 1 Cor. I. 10. That there be Schisms a∣mong them. Now it is manifest, how much difference there is between him who
holdeth something contrary to the faith, and yet departeth not from the com∣munion of the Church; and him that departeth from the commnion of the Church, though holding nothing contrary to the substance of the Christian Faith. The one forfeiteth his interest in Heaven, by the inward act of his soul, refusing the common faith which saveth all Christians, though outwardly hold∣ing communion with the Church: The other, by the inward act of the soul, pro∣ceeding to the outward act of dissolving the communion of the Church, which the common charity of Christians in the first place is to maintain. If both these crimes may come under the the common name of Heresie, (because inward mis∣belief naturally tendeth to make a sect of such as shall profess to live accor∣ding to it) no marvail, if all divisions of the Church be commonly called both Heresies and Schisms, whatsoever be the cause upon which they divide; If meer schisms, (that is, where the cause is not any thing necessary to the salvation of all to be believed) be also Heresie in the Language of the Apostles. Neverthe∣lesse, there being so much difference between the two crimes, and the grounds of them, it is necessary to understand, setting aside all aequivocation of terms, that there is a crime consisting in mis-believing some Article of the faith (which, if you please, may properly be called Heresie;) And another consisting in dis∣solving the unity of the Church, which is properly called Schism, when there is no further pretense for it then some Law, which, the Church being able to make, the other part will rather depart then admit. There may divisions in the Church upon pretence of such doctrines, as are not necessary to the salvation of all (and so, no part of the rule of faith) but, so evidently to be deduced from it, and from the rest of the Scriptures, that the Church may have cause to determine the same; and yet others may choose rather to depart from the Church, then suffer the determination thereof to take place. Which divisions, that memorable observation of S. Jerome seems to call Heresies, which said that all Schisms naturally devise to themselves some Heresie, (that is, some do∣ctrine extravagant from the doctrine of the Church) that they may seem not to have departed from the Church for nothing; Which is very well exemplified by S. Austine in the Donatists. But whether such divisions are to be counted He∣resies or Schisms, both names properly signifying all divisions of the Church, (and only that crime which consisteth in mis-believing some Articles of faith, appropriating the name of Heresie, because common use hath given it no pe∣culiar name of its own) I leave to him, that shall please to determine it. Supposing these things, it will not be requisite for me to say much, to that which hath been published concerning the nature of Schism, of late. That, be∣ing to be had onely out of the Scripture, it is no where there to be had, but in S. Paul to the Corinthians. That there was at Corinth, when S. Paul writ, onely one Congregation of Christians, which he calleth the Church of Corinth. That therefore, there is no crime of schism, but in breaking one Congregation into more. As for any visible society of the Catholick Church, acknowledging the materials, men that professe Christianity, (which he that sees cannot believe) to the form (which is that unity which is visible) he is as great a stranger, as if he had never heard of the Creed; acknowledging, notwithstanding, an invisible unity in the common faith and love of Christians; upon perswasion whereof, he challenges as great freedom from schism, as ever any member of the Catholick Church could claim. For, having showed, how a thing which God made visible for many ages, may reasonably be expected to be found in the Scriptures; I am not to yield to try it by any part of them, knowing, that, whosoever evi∣denceth a society of the Church by Gods Law, evidenceth the crime that con∣sists in the dissolving of it. And, it were fit we were told, how all the Christi∣ans, in a City where God had much people, should sit at one Table; (or, at least, sup in one room) before we believe, that there was then no more Christians at Corinth, then could assemble at once. Which if I did believe, I would notwith∣standing alledge Iustine the Martyrs words, Apol II. , On the day called Sunday, all that dwelt in Cities, or in Countries, assemble themselves in one. And,
supposing, that then, there were more Christians in Rome, and the Territorie thereof, for example, (for he writes to the Emperour Antoninus) then could meet together in one place; As Iustine means not, when he saies, That all in Cities or Countries meet in one, that all made one Assembly, but met all in common assemblies: I would thereupon argue; that, no more does S. Paul say, (when he gives these rules to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. XI. 14. which serve any assembly) that there was then but one Congregation at Corinth. If in Iustines time, if afore, if after, he can show me any Church of Rome, or any City beside Rome, that contained not all the Christians of that City, and the Territory thereof; I will believe, that, when Clemens writ the Letter lately published, from the Church of Rome, to the Church of Corinth; there were no more Christians at Rome, or at Corinth, then could meet all at once. But, if in all the Scripture, as well as in all the Records of the Church, a Church signifie the university of Christians, which one City, and the Territory thereof, containeth; it is an affront to common sense, for him to deny, that , or , is the Church that is contained in the Ci∣ty and Territory of Rome, or Corinth. Let the learned Publisher of that Epi∣stle, take  there for Inquilinus or Peregrinus, in Inmate or Pilgrim, (be∣cause his Greek gave him leave) he that hath been showed so plentiful men∣tion of , in the subject in question, for that which we now call a Dio∣cese, can have no reason to see with his eyes, but because he is resolved not to use his own. For, in the very address of Polycarpus his Epistle, , To the Church of God dwelling beside Philippi; The da∣tive case quite spoils the construction of the words to his sense. If the Church of the Philippians dwelt near Philippi, then the Christians of the Territory be∣longed to the Church of the City. As for the visible unity of the Catholick Church, it was not so easie for me to evidence that, which could not be questi∣onable till the difference between Catholick Church and true Church, came to be questionable: As it is not hard for any Christian to question, whither the Church, which was Catholick for so many ages, ought now to be Catholick, or not. For, till he have destroyed the evidence which this abridgement hath been able to advance, (and, when that is done, new evidence will not be wanting, so long as the records of the Church are Historically true, and men continue possest of common sense) it is in vain to alledge the dictate of his own spirit, to show, that he is no Schismatick, not acknowledging, much lesse holding the unity of the Church, out of which no man can be accounted otherwise. But I marvail most, wherein he would have the crime of Schisme, acknowledged by S. Paul, in that one Text which he would be tried by, to consist. It is the Law of Nature that inables Christians to oyn in a independent Congregation, as our other Doctor of Oxford hath told us. If a Covenant or League passe be∣tween so many Soveraigns in this point; consider how difficult it is, to charge a Soveraign with breach of League, such contracts consisting of many Articles, one whereof violated voids the contract; At least, to the contrary there is no Rule. Now, the Covenant of a Congregation must suppose all Christianity, the violation whereof in any point, by any member, supported by the rest, frees a man of his contract. How then shall S. Pauls words take place, 1 Cor. XI. 19. There must be Heresies, that the approved may become manifest among you: For, if one leave six, (the Congregation consisting of seven) how shall it appear that the six are in the right? But, in my supposition, these petty animosities at Corinth, may have been fomented by secret Hereticks, as in time I shall show that they were. And their indeavour might be, to make a party for their Here∣sie out of other Churches, as well as out of that of Corinth; and, being formed, to unite them by the like bond, as they saw the Church tied with by the Apo∣stles. In this case division is ruinous to Christianity, not when the question is, whether seven shall meet together, or three and four. For by this means, it may become difficult for particular Christians, upon true principles, to give sentence for themselves in the matter of differances, but easie to miss the truth, and to joyn with the enemies of it, (thinking they serve God in communicating with
them) by charging themselves, with judging of the sense of the Scriptures, ei∣ther in those Laws of the Church, which concern not the salvation of particular Christians; or, in the common faith, without those bounds which God hath pro∣vided by the Church. And, upon these terms, those that are approved may and do become manifest, by the rising of Heresies in the Church. That which I shall inferre, is this; That, though there be no such virtue as im∣plicite faith, because it is no part of faith, no office of that virtue to believe, that any thing is true (because the Church believes it with that firm adherance to it, as we are resolved to stand to that, by believing which we hope to be saved) yet it is part of the virtue, and part of the office of a faithfull man, that is a Christian, to conform himselfe to the beliefe of all that which the Church lawfully determineth to be believed; that is to say, not to professe the contrary of it, (and upon that profession, to do any thing towards dissolving the unity of the Church) so long as the determination thereof causeth not that corruption of those things which the society of the Church presupposeth, as may seem to make the unity thereof uselesse; whereof, this is not the place to debate when it comes to pass. It is sufficient for the present, that, whatsoever the Church hath power to determine according to the premises, that the Church (that is, all particular Christians) are obliged, not to believe, (by the office of faith, which is onely exercised in them, who can make deductions of conclusions from the principles of faith, who necessarily holding the conclusions in considera∣tion meerly of the premises, do necessarily believe the conclusions, by that virtue of faith which holds the principles) but to hold, and to conform to, and not to scandalize, by the office of that charity, which is most eminently exerci∣sed, about that which concerns the common good of all Christians in generall; which, uothing in the world can so much concern, next the common faith, as the unity and communion of the Church. Thus have I bounded the power of the Church, and so showed the reason upon which the right use of it is to pro∣ceed. I showed afore the ground of that exception, which, the interest of se∣cular Power in Church matters createth, to the due use of it. When I shall have showed, in the third book, what the Law of God hath determined in mat∣ters concerding the communion of the Church; (and, by consequence, what it leaveth to the Church to determine) it will be time to take in hand the same consideration again. For, the ground of this exception will show, how farre it extendeth; whereby it will appear, that Christian Powers do acknowledge the Church, and the power of it to stand by Gods Law, even when they limit the exercise of it, by virtue of that interest, which the law of God alloweth them in Church matters. CHAP. XXVI. What it is to adde to Gods Law; What to adde the Apocalypse. S. Pauls Anathe∣ma. The Beraeans. S. Johns Gospel sufficient to make one believe; and the Scrip∣tures, The man of God perfit. How the Law giveth light, and Christians are taught by God. How Idolatry is said, not to be commanded by God. IN the beginning of this Book, I proposed the chief Texts of Scripture, which are usually drawn into consequence, to prove, either the infallibility of the Church, or the sufficience and clearness of the Scriptures. Of which I may tru∣ly say, that they are, and have been, for these hundred and forty yeares, the Theme of a dispute, between the Scriptures and the Church, for the right of giving Law to the consciences of Christians, what communion to chuse, that of the Reformation, or that of the Church of Rome: But with so little success, that a discreet man may truly say, that the parties do now stand at a bay, as it is visible that they do, meerly because they are not able to force one another, by the arms which they are furnished with; the Arguments of either side serving to maintain them against the adversary, meerly because the arguments of the other side are insufficient; not because either hath, either the whole truth, or no∣thing
of the truth for it. I showed you there, that they come short of making good that which they are imployed to prove, on this side as well as on that. As for my present business, (which is here to show, how the sense of them concurs to the truth which I have established) I shall but desire any man of common sense, to make an argument from the Text of Moses alledged in the first place, and say; The people of Israel are forbidden by the Law of Moses, to adde any thing to the said Law, and to take any thing from it. Therefore the Scri∣ptures contain, (clearly set down to all understandings concerned) all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians; then to tell me, whither he will undertake to make good this consequence of not. For, if the Law of Moses cannot pretend to contain clearly all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians, it will not hurt my opinion to inferre; That, because it is unlawful to adde any thing to Moses Law, (by saying, that it is and ought to be part of it, when it is not, nor ought to be) therefore it is unlawfull to adde any thing to the Bible, by saying, that it is necessary to the salvation of all Christians, though not written there: For, this my opinion sayes not. And truly; I must here alledge, that Gods Law, Deut. XVII. 8.-12. provideth a power in that people, to resolve and determine all things, which the peace and unity of that people requireth to be determined: And that, for the effect of this power, we have to show, all the constitutions and determinations (whereby the precepts of Moses Law are limited, how they are to be observed) which we find recor∣ded in the Jews Talmud, and all the disputes and debates, that have ended in those determinations. In as much as we have to allegde, that our Lord in the Go∣spell, hath commanded to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, as those that sit in Moses Chair. For those constitutions derive their Pedigree from those that were in force in our Lords time, by the authority of the Scribes and Pharisees, as it appears to all that compare them with the particulars mentioned in the Scriptures, in Philo, and Iosephus. For though the particulars be not alwaies the same, because time produces continual charge in particular custome; yet there is agreement enough to show, that it was successively the same authority, that made such orderly and moderate changes, (as the state of the time might re∣quire, or mens fancies imagine) in the practise of their Law. Whereby it is evi∣dent, that, the power of so interpreting the Law, being established by the Law, cannot be against the Law, as forbidden by it. And this abundantly e∣nough for the justifying of that which I have said. For, the interpretation and limitation of the Precepts of the Law, by the tradition left with Moses, and by the Authority setled in the Synagogue, being established by the Law, cannot be counted an addition to the Law. Therefore, the interpretation of the Scrip∣tures, by Tradition, left the Church by the Apostles, and the limitation of the circumstances which the service of God is to be regulated with, by the Autho∣rity setled in the Church, cannot be counted an addition to Gods new Law, or to the Scriptures of the New Testament. But, because the satisfaction of the Reader, in the true intent of these precepts of the Law requires more, I shall say further; That I conceive, that God, providing a power requisite to determine all circumstances, which the practice of the Law should require; re∣peats neverthelesse a caution of adding to, or taking from the Law, that it might not be thought, that this Power extended to alter any thing in the worship of the one true God, which all the precepts of the Law tended to limite. Sure∣ly, in the Text of Deut. XII. 32. this caution followes immediately upon warning given, not to worship God by any of those Ceremonies, with which the Gentiles honoured their false Gods: the reason whereof is plain, least, by using the like ceremonies, the honour of those false Gods, to whom they were tendred by those that believed in them, might be admitted. Whereupon, when it is inferred, that nothing be added to or taken from those precepts, by which the Law commandeth to serve the true God; it is manifest, how well, the limi∣tation of circumstances questionable in the practice of the Law stands with this caution, so soon as it appears, that the precepts thereof cannot be practised, till so limited. And upon the same caution, Deut. IV. 2. he inferres immedi∣ately;
Thine eyes have seen what the Lord did to those that served Baal-peor, now they are dead, and thou alive this day. As supposing this consequence; That, if they stuck close to their own, the true God, nothing should seduce them from his Laws: Not this; That, if they stuck close to their own, the true God, no∣thing should perswade them to practice the precepts of his worship, in that sorm, which the power appointed by him should determine. So that both Texts prepress upon them the precepts of the Law, as those whereby the worship of the true God is distinguished; not as if, of themselves, they contained mater to oblige that people, or to procure them happiness. And surely, the determi∣nations of their Elders, as they concur to the same ends, so are they inforced by the same obligation which the precepts themselves produce. And therefore it will not be amiss to take notice, how far the Jews, who acknowledge all that I say of limiting the Law, are, from thinking it to be contradicted by these Scriptures. Solomon Jarchi upon Deut. VI. 2. Thou stalt not adde; As for ex∣ample, to the five Sections in the Phylacteries; to the five kinds in the banquet, which we cary at the feast of Tabernacles; to the five Thrummes in the Fringes: And so when he sayes, Thou shalt not take away. They are commanded by the Law, to wear frontlets upon them, to put them in remembrance of the precepts thereof, Ex. XIII. 9. Deut. VI. 8. XI. 18. to carry in their hands, and to walk with a Bush, made up of the branches of severall trees, at the feast of Ta∣bernacles, Levit. XXIII. 40. to put a fringe to the corners of their Garments, made of a thred of Hyacinth among others, Numb. V. 38. 39. But that those frontlets should contain five Sections of the Law, & no more; that those fringes should consist of four kinds besides the Hyacinth (which are the determinati∣ons of their Elders) these, according to his opinion, they are as much forbid∣den to adde to, as to take from that which is determined by the leter of the Law. Abenezra seems to be more sober upon the same place; Thou shalt not adde, saith he, Of your own conceit, as thinking the worship of God to consist in it. For, believing that they vow to worship one God alone, and, that no passive acts, which the light of nature injoyneth not, can be esteemed the worship of God of themselves; but, in the doing of them, is the keeping of that Law which appoints them: it is one thing to worship God, as the precepts of the Law, determined by that Power which it appoints, do injoyn; another thing, to introduce rules of worshipping God, not by virtue of his Law, but upon a mans own conceit. And therefore it is forbidden them, to inquire after the fa∣shions, by which the Gentiles worshipped their Gods, Deut. XII. 30. as a pre∣sumption, that he which should say, that he would worship God as they did their Idols, had a mind to worship their Idols in stead of God, otherwise he would rest content with that way of worshipping God, which the Law had pre∣scribed. Whereupon the Jews determine, that there are four Ceremonies, which who so does to any thing but to God alone, must be understood to wor∣ship it for God; which are, sacrificing, burning incense, pouring out drink-of∣ferings, and adoration: But others there are, by doing which, a man cannot be concluded to worship any thing but God, till he do it in that way and fa∣shion, as is one by those that professe to worship it for God. If it be said, that these are Jews which allow Traditions; but, that there is another sort of Jews called Scripturaries , which admit nothing but the leter of the Scriptures. I answer, that those also who admit onely the Text of Scripture, and pretend to determine all controversies about the Law, by consequences to be drawn from it, could never come to agreement among themselves, what consequence should take place, and what not, did they not acknowledge some publick per∣sons, whose determinations the whole body of them submitteth to; the conse∣quences which they derive their observations by from the leter of the Law, be∣ing so ridiculously insufficient, that they could not satisfie the meanest under∣standings otherwise, as may appear by those which the Talmudists alledge for their constitutions. Which being no lesse ridiculous, then the traditions which they alledge incredible, would be both to no effect, did not the publick power of the Nation (which, while the Law stood was of force by it; but, now it
is void, ought to cease) put all pretenses beyond dispute. And for that which is alledged out of the Apocalyps (which in sound of words, seems to import some such thing concerning the vvhole book of the Scriptures, as these Texts of Moses import concerning the Lavv) I shall desire the understanding Reader, but to consider that protestation vvhereby Irenaeus conjures all that should copy his Book, to collate it vvell vvith the Original, that they might be sure, neither to adde to it, nor take from it, as Eusebius rela∣teth out of his Book de Ogdoade against the Valentinians, Eccl. First. V. 21. . I adjure thee, that shalt copy out this Book, by our Lord esus Christ, and by his glorious presence, when he comes to judge the quick and dead, to collate what thou hast transcribed, and correct it by this Copy whence thou hast transcribed it, with care; and likewise to transcribe this adsuration, and puit in the Copy. Setting aside this adjuration, what is the difference between S. Iohns charge, and the matter of it? And, finding the words of S. Iohn to import neither more nor lesse, to tell me what he thinks of this argument; S. Iohn protesteth in the conclusion of his Revelation, that, who so shall adde any thing to the true and authentick Copy of these Prophe∣sies, to him shall be added the plagues written it; who so taketh from it, from him shall be taken his share in the Book of life, and the holy City, and the good things written in that Book: Therefore, all things necessary to the sal∣vation of all Christians, are contained in the Scriptures clearly to all under∣standings. But, strain the consequence of this Text beyond the words of it, (which concern onely the words of the prophesie of this Book; that is, the Apo∣calyps) if you please; and take it for a seal to the whole Bible, forbidding to take any thing from, or to adde any thing to it (for some of the Ancients have so argued from it) shall he that addeth the true sense to, or taketh false glosses from the Bible, by force of that evidence which the Tradition of the Church createth, be thought therefore to adde to the Word of God, or to take from it? Then did God provide that his own Law should be violated by his own Law; when, having forbidden to adde, or to take from Moses Law, he provided a power to limit or to extend both the sense and practise of it, and that under pain of death to all that refractarily should resist it. Now, I demand of them that shall alledge S. Pauls Anathema, against him that should preach any other Gospel then what he had preached to the Galatians, against the position that I maintain whether he do believe, that the Galatians had then the New Testament, consisting of the four Gospels, and other Aposto∣licall Scriptures; or whether he can maintain that they had any part of it. For if this cannot (as is evident that it cannot) be affirmed, then, of necessity, S. Paul speaks of the Gospel, not as we have it written in the Books of the New Testament, but as they had received it from the preaching of S. Paul, by word of mouth; which, being common to all Christians, (unlesse we question whether all the Apostles preached the same Gospell) cannot be thought to destroy, either the being of the Catholick Church, or the saith which it suppo∣seth, or the power wherein it consisteth; and the Authority of those acts which have voluntarily proceeded from it. As for the Beraeans, that examined even the doctrine of S. Paul by the Scriptures; is it a wonder, that they should not take S. Paul for an Apostle of Jesus Christ, upon his own word, but should demand of him, to show by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ, that so they might be induced to believe him sent to preach the Gospel of Christ? Therefore, when they were become Christians, we must believe, that they un∣derstood themselves, and S. Paul better, then to call his doctrine under exami∣narion, or to dispute with him about the meaning of the Scriptures which he should alledge; which our illuminati, which take this for an argument, must consequently do, because they value not, in S. Paul, the commission of an Apostle, but the presumption they have, that the Holy Ghost moved him to
write the Scriptures which he hath left us, though they have nothing to alledge for it, but the general commission of an Apostle. To the words of the Evange∣list, Ioh. XX. 30. 31. I answer, that he speaks onely of his own Gospel. And, that the things written in that Gospel are sufficient to induce a man to believe, that believing he may have life; But that is not sufficient to inferre; that, there∣fore all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians, are clearly expressed, either in S. Iohns Gospel, or in the whole Scripture; because, he that is indu∣ced by the things there written, to belive the truth of Christianity, may seek further instruction in the substance thereof, that he may attain unto life by im∣bracing the same. So, S. Iohn saith not, that a man hath life by believing what is there, but what, by knowing it he cometh to believe. As for those words of S. Paul, 1 Tim. III. 16. 17. I confidently believe, that S. Paul speaketh onely of the Books of the Old Testament, then (before the writings of the Apo∣stles were gathered into that body, which now is the New Testament) known by the name of the Scriptures: Being well assured, that no evidence can be made to the contrary, because of those alone it could be demanded, that they should bear witnesse to that which the Apostles preached and taught: There being no question, that the sayings and doings of our Lord and his Apo∣stles, (the matter of the Gospels and Acts) and the writings of the Apostles, contain the same, which the man of God, that is Timothy, is to Preach and Teach. Neverthelesse, waving so evident a presumption, I am ready to stand to all, that the words, understood of the whole Bible, will argue. For, granting, that all Scripture was inspired by God to this purpose, That the man of God might be perfectly furnished to every good worke, of edifying believers, or convincing gain-sayers; of instructing the sonnes of the Church, or correcting the rebelli∣ous; it would be neverthelesse in vain to inferre, that, therefore, all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians, are clearly expressed to all under∣standings in the Scriptures; because it is evident, that the man of God, by be∣ing first made a Christian, or else a man of God, might be instructed in all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians, or to the discharge of his particular trust, which by learning the Scriptures, he might afterwards be more plentifully inabled to know. For, granting that the Scripture is able abun∣dantly to furnish him that hath learned all that is necessary for a Christian, or for a man of God to know, with all parts belonging to a man of God; It fol∣loweth not, that the Scripture clearly teacheth him that hath not learned the same, all that is necessary to the salvation of all Christians: Because, he that transgresseth not the substance of Christianity, may find in the Scriptures suf∣ficient furniture, both for the maintaining, and for the advancing of that Chri∣stianiy which he acknowledgeth; And yet, he that trusteth his own sense, to find out what is the substance of Christianity, by the leter of the Scriptures, may well miss of that, which God never bade him trust his own sense, to find by the Scripture. Now if it be demanded, how the Law can be said to give light, or wise∣dom to the simple, being of it selfe not to be understood; I will answer from the peculiar consequence of my position, concerning the double sense of the Law: For it becometh a Christian to believe, that the Law is thus highly ex∣tolled by the Brophets, (whom he is obliged to take for the fore-runners of Christ, not for the outward and carnal sense of it, as it was the condition of holding the Land of promise, and the happinesse thereof; but for the inward and spirituall sense, as the means whereby the Spirit of God then enlight∣ned them to discern the true inward and spirituall righteousnesse of Christians, as I said afore. And, what is the reason that the Psalmist sairh, XXV. 11. 13. What man is he that feareth the Lord? Him shall he teach in the way that he shall chuse. The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he will shew them his Covenant: The Covenant of the Lord being clearly expressed to all Israelites, whose Ancestors, contracting it with God, had undertaken to teach it their children? But that there was something more in it than all that were of it understood, which, God teacheth by the Psalmist all that were of it, that
he was ready to teach them, that should come with his fear in their hearts to learn it. The same which our Lord tells the Jews of his time, Ioh. VII. 17. If any man will do the will of my Father, he shall know, concerning my doctrine, whi∣ther it be of God, or I speak from my selfe. For, that which our Lord Christ shews, shall be expresly received and acknowledged by those, who, by the Law had been conducted, to be willing to do what God should command, in point of inward and spiritual obedience; To them that stand so affected, nothing remain∣ing to be done, but to shew them that Christ was come from God with instru∣ctions, what he vvould henceforth have them to do that vvould be saved. Novv, if the Prophets, Esay and Ieremy promise, that, under the Gospel, all Christi∣ans shall be taught of God: If our Lord praiseth the Father, for revealing to babes the secret thereof, vvhich he had concealed from the great and learned of the world; If, upon the same account, it was not flesh and blood, but the Father that had revealed to S. Peter the Christ the Son of God: I demand whether we shall imagine their meaning to be, that God taught them these things without showing them reason sufficient argument to believe them to be true; Or, having shewed them such, that he taught them, by inclining them to follow that which he had showed them sufficient arguments to believe. If we say, that he taught them immediately, without showing them any sufficient reason for the truth of that which he taught them to follow; we expose our common Christianity to the scorn of all unbelievers, whom, by consequence, we can show no reason why they should become Christians, unlesse God make them so before they know why. Nay, we can show them no reason, why we deal with them to become Christians; why the Gospel should be preached at all, or any man suffer for preaching or professing it, in order to reduce the world to it, unlesse we suppose that we can show them reason so sufficient why they should be Christians, that it may by Gods grace become effectual to make them no lesse. But this is the reason why our Lord Christ protesteth, concerning the testimonie of Iohn the Baptist, (which, every man sees how available it was to make him receivable of those who before had admitted Iohn to be sent by God, professing himselfe sent expresly to bear witnesse to our Lord Christ) I say, this is reason enough, why he professeth neverthelesse, not to receive any witnesse from man. For, had not God provided afore-hand, that the witnesse of Iohn should he accepted for the word of God; that, being so accepted, it might leave no doubt in them that had accepted it (so considerable a party, that those who refused our Lord Christ, durst not provoke it, as we see by the Gospels) that our Lord was come from God; in vain had it been for our Lord to alledge his witnesse. Wherefore, when he alledgeth him, alleadging not him, but the Father, who had procured him to be accepted; well & truly, though alledging witness of Iohn Baptist, be renounced the witnesse of man, but professeth to speak those things whereby they might be saved, only under the witness of God. Neither is it strange that the Prophets, Esay and Ieremy, and the Apostle S. Iohn, should say; that those who had been thus taught of God, should need no instruction from one another, because they know all things already, or because they had that within them, that should teach them all things. I confesse, if we look impertinently, upon that infinity of disputes that remains in the world, either about action, or about knowledge; if we look upon the multiplying of controversies in Religion, the least of which dispute of reason decides not, and therefore faction determines; it may appear a very large vvord to make good: But if vve look upon the intent of those that spake it, and the mater vvhich they had in hand, it will appear ve∣ry unreasonable to extend it to any thing else. Now I suppose, upon the pre∣mises, that the Prophets, Esay and Ieremy, in the first, and literal, and obvious sense, intend to soretell the return of the people of Israel from Captivity, and the great change that should be seen, in their faithfulnesse to God; though figuring thereby that knowledge of God, and that fidelity of Christi∣ans, which the preaching of the Gospel should produce. And truly, I do chal∣lenge all them that are best acquainted with the state of that people from the beginning, to show me any greater change in it, then that which we see came to
passe upon their return from the Captivity. To wit, that they, who formerly, before the Captivity, had been every day falling away from their own the true God, to the worship of imaginary Deities; should from thenceforth con∣tinue constant to him, when tempted with the greatest torments in the world, to renounce him for the worship of Idols, as we see by the relations of the Mac∣cabees. And is it strange then, that I should say, that this is the change which these Prophesies intend to declare? Especially when I say not, that this is all they intend, because I know, that the Apostles have declared them to be in∣tended of the times of the Gospel; But, that this is that which they intend in the first instance, which, by the premises, must be a figure and step to that which the Gospel intends to declare. And yet, in regard of the manifold Idolatries which prevailed before the Captivity, it shall be most truly and significantly understood; that the people of God, who, after the Captivity never departed from the true God, shall not then teach one another to know the true God; because that Law, the summe of the old Law, should be written in their hearts and entrails, so that they should have no need to teach one another to know the true God. If this be true, referring this Prophene to the Gospel, of which the Apostle expounds it in the mystical sense, Heb. VIII. 8—it will be much more evident, how those that are baptized upon the profession of the Christi∣an faith, (who are the new Israel according to the Spirit) shall have no need to teach one another to know the true God, who both know God, and the way to God, which is the Law of God which they bear in their hearts, if their Chri∣stianity be not counterfeit. So that, when God promiseth to establish this new Covenant, he promiseth neither more nor lesse, then the conversion of the world to the Christian faith. Accordingly, S. John truly tells the Christians to whom he writes, that they knew all things, and had no need that any man should teach them, because the unction that was in them, taught them the truth; because he doth not mean, that they knew the secrets of Geometry, or the mysteries of nature, or what∣soever is, or is done in the utmost parts of the world, or any thing else imper∣tinent to his present discourse: But, because they had in them a principle suf∣ficient to condemn those errors which he writes against there; to wit, those that deny both the Father and the Son, by denying Jesus to be the Christ, which, saith the Apostle, is the spirit of Antichrist. For surely, he that hath unfained∣ly professed the Christian Faith upon being catechized in it, hath in him a prin∣ciple sufficient to preserve him from such gross infections; which the Holy Ghost, wherewith he is anointed upon being baptized into this profession out of a good conscience, sealeth up in his heart, so that such corruptions can have no access to infect it. And therefore the Apostle might well call upon them, to try such Spirits, whither of God or not; seeing that the comparing of their pretenses, with that which they had once received, must needs be sufficient to condemn that which is opposite to it, by the judgement of any man that un∣fainedly adhereth to it. So that S. Paul, when he bids the Thessalonians try all things, but hold that which is good; demands no unreasonable thing at their hands, if we understand those things which he would have tried, to be such as are trible by the rule of faith, common to all Christians. Indeed the same Apo∣stle, when he writeth to the Corinthians, that the spiritual man is judged by no man, but himselfe judgeth all things; seems to speak more generally, not onely of the rule of Faith, but of the secret counsel and good pleasure of God, in dis∣pensing the revelation thereof, one way to the ancient Prophets, another way to the Apostles, both, by the Spirit of God and Christ: Which secret counsel, those spiritual men that he speaketh of, were able to interpret, in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, by comparing spiritual things with spiritual things; That is, the revelations granted under the Law, with those which the Gospel had brought forth. Which though the Apostles could do, yet, the grace of under∣standing the Scriptures of the Old Testament, by the Holy Ghost, was no more common to all Christians at that time, then now, that the understanding of the Scriptures is to be purchased by humane indeavours, it can be common to all
Christians to be Divines. By all which it appeareth, not that the Scriptures con in all things necessary to salvation, clearly to all that want it; but that Christianity affordeth sufficient means of instruction, in all things necessary to the salvaion of all that learn it. And those, who, to find this instruction, turn simple plain meaning Christians to that translation of the Bible which they like, to find resolution in the pretenses of the sects, which can arise, cannot be said, either to teach them Christianity, or sufficient means to learn it. For, he who hath not only acknowledged the substance of Christianity, but grounded the hope of his salvation upon it, will rather deny his own senses, then admit any thing contrary to it, to be the true meaning of the Scripture, whatsoever be the sound of the words of it. But, he that onely knoweth the Scriptures to be Gods truth, and believeth he hath the spirit of God to conduct him in seek∣ing the sense of it, not supposing the beliefe of Christianity to be a condition requisite to the having of Gods spirit, may easily be seduced by his inbred pride, to devise and set up new positions, sounding like the Scriptures, which the Church acknowledgeth no more, then that meaning of the Old Testament, which our Lord and his Apostles first declared, was acknowledged by the Scribes and Pharisees. And, thinking he doth it by the same right as they had, must needs take himselfe and his followers for our Lord and his Apostles, but the Church for the Scribes and Pharisees. As for that extravagant conceit of Cart∣wright, I will once more stand amazed at it. A man of so much knowledge, as to think himselfe fit to recall the Lawes of his Country, and give new Laws to the Church of God in it, is not ashamed to admit, that the reason why the Idolatries of Israelites were so odious to God, was, because he had not com∣manded them by the Scriptures; As if God had never forbade them to wor∣ship Idols by the Scriptures. For, otherwise, he could not have inferred by the words of the Prophet, that a Christian ought to do nothing without a Text of Scripture to warrant it; much lesse, to admit any Law of the Church without such evidence. Which had it been granted him, with power to give the Church such Laws, he could not have proceeded without demanding this exception; that those which Cartwright should make without any such warrant, might be counted godly and religious; but these which the Church, superstitious. CHAP. XXVII. Why it was death to transgress the determinations of the Jews Consistory, and what power this argueth in the Church. A difference between the authority of the Apo∣stles, and that of the Church. The being of the Church to the worlds end, with power of the Keyes, makes it not infallible. Obedience to Superiors, and the Pillar of truth inferre it not. IT will not be more difficult to show, how the true sense of all those Scrip∣tures, which are alleadged towards the infallibility of the Church, concurs to make good the terms upon which I have resolved the dispute in hand. For, having showed, that the Law of Moses was given the Jews for the condition of holding the land of promise, they ruling as well their civil communion, as the service they tendred to God, according to it; I will demand but one thing more, from the general experience of all civill people: which is this; That no form of Laws can be propounded to any community of men whatsoever, so as to serve it, without further determining and limiting of such things, as time, and the occurrences of time shall discover to be undetermined by that Law, and therefore questionable. So that Moses Law, though given by God, who fore∣saw whatsoever could become questionable concerning the mater of his Law; yet, because given for the civil Law of the people, must needs be given liable to want such limitations as the occurrences of time should make requisite. Nei∣ther can the truth hereof be better evidenced, then by showing the course which God, by the Law, hath taken, for the ending of all such disputes arising
upon the Law. I do therefore not onely grant, but insist upon this, that the power established by the law of Deut. XVII. 8.-12. extendeth to all maner of debates, arising upon occasion of any recept of Moses Law; and to the deter∣mining of them, by limiting those things, which the leter of the Law had not expressed. I do likewise grant, that death is allotted for a penalty, to whoso∣ever should not conform to any such determination, and the practice of the Law according to it. And I do find so much reason for it, that I do not under∣stand, how possibly that people should subsist (and, by consequence, the Law which made them that people) in practice of it, without such a provision as this; An opinion of the intent and meaning of God, in the practice of any precept, being sufficient to divide that people into parties, not to be reconciled but by the voice of God, either upon the occasion, or by the Law, warranting the sentence of those whom he authorizeth to declare what he requireth of his people. Setting aside for the present to dispute, whether it be the Priests alone, or the Priests with the chiefe of the People, in whom this Power is vested by the Law, (as, for the present, I dispute not, who the persons are, in whom the power of Church maters rests, in behalf of the Church) it is plainly, by this Law, a capitall crime, to teach and do contrary to what the publick Power of that People should determine, concerning the intent and practice of any Pre∣cept of that Law. And therefore accordingly I grant, & insist, that, in the new Israel of God according to the Spirit, which is the Church of Christ, there is and ought to be a Power of putting out of the fellowship of the same any man, that shall not stand to the resolution, which legally is able to conclude it. For, without such a Power, it cannot be imagined, how the unity thereof should sub∣sist, seeing that there can be no community, in which debates shall not arise, about those things wherein they communicate. I grant further and insist, that he who is justly put out of the Church, though meerly for violating the unity thereof, by disobeying that just order which unites it, is thereby condemned to the death of the world to come; As, he that teaches and does contrary to the sentence of that power that concludes the Synagogue is put out of this. Notwithstanding, as many other crimes besides this, are capitall by the law of Moses; so, there be many other causes, both of faith, and of life, by which a man forfeits his interest, both in the world to come, and in the communion of the Church. But if any man argue, that, because a man forfeits the Communi∣on of the Church, by disobeying the determination thereof; therefore all the de∣terminations thereof are infallibly true, and obliging by virtue of Gods Law. I shall deny the consequence, by virtue of that very Law of Deut. XVII. 8.-12. upon which this Argument is grounded; For, whereas it makes disobedience a capital crime, there are other Laws, that suppose a breach of the Law, even in following the determinations of that power which it establisheth. At least if we admit the practice of those Jews that follow the Talmud, in those precepts of Levit. VI. 13.-21. Numb. XV. 21.-26. which indeed cannot reason∣ably be otherwise understood: How should the Congregation offer sacrifices to expiate that ignorance wherein all were involved; but, as those that had power to make wrong determinations, should expiate that ignorance, which the Congregation, by following, had incursed. Neither saith our Lord any lesse in the Gospel, though in a mater of greater consequence, when, having con∣demned them that transgressed Gods commandment, for the Tradition of their Predecessors, Mat. XV. 5-10. Mar. VII. 8-12. neverthelesse, he com∣mands them to observe; and do all such things as the Scribes and Pharisees, sit∣ting in Moses Chair, should command, Mat. XXIII. 2. to wit; because the authority of Moses his Chair presupposed the Law of God, but extended not to nullifie any part of it. In like maner, the authority of the Church presuppo∣sing the truth of Christianity, the profession whereof makes Christians, the Body whereof is the Church: It is not possible that it should reach so farre, as to warrant any man to believe that, which, those grounds, upon which the truth of Christianity stands, cannot evidence to be true. I say not that the Church cannot determine what shall be taught and received, in such disputes, as will di∣vide
the Church, unlesse an end be put: But I say, that the Authority of the Church can be no reason, obliging or warranting to believe that for truth, which cannot be reasonably deduced from the motives of our common faith; onely it shall be a reason, obliging and warranting to keep the peace of the Church, by not scandalizing such determinations thereof, as are not destructive to the common faith. Much more, where the faith is not concerned, (onely the que∣stion is, of determining the circumstances of those actions, wherein the Com∣munion of the Church is exercised, which neither our Lord, nor his Apostles have determined) shall the disobeying of such determinations, be the violating of that unity, which all Christians professe that God hath ordained in his Church. And now we have an easie account to give, how the Prophets Haggai and Mala∣chi send the Israelites to the Priest, for resolution in those things, which the practice of that people determined, to belong to their office to resolve; Be∣cause it cannot be doubted, that their resolutions depended upon upon the acts of that authority, which concluded that people, by the Law aforesaid of Deut. XVII. 8.-12. Which, if not infallible, and yet authorized by God, to war∣rant the proceedings of his people, it will be no marvail, if those that act in dependance on them, be authorized to warrant the people, though further from being infallible. To come now to those things that are alleadged to be said of the Apostles and of the Church; having already limited the power of the Church not to ex∣tend to the faith of Christianity, which it presupposeth it will be easie to distin∣guish it from the power of the Apostles. Which, though it presuppose the truth of Christianity preached by our Lord, as that which they are imployed to introduce and establish; yet, in order of nature and reason, is before the ve∣ry being of the Church, as serving to evidence any truth of the Gospel to them that believe, being convicted that they came from God to move them to be∣lieve. For, how can they stand obliged to believe the truth of our common Chri∣stianity to be that, which God sent our Lord Christ to preach; but, by standing convict, that the Apostles were sent by him, to move them to accept of it, and thereupon inabled with means to evidence this Commission, and trust; where∣upon, the world may safely repose themselves upon the credit of them, whose act God owns, by the witnesse he yields them for his own? The true reason and ground, upon which, no act of theirs, whither by word or writing, is refusable by the Church: Upon which, the truth of things determined by their writings, is no more determinable by the Church, because the meaning of their words, which is the truth sought for, is in the words from the time they are said. And is it then an unreasonable demand, that their Charter, He that heareth you, hear∣eth me—extending to all that falls under their office, should not be thought to descend upon the Church indefinitely, but according to such limitations as the constitution thereof determineth; That is to say, not to the effect of crea∣ting faith, but of preserving peace and unity in the Communion of the Church? Not prejudicing, neverthelesse, that force of evidencing the truth of Christia∣nity, and the meaning of the Apostles writings, which I have showed to be in the testimony of the Church, not by any authority it hath from God, but from that conviction, which the testimony of such a body of men inferreth I shall not therefore deny, that he who heareth or refuseth their successors, heareth and refuseth God; if that which they would be heard in, be within the bounds of that power which God hath assigned them, but is not the same that he as∣signed the Apostles. But I shall utterly deny, that it is by virtue of these words, which were spoken by our Lord, at such time, as he had not declared, whither they should have successors or not. For, there is very great appearance, that they themselves, after this, expected to see the worlds end, and the coming of Christ. When the Apostles, Mat. XXVI. 3. inquire of our Lord, When shall these things come to passe? And what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the worlds end? Though our Lord by this answer, distinguisheth the time of the destruction of Jerusalem from the end of the world; yet, by the question, there is no appearance, that the Apostles did so distinguish, before his answer, And,
when his answer contains; That this generation shall not be over, till all these things come to passe; and that, not only after he had declared the destruction of Jerusalem, but his coming, and the end of the world, Mat. XXIV 14.-23-29-34. it appeareth, that those things, which, he declares, shall forerun the worlds end, were to begin before that generation were out, when to end, being not thought sit then to be said. If this interpretation of Grotius, which makes good the leter best, suffer contradiction; yet is it evident by S. Pauls Epistles, 1 Cor. XV. 51, 52. 2 Cor. V. 11-44. 2 Thes. IV. 15. 17. that he was not certificed, but that the coming of Christ to judgement should be during his time. In which S. Iohn, by the Apocalypse, was more fully informed. If these things be true, the obe∣dience due to the Apostles successors, cannot stand by virtue of this command, given, when it was not declared, whither they were to have successors or not: But, by those Scriptures, whereby it may appear, so farre as in due place it shall appear, whither or no, and upon what terms the Apostles left their Authority with successors; which when it appears, then, by consequence of reason it will be inferred from these words, that, who hears or refuses them, hears or refuses God, by whom the Apostles were inabled, to leave such part of their power with successors. Neither will it be strange, that I allow not any Councill, in which never so much of the authority of the present Church is united, to say, in the same sense, and to the same effect, as the Synode of the Apostles at Jerusalem; It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us: Though I allow, the overt act of their as∣sembling to be a legall presumption, that their acts are the acts of the Holy Ghost, so farre as they appear not to transgresse those bounds, upon which the assistance of the Holy Ghost is promised the Church. For, as for the Apostles, I have showed before, that they had the Holy Ghost given them, not onely to preserve them in the truth of the common profession of Christians, but to re∣veal unto them the true sense of the old Scriptures, according to the Gospell which they preached, (though that grace was common to many more besides the Apostles, not to all Christians) upon which depended the resolution of the point then in debate. Besides, I do not intend to depart from that observation which I have made in another place, that we find by the Scriptures, and by the primitive Records of the Church, many revelations made to Gods people at their publick Assemblies, by the means of such as had the Grace. And there∣upon do inferre, that such a revelation was made to that Assembly upon the place, directing the decree which there follows, and is signified (according to that brevity which the Scriptures use, in alleadging that whereof no mention is premised in the relation that went afore) by these words it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us. Now, the words of our Lord, Mat. XXVIII. 20. Be∣hold, I am with you to the worlds end; are manifestly said to the body of the Church, and therefore do not promise it any priviledge of the Apostles. And truly, seeing it is a promise immediately insuing upon a Precept; Go preach and make Disciples all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things I have commanded you: I find it a matter of no ill consequence, but very reasonable, to say, that the Precept is the condition of the Promise, seeing no act so expressed can reasonably be understood otherwise. But, in regard it is otherwise manifest, that the continu∣ance of the Church is absolutely promised and foretold, till the world end, by name, in those other words of our Lord, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. XXI. 18. I shall easily admit, that God absolutely promises to be with his to the worlds end, so as to preserve himselfe a people in the mani∣fold distractions and confusions that fall out, by the fault of those that professe themselves Christians, as well as by the malice of Infidels: But I shall deny that this inferres the gift of Infallibility in any person, or quality, in be∣halfe of the Body of Christians. For, supposing the visible profession of Christi∣anity to continue till the worlds end; so that, under this visible profession, there is sufficient means to conduct a true Christian in the way to salvation; And that by this means, a number of men invisibly united to our Lord Christ
by his Spirit, do attain unto salvation indeed: These promises of our Lord will be evidently true, though we neither acknowledge on one side, any gift of In∣fallibility in the Church; nor deny on the other side, the visible unity of the Church instituted by Gods Law. It will be evidently true, that our Lord Christ is with his Disciples, (that is Christians) till the worlds end, who could not continue invisibly united to him, without the invisible presence of his Spirit. It will be evidently true, that the Gates of Hell prevail not against his Church, in the visible society whereof, a number of invisible Christians prevail over the powers of darknesse. For though, granting the Church to be subject to error, salvation is not to be attained without much difficulty: And, though division in the Church may create more difficulty, in attaining salvation, then errour might have done; yet, so long as salvation may be, and is attained by visible communion with the Church, so long is Christ with his, nor do the Gates of Hell prevail against his Church, though error, which excludeth infallibility, though division, which destroyeth unity, hinder many, and many of attaining it. But if the consequence that is made from those words of our Lord be lame, that which may be pretended from the power of the Keyes, or, of remitting d retaining sins, (both one by the premises) granted S. Peter, the Apostles, of the Church, will easily appear to be none at all. For, no man can maintain the power of remitting and retaining sins to be granted to the Church, but he must yield it to be communicated to more then those, in whom the gift of In∣fallibility can be pretended to reside. Neither can the greatest of the Apostles remit o retain any mans sinne, without inducing him to imbrace profession of Christianity, or (if, having imbraced it, he fall from it in deed, and in effect) without reducing him to the course and study of performing the same, and up∣on due profession thereof, readmitting him into the Church; on the other side excluding those that cannot be reduced to this estate. Nor can the least of all that are able to bring any man into the Church, fail of doing the same, upon the same terms. And, did ever any man ascribe the gift of Infallibility, to all them that should have power and right from the Church, and in the Church, to do this? What meaneth then the exception of clave non errante, which is every where, and by every body cautioned for, that, with any reason challenges the power of the Keyes for the Church? To me it seems rather an argument to the contrary, that, seeing this power is challenged for the Church, under this ge∣neral exception, without limiting the exception to any sort of maters or sub∣jects: And, that the act of it is the effect of the decrees of the greatest autho∣rity visible in the Church; (as, whether Arias should communicate with the Church or not, was the issue of as great a debate, as the authority of the Church can determine) that therefore, the sentence of his excommunication proceeded not from the gift of Infallibility in any authority concurring to the decree of Nicaea, whence it proceeded, granting generally the power of ex∣communication to be liable to the exception of clave non errante. Indeed it cannot be denyed, that something requisite to the exercise of this power, was in the Apostles infallible, or unquestionable, as presupposed to the being of the Church. For, what satisfaction could men have of their Christianity, if any doubt could remain, whether the faith which they preached were sent from God or not? whither the Laws of Ecclesiastical communion, which they ad∣vanced, were according to their Commission, or not? But, the causes upon which the Church is obliged to proceed to imploy this Power, being such as depend many times upon the rule of faith, and the Laws given the Church by the Apo∣stles, by very many links between both; The dependance whereof, it is hard for all those, that are sometimes to concur to these sentences to discern; I con∣ceive it now madnesse to maintain the gift of Infallibility from the power of the Keyes; in the exercise whereof, so many occasions of failing may come to pass. As for the exhortations of the Apostles, whereby they oblige the Churches of the Thessalonians and Ebrues, diligently to obey and follow their Governors, 1 Thes. V. 14. 15. Heb. XIII. 7. 17. these I acknowledge to be pertinent to
the question in debate, as, concerning such Governours, as had in their hands the ordinary power of the Church; saving that, when he saith; Remember your Rulers, which have spoken to you the word of God; And, considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith; It is possible he may speak of those that first brought them the Gospel, and those were the Apostles and Dis∣ciples of Christ, either of the first rank of the XII. or the second of the LXX, whose privildges are not to be communicated to any authority, to be preserved in the Church afterwards. But the importance of these exhortations is not such, as can inferre any imagination of infallibility, in those whom they are exhor∣ted to follow. For, they that know the bounds of that Power, which the Apo∣stles had trusted with the Governours of particular Churches, presupposing the Christianity and Laws of Ecclesiastical communion which themselves had deli∣vered, may safely be exhorted to acknowledge them, to esteem them above mea∣sure in love, to obey them, and to give way to them, remembring those, from whom they had first received Christianity; (from whom they had received these in∣structions, as well as their then Rulers) because they had long before received, and yielded obedience to those things, which we except from the obedience of present Rulers, as presupposed to any power they can challenge. As for the words of S. Paul, 1 Tim. III. 15. I confess they containe a very just and full attribute of the Church, and a Title, serving to justifie all the right I chal∣lenge for it. For, if the Church be the House of the living God, then is it, by Gods founding and appointment, a Body consisting of all members of the true Church, wherein God dwells, as of old in the Temple at Jerusalem; as he dwells in every Christian; as he dwelt in the Tabernacle and Campe of the Israelites. And if it be the Pillar that sustains the truth, then must it have where∣with to maintain it, beside the truth it selfe, which is the Scriptures. And what what can that be, but the testimony of it selfe, as a body and fellowship of men onely; which, securing it selfe, (that is succession) by the evidence made to the Predecessors of the same body, maintains the truth once committed to the trust of it, not onely by writing, but also by practice. But what is this to the gift of Infallibility? for, suppose the Church, by the foundation of it, inabled to maintain both the truth and the sufficience of the motives of faith against Infidels, and also the rule of faith against Hereticks, by the evidence which it maketh that they are received; What is this to the creating of faith, by de∣creeing that, which, before it was decreed, was not the object of faith; but up∣on such decree obligeth all faithful to believe? Surely the Church cannot be the Pillar that sustains any faith, but that which is laid upon it, as received from the beginning, not that which it layeth upon the foundation of faith. Here I will desire the Reader to peruse these words of S. Basil, Epist. LXII. speaking of the Bishop of Neo caesarea deceased; . There is a man gone, that of all men of his time, most evidently excelled in all and every of those good things that belong to men: The stay of his Country, the ornament of the Church, the Pillar that sustained the truth. For, if a particular Prelate may duly be qualified, as well the Pillar that supporteth the truth, as the prop of his Country; Well may the Church be thought capable of the same stile, though it create no mat∣ter of faith, by decreeing, but onely preserve that which it hath received, by defending and maintaining it.
CHAP. XXXI. The Fathers acknowledge the Sufficience and clearness of the Scriptures, as, the Traditions of the Church. They are to be reconciled, by limiting the terms which they use. The limitation of those sayings which make all Christian truth to be contained in the Scriptures. Of those which make the authority of the Church the ground of Faith. IT is now time, having showed the meaning of those Scriptures which are al∣leged for both extremes which I avoid, to do the like for some of those say∣ings of the Fathers which are pleaded to the same purpose. This abridgment cannot consider all; Therefore I will not multiply those which speak to one and the same purpose; Nor marshal them according to the mater which they speak to; Finding them speak to any branch of those extremes which I decline, I will put them down as they come. S. Augustine again de Doctr. Christianâ II. 6. for one place you had afore; Magnifice & salubriter Spiritus Sanctus ità Scripturas modificavit, ut locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus fastidia detergeret. Nihil enim ferè de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non planissimè di∣ctum alibi reperiatur. Gallantly as well as wholesomly hath the Holy Ghost so tem∣pered the Scriptures, as to satisfie hunger by those places that are plain, by those that are obscure, to wipe of queasiness. For, there is scarce any thing digged out of those dark places, that is not found most manifestly said elsewhere. Epist. III. Tanta est Christianarum profunditas literarum, ut in eis quotidie proficerem, si eas solas, ab ineunte pueritiâ usque ad decrepitam senectutem, maximo otio, summo studio, meliore ingenio conarer addiscere. Non quòd ad ea quae necessaria sunt saluti, tant â in eis perveniatur difficultate; Sed cùm ibi quisque fidem tenuerit, sine quâ rectè pie{que} non vivitur, tam multa, tam{que} multis mysteriorum umbraculis opaca intelli∣genda proficientibus restant—So great is the depth of the Writings of Christi∣anity, that I should profit in them continually, if I should indeavor to learn them one∣ly, at very great leasure, with most earnest study, having a better wit, from the be∣ginning of my nonage till decrepit old age. Not as if it were so hard to attain to that which is necessary in them; But when a man hath attained the Faith, without which there is no good and godly living, there remain so many things to be understood, and so darkly shadowed with manifold mysteries—Clemens Protreptico: . Hear yee then that are farre off, hear yee that are near hand. The word is not hid from any. It is a common light, it shineth upon all men. There are no Cimmerians in the Word. As some said then, that there were in the world, that had no Sun. Irenaeus II. 46. Ʋniversae Scri∣pturae & Propheticae & Apostolicae in aperto & sine ambiguitate, & similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt. All the Scriptures both of the Prophets and Apostles are open, and without ambiguity, and may be heard (or understood) alike of all. III. 15. Do∣ctrina Apostolorum manifesta & firma, & nihil subtrahens: neque alia quidem in abscondito, alia verò in manifesto docent um. The doctrine of the Apostles is clear and firm, and conceals nothing; As not teaching one thing in secret and another open∣ly. Origen, contra Celsum VII. . The vnlgar, after their entrance made, may easily study to apprehend even the deeper notions that are hid in the Scriptures. For it is manifest to any man that reads them, that they may have much deeper sense than that which straight appears in them; Which becomes manifest to those that dedi∣cate themselves to the examining of the Word, according to the rate of that leisure and forwardnesse which they bestow upon their exercise in it. Athanasius Disp. cum Ario in Conc. Nic. (if it be his) speaking of the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost; . The Holy Scriptures clearly de∣clare all things; And not onely that which was in debate. S. Chrysostome in Lazarum Hom. III. incourages to reade the Scripture, because it is not obscure; the Gentiles that sought vain-glory by writing books, affecting obscurity as the way to be admired, but the Holy Ghost, seeking the good of all, contrariwise. In oan. Hom. II. hee compares S. Johns doctrine to the Sun, as shining to all, not onely men of understanding, but women and youths. In Mat. Hom. I. to the same purpose; Epiphanius Haer. LXXVI. . For, all is clear in Gods Scriptures, to those that will come to the Word of God with godly reason, and turn not themselvs down the precipices of death, through lust wrought in them by the devil. To the same purpose, Haer. LXIX. Gregory Nyssene in Psalm. Inscriptio∣nes I. commendeth the Psalms for rendring deep mysteries easie and pleasant to men and women, young and old. Cyril in Julianum VII. answering his scorn of the Scriptures for their vulgar language, saith it was so provided, that they might not exceed any mans capacity. Fulgentius, according to S. Austine, Serm∣de Confessoribus: Ita suae moderationis tenet temperiem, ut nec ovibus desint pabula, nec pastoribus alimenta. The Scripture holds this moderation in the temper of it, that neither the sheep wants food, nor the shepherd nourishment in it. S. Chrysostome observes, that when S. Paul sayes 2 Cor. III. 14. Their senses are blinded in read∣ing the Scriptures; Hee makes the cause to be in the Jewes blindenesse when they understand not in the Scriptures. Again, Origen in Mat. Tract. XXV. in Rom. III. S. Basil. Moral. definitione XXV. S. Chrysostome in Psal. XCV. S. Cyril Catech. IV. Rufinus in Symb. agree in affirming, that, whatsoever is taught in Christianity is to be proved by the Scri∣ptures. S. Jerome in Mic. I. Ecclesia Christi quae habitat bene, & in toto orbe Ecclesias possidens spiritus unitate conjuncta est, & habet urbes Legis Prophetarum, Evangelii, & Apostolorum; non est egressa de finibus suis, id est, de Scripturis sanctis. The Church of Christ being well seated, and having Churches all over the world, it hath the Cities of the Law the Prophets, the Gospel, and the Apostles; goes not out of her bounds, which are the Holy Scriptures. Optatus V. putting the case of the Church with the Donatists to be the case of children about their Fathers inheritance, sends them to his Will, as the Judge of their pretenses. And so S. Austine also, in Psalmum XXI. The Constitutions of the Apostles II. 19. Leo Epist. XXIII. S. Cypr. Epist. LXVIII. and many more agree, that the People are to answer for themselves, if they follow bad Pastors. S. Austine adversus Maxim. III. 14. Ne{que} ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminense, tanquam praejudicaturus, proferre Concilium. Scripturarum authoritatibus, non quorumcun{que} propriis, sed utrius{que} communibus testibus, res cum re, causa cum causâ, ratio cum ratione decertet. Neither am I to produce the Council of Nicaea, nor you that of Ariminum, for a prejudice. With authorities of the Scriptures, as witnesses com∣mon to both, not proper to either, let mater contend with mater, reason with reason, cause with cause. De Ʋtilitate credendi VI. hee saith, the Scripture of the Old Testament, ità esse modificatam, ut nemo inde haurire non possit quod sibi satis est, si modò ad hauriendum devotè ac piè, ut vera religio poscit, accedat. Is so tempered, that any man may draw out of it that which is enough for him, if hee come devoutly and piously, as true religion requires, to draw. Vincentius Com∣monit. I. confesseth that inveterate Heres, and Opus imperfectum in Mat. Hom. XLIX. that the corruptions of Antichrist are not to be convinced but by Scripture. The same Vincentius Commonit. I. and Sulpitius Severus Hist. II. ac∣knowledg the Arians to have over-spread the greatest part of the Church. Thee∣fore Nazianzene Orat. advers. Arianos scorns them that measure the Church by number. And Liberius in Theodoret Eccles. Hist. II. 16. answers Constantius, . The cause of the Faith hath never a whit the worse, because I am alone. But truly, I know nothing in all an∣tiquity, more peremptory against the Infallibility of the Church, than that of Vineentius, denying, that the Rule of Faith can ever increase, or Councils do any
more in it, than determine that expresly and distinctly, which was simply held from the beginning. Commonit. I. And S. Austine de Ʋnitate Ecclesiae cap. XVI. challenges the Donatists to demonstrate their Church out of the Scriptures. S. Ambrose de Incarnatione cap. V. S. Hilary de Trinitate VI. Victor in Marcum cap. III. agree, that the Faith is the foundation of the Church, by vir∣tue whereof, the gates of Hell prevail not against it. Therefore S. Austine de Bapt. contra Donat. II. 3. acknowledges, that not onely particular Councils are corrected by General, but that, of General Councils the later may and do cor∣rect them that went afore. Again Irenaeus III. 1. affirms that the Apostles writ what they preached, by the will of God, for the foundation and pilar of our Faith. Tertulliane de Prscript. cap. VIII. Cùm credimus, nihil ultrà desideramus credere. Hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra credere debeamus. When wee believe, wee desire to believe nothing else. For, first wee believe, that there is nothing further which wee ought to believe. So cap. XIV. XXIX. contra. Hermog. cap. XXII. Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis Officina. (that the world was made of mater pre∣exient) Si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud adjicientibus aut detrahentibus definitum. Let the shop of Hermogenes show it written. If it be not written, let it fear the wo de∣creed for them that adde or take away. Apollinaris in Eusebius Eccl. Hist. V. 10. is afraid to write, least hee should seem to write or injoyn more than the Go∣spel, to which nothing is to be added, or taken from it. S. Basil de Fide, sayes, it is plain apostasie, to bring in any thing that is not written. And in Asceticis Reg. LXXX. proves it, because faith is by Gods Word, and, that which is not of faith is sin. So likewise S. Ambrose de Paradiso cap. XII. alleging Apoc. XXII. 19. S. Austine de Bono Viduitatis I. Sancta Scriptura doctrinae nostrae Regulam figit. The Holy Scripture prescribes a Rule to our doctrine. To the same purpose de peccatorum & remiss. II. 36. S. Cyril de Trinitate & personâ Christi, whose words Damascene uses de Orthod. Fide I. 1. Theodoret in Levit. Quaest. IX. Theophilus II. Paschali. S. Jerome in Psal. XCVIII. Omne quod loquimur de∣bemus affirmare ex Scripturis Sanctis. Whatsoever wee say wee are to prove out of the Holy Scriptures. To the same purpose in Mat. XXIII. in Aggaei I. Origen in Mat. Tract. XXIII. That wee are to silence gain-sayers by the Scriptures, as our Lord did the Sadduces. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi & factorem ostendit & facta. I adore the fulness of the Scripture, which showes mee both the Maker and what hee made, saith Tertulliane contra Hermog. cap. XXII. S. Au∣stine de peccat. meritis & remiss. II. 36. Credo etiam hinc divinorum eloquiorum claerissima autorit as esset, si homo sine dispendio promissae salutis ignorare non posset. I believe there would be found some clear authority of the Word of God for this (the original of mans soul) if a man could not be ignorant of it without losse of the sal∣vation that is promised. In fine, seeing it is acknowledged, that the Scripture is a Rule to our Faith, on all hands, the saying of S. Chrysostome in Phil. III. Hom. XII. is not refusable, . A Rule is not capable of adding to, or taking from it: For so, it looseth being a Rule. For the same reason, S. Basil in Esa. II. and Ascet. Reg. I. con∣demns all that is done without Scripture. On the other side, in the next place, a greater thing cannot be said for the Church than that which Tertul. contra Marc. IV. 2. S. ser. Ep. LXXXIX. S. Aust. cont. Faust. XXVIII. 4. have said, that S. Pauls authority depended upon the allow∣ance of the Apostles at Jerusalem. Tertul. Deni{que}, ut cum auoibus contut, & convenit de regulâ Fidei, dextras miscuere. In a word, as som as hee had conferred with men in authority, and agreed about the Rule of Faith, they shook hands. S. Jer. Ostendens, se non habuisse securitatem praedicandi Evangolii, nisi Petri, & caetero∣rum Apostolorum qui cum eo erant, fuisset sententia roboratum. Showing, that hee had not assurance to preach the Gospel, had it not been confirmed by the sentence of Peter, and the rest of the Apostles that were with him. S. Austine; That the Church would not have believed at all, had not this been done. Among the sentences of the Fathers, which make S. Peter the rock on which the Church is built, the words of S. Austine contra partem Donati, are of most appearance;
Ipsa est Petra quam non vincunt superbae inferorum Portae. This (Church of Rome) is the Rock which the proud gates of Hell overcome not. S. Jerome is alleged hereupon, consulting Damasus then Pope in maters of Faith, as tied to stand to his sentence, Epist. LVII. and Apolog. contra Rufinum; Scito Romanam fidem, Apostolicâ voce landatam, istiusmodi praestigias non recipere; Etiamsi Angelus aliter annunciet quàm semel praedicatum est, Petri authoritate munitum, non posse utari, Know, that the Faith of Rome, commended by the voice of the Apostle, is not liable to such tricks. Though an Angel preach otherwise than once was prea∣ched, that, being fortified by the authority of S. Peter, it cannot be changed. The saying of S. Cyprian is notorious; Non aliunde haereses orta sunt aut nata schis∣mata; nisi indè, quòd Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec unus in Ecclesiâ ad tem∣pus Saeerdos, & ad tempus Judex Christi vice cogitatur; cui si secundum magiste∣ria divina fraternit as obtemperaret universa, nemo adversùm Sacerdotum Collegium quicqam moveret, & nemo discidio unit atis Christi Ecclesiam scinderet. Heresies spring, and Schisms arise from no cause but this; That the Priest of God is not obey∣ed, that men think not that there is one Priest in the Church, one Judg in Christs stead, for the time; Whom, if the whole Brother-hood did obey as God teacheth, no man would move any thing against the College of Priests, or tear the Church with a rent in the Ʋnity of it. The authority which the Church giveth to the Scri∣pture is again testified by S. Austine contra Epist. fundamenti, cap. V. Cui libro necesse est me credere, si credo Evangelio; Quum utramque Scripturam similiter mihi Catholica commendet authoritas. Which book (of the Acts) I must needs believe, if I believe the Gospel; Catholick authority alike commending to mee both Scriptures. To the same purpose, contra Faustum XI. 2. XIII. 5. XXII. 19. XVIII. 7. XXVIII. 2. XXXIII. ult. Therefore hee warns him that reads the Scriptures, to preferr those books which all Churches receive before those which onely some. And of them, those which more and greater Churches receive, before those which fewer and lesse. So that, if more receive some, and greater others, (though the case, hee thinks, doth not fall out) the authority of them must be the same. And, contra Cresconium II. 31. Neque enim sine causâ tam sa∣lubri vigilantiâ Canon Ecclesiasticum constitutus est, ad quem certi Prophetarum & Apostoloruus libri pertineant, quos omnino judicare non audoamus. For neither was the Rule of the Church settled with such wholesom vigilance, without cause, to which certain books of the Prophets and Apostles might belong, which wee should dare on any terms to censure. Where, manifestly hee ascribeth the difference be∣tween Canonical Scripture and that which is not, to an act of the Church set∣tling the same. Of the Power of the Church to decide Controversies of Faith, all the Records of the Church, if that will serve the turn, do bear plentifull witnesse. But the evidence for the gift of Infallibility from them, seems to consist in this consequence; That otherwise there would be no end of Con∣troversies, neither should God have provided sufficiently for his Church. S. Austine contra Cresconium I. 33. Quisquis falli met uit huyus obscuritate quaestio∣nis, Ecclesiam de illâ consulat, quam sine ullâ ambiguitate Scriptura sacra demon∣strat. Whosoever is afraid to be deceived by the darkness of this question, (concer∣ning Rebaptizing) let him consult the Church about it, which the Holy Scripture demonstrateth without any ambiguity. S. Bernard Epist. CXC. ad Innoc. II. Pa∣pam. Opertet ad vestrum referri Apostolatum pericula quae{que}, & scandala emer∣gentia in regno Dei, ac praesertim, quae de fide contingunt. Dignum nam{que} arbitror, ibi potissimum resarciri damna Fidei, ubi non possit Fides sentire defectum. All dangers and scandals that appear in the kingdome of God are to be referred to your Apostleship. For I conceive it sitting, that the decaies of the Faith should there e∣specially be repaired, where the Faith is not subject to fail. As concerning the mater of Traditions, wee are not to forget Irenaeus III. 2, 3, 4. where hee showes, that the Gnosticks, scorning both Scripture and Tra∣dition, as coming from those that knew not Gods minde, as they pretended to do, (thence calling themselves Gnosticks) may be convinced by that evidence, which the consent of all Churches in the same Faith tenders common sense, for the Tradition of the Apostles; Which, saith hee, wee must have stuck to,
had they left us nought in writing, as those Christians then did, which had not the use of leters. Epiphanius Haer. LXI. . All Gods words do not need allegory, but are to be understood as they are. But they need consideration, to know the force of each mater. Tradition also is to be u∣sed: For all is not to be had from Gods Sriptures. For the Holy Apostles delive∣red some things in writing, others by Tradition, as the Apostle saith. So Haer. LV. LXXV. S. Jerome advers. Lucif. Multa quae per Traditionem in Ec∣clesiis observantur, auctoritatem sibi scriptae Legis usurpàrunt. Orthod. Non quidem abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiasticam consuetudinem: Sed quale est, ut Leges Ec∣clesiae ad haeresim transferas? Many things that are observed in the Churches by Tradition have usurped to themselves the authority of written Law. The Ortho∣dox party answers. I deny not the custome of the Church to be such: But what a business is it, that you transform the Lawes of the Church into Heresie? S. Austine Epist. CXVIII. Illa autem quae non scripta sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orbe servantur, dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenariis Conci∣liis, quorum est in Ecclesiâ saluberrima auctoritas, commendata at{que} statuta reti∣neri. But those things which wee observe, though not written but delivered, being observed all over the world, wee are given to understand, that they are held as re∣commended and setled either by the Apostles themselves, or by General Councils, the authority whereof is very wholesom in the Church. To the same purpose, de Bapt. contra Donat. II, 7. IV. 6, 24. V. 23. de Ʋnitate Ecclesiae XIX. contra Cres∣coniam I. 31, 32, 33. The supposed Dionysius the Areopagite Eccles. Hierar∣chiae cap. I. mentioneth that instruction which the Apostles delivered without writing, as a witnesse of the Church, though not as a Scholar of the Apostles. And Eusebius de demonstr. Evang. I. 8. acknowledgeth written Lawes of the Apostles. Concilium Gangrense in fine; . And wee desire in summe, that all things delivered by the Scriptures of God, and the Traditions of the Apostles, be observed in the Church. And Greg. Nazian∣zene Orat. I. advers. Jul. referrs those Ordinances, which I quoted out of him a∣fore, to the Apostles, as Authors of them. Some sayings of the Fathers are also alleged, to show, that they held the Scriptures obscure. Origen in Levit. Hom. V. allegorizeth the Law of burning some part of the peace-offerings, to signifie, that some things in the Scriptures are reserved to Gods knowledg, least wee understand them otherwise than truth requires. The same saith Irenaeus II. 47. even in the world to come, that man may alwayes learn, but God alwayes teach the maters of God. S. Chrysostome in Joan. Hom. XL. observes, that our Lord bids; Search the Scriptures; By dig∣ging, as for mines, or treasure; So, if they may be understood with searching, yet it followeth not, that every one is able to take that course in searching them, that is requisite. And, Opus imperfectum in Mat. Hom. XLIV. Ergò non sunt Scriptnrae clausae: Sed obscurae quidem, ut cum labore inveniantur, non autem clausae, ut nullo modo inveniantur. Therefore the Scriptures are not shut: Dark indeed they are, so that they are found with pains: But not shut, so as by no means to be found. Adding, that, as it is for the praise of them that finde them, that they sought, so, for the condemnation of them, that seek not, that they under∣stand them not. S. Jerome ad Algasiam Quaest. VIII. Omnis Epistola ad Roma∣nos miris obscuritatibus involuta est. The whole Epistle to the Romanes is involved with marvellous darkness. Epist. ad Paulinum. Hoc autem velamen non solùm in facie Moysi, sed & in Evangelistis & Apostolis positum est. This vail is not onely in Moses face, but upon the Evangelists and Apostles. And; Nisi aperta fuerint universa quae scripta sunt, ab eo, qui habet clavem David, qui aperit, & nemo clau∣dit, qui claudit, & nemo aperit, nullo alio reserante pandentur. Unless all things that are written be opened, by him who hath the Key of David, who opens and no man shuts, who shuts and no man opens, no man else will unlock and lay them forth.
Before him, Origen in Exodum Hom. XII. is afraid, that the Evangelists and A∣postles, as well as the Prophets, will prove not onely vailed, but sealed to us, as the Prophet saith, unlesse wee both study and pray, that the Lamb of the Tribe of Juda may open us the Seals of it. Here I will advise the parties to consider, how they can advantage themselves by those sayings of the Fathers, which contain not the terms of that position, which, they do nothing unlesse they inforce. Allege they what they can allege out of the Fathers, to show, that they acknowledg the Scriptures both sufficient and perspicuous; I shall not be troubled at it, but shall willingly concurr to ac∣knowledg the same. I acknowledg the Scriptures to be an Instrument of God, though a Moral Instrument. And I shall have a care not to acknowledg, that God ever provided or used au Instrument that would not serve his turn. Instru∣mentum Vetus & Novum, is a term in every mans mouth, to signifie the Old and New Testament. But there are Natural Instruments, and there are Moral In∣struments. I say not that there is no third kind of Instruments, for it may be there are Artificial Instruments, of a several nature from both, but my present purose obliges mee not to consider that difference. When the substance or frame of the Instrument inables it to serve him that imployes it, well may it be called a Natural Instrument, as the parts of mans body, or other creatures, which execute the operations of the soul. When neither the substance nor frame of the thing which that substance produces, concurrs to the work to the which it is Instrumental, but it is done meerly by the consent of mans will, (the reason is the same of Gods will, if it be an Instrument between man and God) then is it great reason why it should be called a Moral Instrument; because the force of it lyes in the maners of those, who use it to testifie those acts, which they do not mean to transgresse: Such as all civil records are, in regard of the effect of those contracts, or deeds, which they come to witnesse. The Old and New Testament are the records of two several Treaties, or Contracts if you please, that have pas∣sed between God and Man. And therefore authentick, because the writings of those who contracted those Treaties. But does every Instrument of a contract contain every thing that is in force by the said contract? Surely it is a thing so difficult, to contain in writing every thing that a contract intends, that, many times, if witnesses were not alive, other whiles, if general Lawes did not de∣termine the intent of words, in fine, if there were nothing to help the tenor of such Instruments, things contracted would hardly sort to effect. Consider now what is alleged on the other side, how resolutely, how generally, the Tra∣dition, both of the Rule of Faith, and of Lawes to the Church, is acknowledg∣ed even by those witnesses, whose sayings are alleged to argue the sufficience, perfection, and evidence of the Scriptures. Is it civil, is it reasonable to say, that the Writers of the Christian Church make it their businesse to contradict themselves; which no Scholar will admit either Infidels, Pagans, Jewes, Mahu∣metans or Hereticks to do? Is it not easie to save them from contradicting themselves, by saying, that Tradition of Faith containeth nothing that is not in the Scriptures, but limits the meaning of that which they contain; Tradition of Lawes, may contain that which is not in the Scriptures, for the species of fact, but is derived from the Scripture, for the authority from whence it pro∣ceeds? Or, is it possible by any other means, reasonably to save them from con∣tradicting themselves? These generals premised, freely may wee make our approaches to the particu∣lars, and, by considering the circumstance of the places where they lye, make our selves consident to finde some limitation, restraining the generality of their words to make them agree, as well with my position, as with themselves. For example; Epiphanius Haer. LXXVI. Irenaeus II. 46. III. 15. Athanasius Disp∣cum Ario say, all is clear in the Scriptures; Meaning, that the sense of the Church is clearly the sense of the Scriptures, in the points questioned; But not to them who exclude that Tradition, which themselves include and presuppose. Observe again, that the perspicuity of the Scriptures is not limited to things necessary to salvation, in all that hath been alleged, but once in S. Austine Epist.
III. and observe withall, that the knowledg of things necessary proceeds upon supposition of the Rule of Faith, acknowledged, and received from the Church, in the Catechizing of those that were baptized; Not determined by every ones sense of the Scriptures. It is therefore easily granted, that the Scriptures were made for all sorts of people, that they might profit by them; Alwaies provi∣ded, that they bring with them the Faith of the Catholick Church, for the Rule, within the bounds whereof, they may profit by reading them, otherwise, they may and they may not. And therefore, those sayings which were alleged, to prove them obscure, convincing, that they are not clear to all understandings, because they require study, and search, and digging; do necessarily leave him that comes without his Rule, not onely in doubt of finding the truth, but in danger of taking error for it. Upon the like supposition S. Austine affirms, de Ʋtilitate credendi VI. that any man may finde enough in the Old Testament, that seeks as he ought: For, to seek humbly and devoutely, is the same thing for him that is no Christian, (For, the Manichees, to whom S. Austine recommends the Old Te∣stament, in this place, were Christians no further than the name) as it is, for him that is a Christian, to seek like a Christian that is, having before his eyes the Faith of the Church. And this is that which S. Austine means, that hee who is no Christian, so seeking, may finde enough to make him a Christian; That is, as much as hee is to expect from the Old Testament. And this supposition is ex∣prest by Origen, contra Celsum VII. when hee sayes; that the unlearned may study the Scriptures with profit, after their entrance made: For, this entrance is the Rule of Faith, which they were taught when they were baptized. And, the Catechism of that time, containing as well the motives as the mater of Faith, appears to the unlearned the way into the deep, that is, the mystical sense of the Scripture. Upon the same terms may wee proceed, to grant all that is alleged to show, that which is not contained in the Scriptures not to be receivable in point of Christian truth. For, having showed, that the Rule of Faith is wholly contained in the Scriptures; And, nothing contained in the records of Church Writers to be unquestionable but the Rule and Tradition of Faith; Whatsoe∣ver further intelligence and information can be pretended, either tending to e∣stablish the same, or, by consequence of reason to flow from it, if it cannot be pretended to come from Tradition, (because there is no Tradition of the Church concerning that wherein the Church agrees not) either it must come from the Scripture, or by the like revelation as the Scriptures, which no Church Writer pretends to have. For, as for that, which by consequence of reason is derived from those things which the Scripture expresseth; Seeing the words of the Scri∣pture is not the word of God, but the sense and meaning of them, it were a thing very impertinent to question, whether or no that be contained in the Scri∣pture, which the true sense of the Scripture, by due consequence of argument imports. But if the question be of Lawes delivered the Church by the Apostles, having showed, that there may sufficient evidence be made of such, though not recorded in the Scriptures; there can no presumption be made, being not found in the Scriptures, that therefore a Law was not first brought into the Church by the Apostles. And yet it remains grounded upon the Scriptures, in point of righ, because the authority, by which it was brought into the Church, is either established or attested by the Scriptures; Mater of fact being competently evi∣denced, by other historical truth besides. And upon these terms wee may pro∣ceed to acknowledg the goodness of an argument drawn negatively from the Scriptures; that is to say, inferring, this is not in the Scriptures, therefore not true. Doth my position then oblige mee to deny Irenaeus, affirming III. that the Apostles writ the same that they preached? Or S. Austine in Psalmum XXI. de Ʋnitate Ecclesiae cap. V. and Optatus V. tying the Donatists to be tried by the Scriptures? Both parties pretending to be children of God, are to be tryed by their Fathers Will, that is by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. But, if there shall fall out any difference about the intent of their Fathers Will, the meaning of the Old and New Testament, shall I think that is said in vain, which is alleged on the other side, out of the same S. Austine contra Cresco∣nium
I. 33. that, if a man would not erre in that point, hee is to advise with the Church, which the Scripture evidenceth? For, the question being about the rebaptizing of Hereticks, (that is, about a Law of the Church) if you will have S. Austine agree with S. Austine, it must be upon the terms of my position, the practice of the Church giving bounds to the sense of the Scripture. I can there∣fore safely agree with the Constitutions of the Apostles, with S. Cyprian and Leo, and whosoever else teaches, that it is not safe for the people, to assure their consciences upon the credit of their Pastors: But it is because I suppose the U∣nity of the Church provided by God, for a ground, upon which the people may reasonably presume, when they are to adhere to their Pastors, when not; To wit, when they are owned, not when they are disowned by the Unity of the Church. For, though this provision becomes uneffectual, when this Unity is dissolved, yet ought not that to be an argument, that the goodnesse of God ne∣ver made that provision, which the malice of man may defeat; But, that, who∣soever concurrs to maintain the division, concurrs to defeat that provision which God hath made. As safely do I agree with all them, who agree, that whatsoever is taught in Christianity is to be proved by the Scriptures. For, if it belong to the Rule of Faith, it is intended by the Scriptures, though that intent is eviden∣ced by the Tradition of the Church. If to the Lawes of the Church, the autho∣rity of it comes from the Scriptures, though the evidence of it may depend up∣on common sense, which the practice of the Church may convince. If over and above both, it is not receivable, if not contained in the Scriptures. And in this regard, whosoever maintains the whole Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, is throughly justified by all those testimonies that have been alleged to that pur∣pose. For, though it be not necessary to the salvation of all Christians, to un∣derstand the meaning of all the Scriptures; yet, what Scripture soever a man at∣tains to understand, is as much a Rule to his Faith, as that, which a man cannot be saved if hee understand not the sense of it, whether in and by the Scripture, or without it. And though a man may be obliged to believe, that which is not in the Scripture, to have been instituted by the Apostles; yet is he not ob∣liged to observe it, but upon that reason which the Scripture delivereth. And, upon these terms, is the whole Scripture a Rule of Faith, from which, as nothing is to be taken away, so is nothing to be added to it, as the saying of S. Chrysostome in Phil. II. Hom. XII. requireth. And the saying of S. Basil in Esa. II. and Ascet. Reg. I. condemning all that is done without Scripture, takes place upon no other terms than these. Not as Cartwright and our Puritanes after him imagine, that a man is to have a text of Scripture, specifying every thing which hee doth, for his warrant; For, as it is in it self ridiculous to ima∣gine, that all cases which fall out, can be ruled by expresse text of Scripture, our Christianity being concerned infinite wayes, of which, it is evident, that the Scri∣pture had no occasion to speak; So, if the words of the Scripture be lodged in a heart, where the work of them dwelleth not, (a thing which wee see too pos∣sible to come to passe) it is the ready way, to make the Word of God a color for all unrighteousnesse, not onely to others, but to the very heart of him who hath that cloke for it. It is therefore enough, that the reason of every thing which a Christian doth is to be derived from that doctrine which the Scripture decla∣eth. And, where a man proceedeth to do that, for which hee hath not such a reason so grounded, as reasonable men use to go by, then cometh that to passe which S. Basil chargeth Ascet. Reg. LXXX. That, What is not of faith is sin. It is true, according to that sense which hitherto I have used, after many Church Writers, the Rule of Faith extendeth not to all the Scriptures, but onely to that, which it is necessary to salvation to believe and to know; Which, every man knowes, that all the Scripture is not. For, though it be necessary to salvation to believe, that all the Scripture is true, yet is it not necessary to salva∣tion to know all that the Scripture containeth. And, the reason why I use it in this sense is, to distinguish those things contained in the Scriptures, which Tradition extendeth to, from those to which it extendeth not; For, upon these terms, is the sense of them limitable to the common Faith. But, I quarel not
therefore the opinion of them that maintaine, the whole Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, acknowledging that, whatsoever it containeth is necessarily to be believed, by all that come to understand it: And whatsoever it containeth not, though the Scripture alone obligeth not to believe the truth of it, is not ne∣cessarily to be observed, for any other reason, but that which the Scripture de∣clareth. As for S. Basil, making it apostasy, to bring that which is not written into the Faith; It is a thing well known, that the Arians were charged by the Church, for bringing in words that were not in the Scriptures, saying ; There was a time when Christ was not; And, ; That hee was made of nothing; On the other side, after the Council of Nicaea, the Arians charged the Church, for bringing in the word , of the same substance. Where then lay the difference, between the Inndelity of the Arians, and the Faith of the Church? Theodoret showes it Hist. Eccles. I. 8. out of Athanasius de Actis Concil. Niceni: , saith hee; They were condemned by written words piously understood. But how appears this piety? For, I suppose the Arians would not have granted it. Hee addeth, that the word , had been used by the Fathers, (which, had it been inconsistent with the sense of the Church, could not have been indured, in a ma∣ter concerning the Rule of Faith) whereas their terms were contrary to that which is found in the Scriptures. Now S. Basil acknowledgeth that hee had else∣where, dealing with Hereticks, used terms not found in the Scriptures; to ex∣clude their sense contrary to the Scriptures, (as, you shall finde by the Authors alleged, that the Council of Nicaea had done) but to those who desired informa∣tion with a single heart, hee resolves to rest content with the Scriptures; The terms whereof, his meaning is that the Hereticks did not rest content with, be∣cause they had a minde to depart from the Faith. Upon the same terms, Tertul∣lian pronounces the Wo that belongs to them which adde to Gods Word, upon Hermogenes, because his error concerned the Article of our Creed, that God made heaven and earth. And S. Austine presumes, the reason why there is no clear Scripture for the original of the soul, to be because hee presumes that it concerns not the substance of Faith. Besides these Observations, some of those passages which are alleged may concern Christianity, rather than the Scriptures. The Word shines upon all, and is hid to none, saith Clemens to the Gentiles. But it is enough for his purpose, that they may be convinced of Christianity, whether the Scriptures contain it clearly to all understandings or not. Tertul∣lian prescribeth, that, when once wee believe, wee are to believe that wee have nothing else to believe; because the Gnosticks pretended secrets, which our common Christianity, they confessed, contained not. Claudius Apollinaris is afraid that our common Christianity might be thought unperfit, if hee should write against Montanus. And does not Christians writing one against another cast a mark of imperfection upon it, in the opinion of unbelievers, though Christians ought to know that God is not tyed to prevent offenses? Assuredly, the Gospel of which hee speaks, is neither any one Gospel nor all four: Nor can the word Gospel signifie, either the New Testament alone, or the Old and New both: Nor could hee be thought to adde to them, by expounding them, and thereby maintaining the Church. Therefore, hee inferrs a good consequence, that, because it is forbidden to adde to, or take from the Law, therefore, our com∣mon Christianity is not unperfit, nor ought wee to do that, whereby it may seem unperfit. Now, as for the sayings alleged out of S. Austine, that import as much as the words which wee had afore; Ego Evangelio non crederem—having show∣ed what is the effect and intent of them, I shall not be very solicitous to show, how all that is said to the same effect is answered. For, as there is no head so hard, that cannot distinguish, between the authority of the Church, as it is a vi∣sible Body of men, that could never have been cozened into the beliefe of Chri∣stianity upon pretended motives (whether sufficient or not) and, as it is suppo∣sed by Christians, to be a Body founded by God; So is there no heart so hard∣ned with prejudice, as to refuse this demand: That the authority of the Church as the Church presupposes the truth of Christianity, and therefore proves it not;
And, by consequence, no truth, that Christianity either containeth or inferreth. Which being admitted, if any thing be ascribed to the Church, which seems not to suppose any part of Christian truth, it must be referred to the authority and credit of the Church, as a visible Body of men, moving others to imbrace the Christian Faith. For, though this credit contribute to the making of those men Christians, which are won to the Church already setled, and so the Church is the Church before they are Christians; Yet is the ground and reason which makes the Church a Body founded by God, to wit, the profession of Christianity, more ancient in order of reason and nature, than the being of the Church. And up∣on supposition of this ground, (that is, that the Church hath true reasons, as well as sufficient, to believe) proceeds all that authority of the Church, which S. Au∣stine allegeth to the Manichees, upon so high terms, that hee would not believe, were hee not moved by it to believe. Neither was it the authority of the Church, vested in the rest of the Apostles, that gave S. Paul the authority of an Apostle over the Church; (though I have said afore, that all the authority which the Church can ever have, was in the Apostles and disciples of our Lord, for the time. And though it is manifest, that S. Paul could not have had the Authority of an Apostle over the Church, had he not been owned by the rest of the A∣postles) but the Authority of our Lord Christ in the Apostles, of the same effect, in obliging the Church to receive S. Paul for an Apostle, as, to receive that which they preached, for the Faith. Nor is the mater much otherwise, in the receiving of any Scripture for Canonital. For, neither can any mans writing be owned for Canonical Scripture, not supposing his person owned by the Apostles. And his authority, being so owned, is necessarily before any authority of the Church, and the very being of it. That some Scriptures may be received in some Chur∣ches, and not in others, is not because any Church can have authority to reject that which another is bound to receive; but because some Church may not know, that some Scripture comes from a man so owned by the Apostles, (though ano∣ther may know it) and yet be a Church, and salvation be had in the communion of it, such knowledg depending meerly upon evidence in point of fact; And therefore, the act of the Church in listing the Scripture hath no authority but that which the presumption of such evidence createth. As for the rest of that which is alleged for the authority of the Church, if S. Jerome resolve to stand to the Church of Rome, it is not because hee takes the sentence thereof to be in∣fallible; but because hee had reason to presume, that it were in vain for an An∣gel in heaven to preach any other Faith to it, than that which once had been re∣ceived. Nor doth S. Cyprian make the not believing the Popes infallibility the sourse of all Heresie and Schism, but, the neglect of authority derived from the Apostles, upon the Heads of particular Churches, in the consent of whom, the visibility of the true Faith, and Church both, consisteth. For, it is meer slight of hand, to take the Rock which the Gates of Hell vanquish not, in S. Austine, for the Church of Rome, because hee spoke of it in the words next afore; Be∣ing meant of the Vine which hee had speech of a little afore that; to wit, the Christianity which our Lord Christ preacheth. For, in S. Bernards time, I grant, the stile was changed, and it might passe for good doctrine to say; That the Faith cannot suffer any failleur in the Church of Rome. As for all those passages of the Fathers, which are alleged in recommendation, whether of Tradition for the Rule of Faith, or of Traditions which are the Lawes of the Church, they are all mine own; They cannot serve the turn of any opinion but that which I pre∣tend; That the Tradition of the Church, (witnessed and evidenced by the con∣tinual exercice and practice of the Church, extant in the records of the Church, not constituted and created by any expresse act of those that have authority in be∣half of the Church) as it giveth bounds to the interpretation of the Scripture, in such things as concern the Rule of Faith; So it discovereth what Lawes the Church received from the Apostles, and, by consequence, what is agreeable and consequent to the intent of the same in future times, according to the difference between that and the present state of the Church. Let those things therefore which have been produced here, be added to that which I alleged in the begin∣ning,
to make evidence for the Corporation of the Church, from the Lawes given it by the Apostles. Irenaus shall serve, both for the authority of the Scri∣pture antecedent to the authority of the Church, and for the Tradition of the Church bounding the sense of it. For, if the same Faith which first was prea∣ched, was afterwards committed to writing by the Apostles, (and, how should those Christians which had not the use of leters, be saved otherwise?) then was it the authority of the Apostles, acknowledged by them that found themselves tyed to be Christians, which made the Faith to oblige, whether delivered by writing, or without it; The consent of all Churches, in the same Rule of Faith, serving for evidence of the Apostles act, in delivering the same to the Chur∣ches. Nor can any further reason be demanded, why that knowledg, which the Gnosticks prerended to have received by secret wayes should be refuted, than the want of this. And therefore it is in vain to allege, that, as they scorned the Scripture, so they alleged Tradition for this secret knowledge; The Tradition which they alleged being secret, and such as could not be made to appear; But no lesse contradictory to the Tradition of the Church, than to the Scriptures, both infallibly witnessed by the consent of all Churches. And hereupon, I leave the sayings of S. Austine, setting aside the authority of the Council of Nicaea, and affirming, that former General Councils may be corrected by later, without answer; As also the sayings of them who affirm, the Faith which our Lord hath taught to be the rock, upon which the Church is built. For, if no building can lay that foundation, upon which it standeth, then cannot the Church make mater of Faith, being founded upon it. And that authority which may be set aside, or corrected, can be no infallible ground of Faith. It is true, it is pleaded, that, though, in the Church of Rome there be some, that do believe, that the Church is able to make new Articles of Faith; (that is, to make such determinations in maters of Faith, as shall oblige all men to believe them, as much as they are obliged to believe all that which comes from our Lord by his Apostles) Others, that do believe onely, that the Church is able to evidence what the Apostles delivered to the Church, and that this evidence is the ground whereon particular persons are to rest, that, whatsoever is so evidenced, was in∣deed so delivered by the Apostles; yet both these agree in one and the same rea∣son of believing, both of them alleging the Tradition of the Apostles to the Church, for the ground of their Faith. But this is more than any man of reason can believe, unlesse wee allow him that affirms contradictories, to ground him∣self upon one part of the contradiction, which the other part of it destroyes. For, seeing that there must be but one reason, one ground, upon which we believe all that we believe, and that it is manifest, that, those Articles of Faith which the determination of the Church creates, (being not such by any thing which that de∣termination supposes) are believed to be such, meerly in consideration of the au∣thority of the Church that determines them; By consequence, the Scripture, and whatsoever is held to be of Faith, upon any ground which the authority of the Church createth, is no mater of Faith, but by the authority of the Church, de∣termining that it be held for such. On the other side, hee that allowes Tradi∣tion to be the reason why hee believes the Christian Faith, necessarily allowes, all that hee allowes to be mater of Faith, not onely to be true, but to be mater of Faith, before ever the Church determine it. So that, allowing him to say, that hee holds his Faith by Tradition, hee must allow mee, that hee contradicts himself, whensoever hee takes upon him to maintain, that the Church creates new Articles of Faith, which were not so, the instant before the determination of the Church.
CHAP. XXXII. Answer to an Objection, that choice of Religion becomes difficult upon these terms. This resolution is for the Interest of the Reformation. Those that make the Church Infallible cannot, those that make the Scripture clear and sufficient may own Tradition for evidence to determine the meaning of the Scriptures, and Controversies of Faith. The Interest of the Church of England. The pre∣tense of Rushworthes Dialogues, that wee have no unquestionable Scripture, and, that the Tradition of the Church never changes. AS little shall I need to be troubled at any reason that may be framed a∣gainst this resolution, having answered the prejudice that seems to sway most men to apprehend, that God must have been wanting to his Church, if all things necessary to salvation be not clearly laid down in the Scriptures. For, it is very manifest, that the very same presumption possesses the mindes of the adverse party, that God must needs have provided a visible Judge infallible in de∣ciding all Controversies of Faith; Whether the Church, or any person or per∣sons authorized in behalf of the Church, for the present all is one. I shall there∣fore onely demand, that it be considered, first, that God was no way tied either to send our Lord Christ, or to give his Gospel; which, because it comes of Gods free grace, is therefore called the Word of his Grace, and the Covenant of Grace. Then, that hee hath not found himself obliged to provide effectual means, to bring all mankinde to the knowledge of it; resting content to have provided such, as, if men be not wanting to their own salvation, and the salvation of the rest of mankinde, may be sufficient to bring all men to the knowledg of it. And, when it is come to knowledg, all discreet Christians, notwithstanding, must acknowledg, that the motives thereof fully propounded, though abundantly suf∣ficient to reasonable persons, yet do not constrain those that are convicted by them, to proceed according to them, as necessary reasons constrain all under∣standings that see them, to judg by them. For, how should it be a trial of mens dispositions, if there were no way to avoid the necessity of those motives that in∣force it? Now, if any knowledg can be had, of truth in maters of faith that become disputable, it must all, of necessity, depend upon the sufficiency of those motives, which convict men to imbrace the Christian Faith. And if there be any such skill as that of a Divine among Christians, of necessity, all of it pro∣ceeds upon supposition of the said motives, which, not pretending to show the reason of things which they convict men to believe, convict them notwithstand∣ing to believe, that they are revealed by God. For, what conviction can there be, that this or that is true, unlesse it may appear to fall under those motives, as the means which God hath imployed, so to recommend it? Therefore can it not be reasonable, to require a greater evidence, to the truth of things disputable a∣mong Christians, than God hath allowed Christianity it self; which being suppo∣sed on all hands, it remains questionable, whether this or that be part of it. Therefore can it not be presumed, that God hath made the Scriptures clear in all points necessary to salvation, to all understandings concerned; or, that hee hath provided a visible Judg, infallible in determining Controversies of Faith; either because originally his goodnesse requires it, or because wee cannot suppose that men can be obliged to imbrace the Gospel upon other terms. It is sufficient, that, having given the Scriptures, hee hath over and above provided the Commu∣nion of the Church, to preserve the Rule of Faith, and the Laws of the Church, in the sensible knowledg and common practice of all Christians; that the means of salvation might be sufficient, and yet men remain subject to trial, whether they would render them uneffectual or not, to themselvs and the rest of mankinde. I confess indeed, it would be much for the ease of the parties, and would shorten their work very much, if it might be admitted for a presumption, that all things necessary are clear in the Scriptures, or, that the Church is an infallible Judg in Controversies of Faith. For then, the superficial sound of the words of Scri∣pture,
repeated by rote, in the Pulpit or out of the Pulpit, would serve to knock the greatest question on the head, without any advise, what difficulties remain behind, undecided, upon no lesse appearances in Scripture; On the other side, a decree of the Council of Trent would serve to put the Scripture to silence, without any proffer to satisfie the conscience that is moved with the authority thereof, equally obliging with our common Christianity, with the sense of the Church on the same side to boot. Thus much is visible, that they whose businesse it is, in England, to reconcile souls to the Church of Rome, finde their work ready done when they have gained this point; and men, all their lives afore grounded upon contrary reasons, in the particulars which are the subject of the breach, change their profession without any coutrary resolution in those particu∣lars, that is, their former grounds remaining in force. Surely nothing were more desirable, than a ready and short way to the truth, in things so concerning. But, to pretend it upon a ground, which, if any thing can be demonstrative in this kinde, is demonstratively proved that it cannot be true; To wit, the authority of the Church decreeing, without means to derive that which it decreeth, from the motives, that should evidence it to be revealed by God; This, I say, to pretend, is no better than an Imposture. And if this be true, I remain secure of that which every man will object a∣gainst the resolution which I advance, that, whereas, the meaning of the Scri∣pture alone is a thing too difficult for the most part of men to compasse, I re∣quire further, that it be assured by the records of the Church, which are endlesse, and which no mans industry can attain to know; So that, the meer despair of finding resolution by the means propounded, will justifie to God, him that fol∣lowes probabilities, as being all one in that case, whether there be no truth, or whether it cannot appear to those whom it concerns. This Objection, I say, I do not finde so heavy upon mee, that I have any cause to mince, but rather to aggravate the difficulty of it, having showed, that the means provided by God, to make evidence of the Faith to the consciences of particular Chaistians, is not any gift of infallibility vested in any person or persons on behalf of the whole Church, but the Unity of the whole Church, grounded upon the profession of the same Faith as the condition of it. For in all reason, what Unity bindes, that Division destroyes. And, whatsoever Unity contributes to the assurance of a Christian, that hee is in the way to salvation, so long as hee continues in the U∣nity of the Church; that the Division of the Church necessarily derogates from the same assurance, in him that cannot continue in that Unity which is once dis∣solved, and yet, believing the Scriptures and our common Christianity to be in∣fallibly true, cannot believe the parties to be infallible, as they are. And, what hath hee that desireth the Unity of the Church to do. but to aggravate that dif∣ficulty of attaining salvation, which the division thereof produceth? I do there∣fore grant, and challenge as for mine own Interest, that it is very difficult for unlearned Christians to discern the truth in those Controversies, about which a settled division is once formed, as now in the Western Church; At least upon so true and so clear grounds, as may assure them, that they make their choice up∣on no other interest than that of Gods truth. But I do not therefore yield to that which this difficulty, it seems, hath wrung from Vincentius Lerinensis, with whom agreeth the Opus imperfectum in Mat. as you have them quoted afore; That there is no means but Scripture to convince inveterate Heresies: The rea∣son whereof, the later of those authors renders; Because those Heresies have their Churches, their Pastors, and the succession of them, and their Communion, as well as Catholick Christians: For hee supposeth Pastors lawfully constituted to have fallen away to those Heresies. And truly, the case of this difficulty was put, when the Arian Faction had possessed so great a part of the Church, that S. Gregory Nazianzene, in the place afore quoted, acknowledges, that the true Church could not be judged by numbers; With whom S. Hilary, libro de Syno∣dis, agreeth. But if the same Nazianzene scorn them that value the Church by numbers, Liberius, in the place afore quoted out of Theodoret, revies it upon him, in saying, that the cause of the Faith could not suffer, though hee were alone.
For, not onely the Scriptures continue alwaies the same, but, though the present Church fail, it follows not, that the Tradition of the Whole Church must fail with it. So long as the original sense of the Whole Church may be evident, by the agreement thereof with the Scripture, wee may discern what is Catholick, without the sentence of the present Church: And, that which is not so to be discerned for Catholick, wee may presume, that our salvation requires us not to believe it. And therefore Vincentius and his fellow are so to be understood, that it is difficult indeed, to make evidence to private Christians, of Tradition contra∣ry to that which they see received by Heresies; (And therefore, that for the convicting of them in the truth, recourie is to be had to the Scriptures) But Vincentius, who, as I showed you, acknowledges evidence for Tradition, from written records of the Church, need not have said, that there is no means to convince inveterate Heresies, but the Scriptures. Be this difficulty then the evi∣dence, how much it concerns the salvation of all Christians, that the Unity of the Church be restored; That the choice of private Christians, in maters con∣cerning their salvation, be not put upon the sentencing of those disputes, the rea∣sons whereof they are not able to manage. For, being restored, upon agreement in those things, which, it is sufficient for all Christians to believe, it will neither be easie for private Christians, to frame to themselves opinions, destructive to their particular salvation, within that compasse, neither will their fall be impu∣table to the Church, but to themselves, if they do. But, neither shall this diffi∣culty be so great an inconvenience in our common Christianity, nor so insupe∣rable as it seems to those, that are loth to be too much troubled about the world to come. For, I never found that God pretendeth to give, or that it is reason hee should give those means, for attaining that truth by which wee must be saved, which it should not lye within the malice of man to render difficult, for them to compasse, whom they concern. I finde it abundantly enough for his unspeak∣able goodness, and exactly agreeable with those means whereby hee convicteth the world of the truth of Christianity, that hee give those whom it concerns, such means to discern the truth of things in debate, as, being duly applyed, are of themselves sufficient to create a resolution as certain, as the weight of the mater in debate shall require. And such I maintain the Scripture to be, contain∣ing the sense of it within those bounds, which the Rule of Faith, and the Lawes given the Church by our Lord and his Apostles do limit. For, what is more ob∣vious, than to discern, what the whole Body of the Church hath agreed in, what not, what is manifestly consequent to the same, what not? what is agreeable to the ground and end of those Lawes which the Church first received from our Lord and his Apostles, what not? Let prejudice cast what mists of difficulties it can, before the light which God hath given his Church, to discover the truth, hee that stands out of their way, shall discern, much more art used to obscure than to discern it. Neither is there any reason why it is so hard to make it dis∣cernable to all that are concerned, but the unreasonable prejudices, either of the force of humane authority in mater of Faith, and the extent of Tradition be∣yond the Rule of Faith, or, that the consent of the whole Church may as well come from Antichrist as from the Apostles. If the records of the Church were handled without these prejudices, lesse learning than this age shows in other ma∣ters, might serve to evidence the consent of  Church in more controversies than wee have, to those that would be content to rest in the Scripture expounded ac∣cording to the same. But, if the Church, that is, those that uave right in be∣half of the Church, being perswaded of a sacrilegious privilege of Infallibili∣ty, shall take upon them to determine truths in debate, to limit Lawes to the Church, without respect to this Rule, (which, if they respect, they manifestly renounce the privilege of their Infallibility) I mervail not that God suffers his people to be tried with such difficulties, whose sins I doubt deserve this tryal; But then I say further, that it is not the providence of God, (that is, the means which hee hath provided to resolve men in debates of Christianity) but it is the malice of man, that makes that means uneffectual, which God hath made suffi∣cient.
I must now answer an envious objection, that this resolution is not according to the positions of those, that professe the Reformation with us: To which I will speak as freely as to the rest, having profess'd my self utterly assoiled of all facti∣on and respect of mens persons, to way against the means of finding the truth, and, for that reason, devested even the Fathers of the Church, of all authority, which their merits from Christianity have purchased, to hear what their testimo∣nies argue in point of Historical truth. I say then first, that may saying no way prejudices the intent and interest of the Reformation, whatsoever insufficience it may charge the expressions of Reformers with. I know the worst that can be alleged in this point is, that Luther, in appealing from the Pope and Council called by him, to a Council that should judg meerly by the Scriptures, first fra∣med this Controversie between the Scriptures and the Church, which since hath been alwaies in debate; so that hee which will not be tried by the Scriptures a∣lone, plainly seems to quit the party, and give up the game. Who has this ima∣gination, though never to apparent, let mee desire him to go a little higher, to the first commencing of the plea about Indulgences. For, there can be nothing more manifest than this; That, when those that undertook that cause against Luther found, that the present practice of the Church could not be derived from any thing recorded in the Scripture, they were forced to betake themselves to the authority of the Church, not that which consisteth in testifying the faith once delivered, but in creating that which never was of force, untill the exercice of it. Here, let all the world judg, (for, I am confident, the case is so plain, that all the world may judg in it) whether Luther had any Interest to demand, that the Scripture alone should be heard, in opposition to the Tradition received from the beginning by the Church, tending (as I have said) to nothing, but to limit the meaning of the Scripture; Or, that his Interest required him to protest, that the truth for which hee stood, was not to be liable to the Sentence of the pre∣sent Church. And therefore, when, afterwards, hee appealed to a Council which should pronounce by the Scriptures alone, if this tend to exclude those means which are subordinate to the attaining of the meaning of the Scriptures; I do utterly deny, that it can be understood so to be meant, by any man that would not defeat his own enterprize: And therefore, that it must be understood, to ex∣clude onely the authority of the present Church, so farre as it proceeds not up∣on supposition of those grounds, whereupon the Church is to pronounce. For, what hinders the sentence of the Church to be infallible, not of it self alone, but as it proceeds upon those means, which, duely applied, produce a sentence that is infallible? And truly, were not his plea so to be understood, all his Fol∣lowers, Melancthan, Chemnitius, and others, who have written Volumes to show, how their profession agrees with that of the Catholick Church, should have taken pains to commit a very great inconsequence. For, as I have argued, that those who maintain the Infallibility of the present Church, do contradict themselves, whensoever they have recourse, either to the Scripture, or to any Re∣cords of the Church, to evidence the sense of the Scripture, in that, which, other∣wise, they professe, the authority of the Church alone infallibly to determine; So, those that will have the Scripture alone to determine all Controversies of Faith, and yet take the pains to bring evidence of the meaning thereof, from that which hath been received in the Church, may very well be said to take pains to contradict themselves. Some of our Scottish Presbyterians have observed, that the Church of England was reformed by those, that had more esteem of Me∣lancthon than of Calvin, and therefore affected a compliance with the ancient Church. And truly it is fit it should be thought, that they complied with him, because hee complied with the Catholick Church; for by that reason, they shall comply with the Church, if in any thing hee comply not with it. But it is a great deal too little for him to say, that will say the truth for the Church of Eng∣land. For it hath an Injunction, which ought still to have the force of a Law, that no interpretation of the Scripture be alleged, contrary to the consent of the Fathers; Which had it been observed, the innovations which I dispute a∣gainst could have had no pretense. If this be not enough, hee that
shall take pains to peruse, what Dr. Field hath writ hereupon, in his work of the Church, shall find, that which I say to be no novelty, either in the Church of England, of in the best learned Doctors beyond the Seas. And sure the Refor∣mation was not betrayed, when the B. of Sarum challenged all the Church of Rome at S. Pauls Crosse, to make good the points in difference, by the first DC years of the Church. Always it is easie for me to demonstrate, that this resolution; That the Scripture, holding the meaning of it by the Tradition of the Church, is the onely means to decide controversies of Faith; is neerer to the common terms, that the Scripture is the onely Rule of Faith, than to that Infallibility which is pretended for the Church of Rome; Having demonstrated, that, to de∣pend upon the Infallibility of the present, and the Tradition of the Catholick Church, are things inconsistent, whereas this cannot be inconsistent with that Scripture, which is no lesse delivered from age to age than Tradition is, though the one by writing, the other by word of mouth, and serving chiefly to deter∣mine the true meaning of it, when it comes in debate. And if prejudice and passion carry not men headlong to the ruine of that Christianity which they pro∣fess, it cannot seem an envious thing, to comply with the most learned of the Church of Rome, who acknowledge not yet any other Infallibility in the Church then I claime, rather than with the Socinians, the whole Interest of whose He∣resie consists, in being tryed by Scripture alone, without bringing the consent of the Church into consequence, and that, supposing all mater of Faith must be clear in the Scripture, to all them that consult with nothing but Scripture. But I cannot leave this point, till I have considered a singular conceit advan∣ced in Rushworthes Dialogues, for maintaining the Infallibility of the Church, upon a new account. The pretense of that Book is, to establish a certain ground of the choice of Religion, by the judgement of common sense; To which pur∣pose I pretend not to speak in this place, thinking it sufficient, if this whole work may inable them who are moved with it, duely to make that choice for themselves, and to show those that depend on them, how to do the like. But, in as much as no man will deny, the choice of Religion to be the choice of truth before falshood, in those particulars whereof the difference of Religion consists; It is manifest, that the means of discerning between true and false in mater of Faith, which I pretend, cannot stand with that which hee advanceth. It consists in two points; That the Scripture is not, and that Tradition is the certain means of deciding this truth. Which, if no more were said, will not amount to a contradiction against that which I resolve. For, hee that sayes, the Scrip∣ture is not the onely means, excluding that Tradition which determines the meaning of it, doth neither deny that Tradition is, nor say that the Scripture is the certain means of deciding this kind of truth. But the issue of his reasons will easily show, upon what termes the contradiction stands. Hee citeth, then, com∣mon sense to witnesse, that wee cannot rest certain, that wee have those Scrip∣tures which came, wee agree, by inspiration of God, by reason of the manifold changes, which, common sense makes appearance, must come to passe in tran∣scribing upon such a supposition as this; That, so many Columns as one Book contins, so many Copies, at least, are made every hundreth years, and in every Copy so many faults, at least, as words in one Column: Upon which account 15 or 16 times as many faults having been made in all copies, as there are words, it will be so much oddes, that wee have no true Scripture in any place; Abating onely for those faults, that may have fallen out to be the same in several copies. And, if Sixtus V Pope, causing 100 copies of the Vulgar Latine to be compared, found two thousand faults, supposing two thousand copies extant, (which may be supposed a hundred thousand in any Language) what will remain unquestion∣able? It is further alleged, that the Scripture is written in Languages now cea∣sed, (which some call Learned Languages, because men learn them, to know such Books as are written in them) the meaning whereof, not being subject to sense, dependeth upon such a guessing kind of skill, as is subject to mistake, as experience showes in commenting of all Authors: But especially the Hebrew, and that Greek in which wee have the Scriptures; That having originally no
vowels to determine the reading of it, wanting Conjunctions and Preposiaions to determine the signification of him that speaks, all the Language extant being contained in the Bible alone (the Jews Language differing so much as it does from it) the Language of the Prophets consisting of such dark Tropes and Figures, that no skill seems to determine what they mean: This, so copious, and by that means so various in the expressions of it (though wanting that variety of Conju∣gations by which the Hebrew and other Eastern Languages vary the sense) that, to determine the meaning of it, is more than any ordinary skill can compasse. Adde hereunto the manifold equivocations, incident to whatsoever is expressed by writing, more incident to the Scripture, as pretending to give us the sense of our Lords words (for example) not the very syllables; Adde the uncertainties which the multiplicity of Translations must needs produce; and all this must needs amount to this reckoning; That God never meant the Bible for the means to de∣cide controversies of Faith, the meaning whereof requires many principles which God alone can procure, because so indefinite. Which, the nature of the Book argueth no lesse, as I observed, being written in no method of a Law, or a Rule, nor having those decisions that are to oblige distinguished from mater of a farre diverse, and almost impertinent nature. Upon these premises it is inferred, as evi∣dent to common sense; that the Scripture produces no distinct resolution of con∣troversies, though, as infinitely usefull for instruction in virtue, so, tending to show the truth in maters of Faith in grosse: and being read, rather to know what is in it, than to judge by it; by the summary agreement of it with that which is held and practised, convincing where the truth is, and on which side, especially if wee content our selves with what is probable from it, expecting from Traditi∣on what is definite and certain. For, supposing so great a Congregation as the Church to take this for the ground of their Faith; that, nothing is to be believed, for revealed truth, but what they have received from hand to hand from the Apostles; it must be grant∣ed; First, that they had the same perswasion from the beginning; Because, having never declared to their successors, what are the particulars they are to receive, ei∣ther they had from the beginning this principle, to distinguish mater of faith from that which is not, or could never introduce it without grosse imposture: And besides, that, holding this perswasion, they could never admit any thing as re∣ceived from their Fore-fathers which was not so indeed; Because, whole Nati∣ons can never agree so to deceive, in a mater subject to sense, as to say, that they received this or that from their Fore-fathers, when they did not, the reason being the same in all ages since Christ, as in our own. For, the Christian Faith being so repeated, so inculcated by the preaching of the Apostles; how long soever wee suppose the remembrance of their doctrine to have remained certain in the Church, so long wee may inferre, that age which had this certain remem∣brance must convey it as certain, in a sensible distance of time, and, by the means of such distances, that it must needs come no lesse certain to us. Neither can any breach have been made upon the Faith, without contesting the common principle of Tradition in the first place: and secondly, the consequence and cor∣respondence which the Articles of Christianity have one with another, by means whereof, hee that questioneth one, must needs, by consequence, prejudice o∣thers. And, Religion being a bond, by observing which, people are perswaded they shall attain happinesse; the same motives to enter into this bond in general, the same grounds of embracing Christianity in particular remaining; how should wee imagine, any part of it should be either lost or changed, which necessarily must concurre to the effect of the whole? For, being dispersed, as from the be∣ginning it hath been, over so many Nations, whose authority can be a sufficient reason, to perswade them all, that which hee sayes to have been received from the Apostles, not that which they were possessed of afore? Who is able to move them with hopes and fears, answerable to those which wrought them to imbrace it, either to silence or to change it? And yet, so long as it can appear, that the contrary was received, so long time must the change require to prevaile, and so much more to leave the truth forgot, and yet subject to be evidenced by any Re∣cords
that may remain. So that there is no appearance, that the principles pro∣ducing such a change, should so long time prevail as those motives, that first evi∣denced the truth. And further, upon all this appearance in point of fact, it is argued à priori, and as it were in point of Right; That, God having provided so many possibilities to make the preservation of Christianity so easie, the effect must needs have followed, lest the means should have been provided in vain, if no effect should insue: All possibility being to no purpose when no effect fol∣lowes, and no effect but this answering the means that render it so possible. CHAP. XXXI. That the Scriptures which wee have are unquestionable. That mistakes in Copying are not considerable to the sense and effect of them. The meaning of the He∣brew and Greek, even of the Prophets, determinable, to the deciding of Contro∣versies. How Religion delivered by Tradition becomes subject to be corrupted. THis is the summe of this new account, which, to my understanding, main∣tains the Infallibility of the present Church, upon as high terms, as those that resolve the reason of their Faith into it; and yet, not upon any gift of Infal∣libility, intailed upon any visible act of any persons, however qualified on behalf of the Church; but upon a pretense of evidence made to common sense, that those who acknowledge Tradition, cannot receive any thing, not onely which they believe to be, but which is indeed inconsistent with it. Wherein I shall protest in the first place, that I have nothing to do with the terms of great error, or Christianity, so as to say here, that, either Christianity, which hee calleth Christs Law, or any part of it, either hath been, or may be renounced by them, that pretend to admit nothing as revealed truth, but what they believe was re∣ceived from the Apostles, and that so great an error as this may have crept into the Church. For, the present purpose being general, to try how any thing in debate may be tryed, whether agreeable to the Faith or not; I should count it a great impertinence, and the ruine of all that I design to infer, upon sufficient principles (which, I pretend, those which I reject, not to be) to be ingaged to show, how great any error may be, before I have a ground to inferre, whether it be an error or not. But, if I may proceed to settle such a ground, I shall make no doubt to convince all, that remain convict of the truth thereof, how great the error is which it convicteth. It shall therefore suffice mee, for the present, to state the opposition which I make to this pretense upon these termes; That the common sense of all Christians determineth, those who pretend to admit nothing as of Faith but what they receive from our Lord and his Apostles, to be subject neverthelesse, under that pretense, to receive things really inconsistent with it, and, which may be discerned so to be, by the means which wee have to decide such questions; The Scriptures interpreted by the Original and Catholick Tradition of the Church. The evidence of this position necessarily consists in that, which is to be said for Scripture and Tradition joyntly, as the onely suffici∣ent means to evidence Christian truths; that is to say, that, having showed, the arguments made against Scripture alone, and for Tradition alone, to be ineffect∣ual and void; That which remains for the truth will be this, that the Scripture, with Tradition to determine the meaning of it, do both together make a suffici∣ent means, to determine the truth of any thing questioned concerning Christia∣nity. I say then, in behalf of the Scripture, which this plea so undervalueth, as not to acknowledge any such thing, but in favour to them whom they dispute with; that it is a mervail to see, how the greater difference with common enemies is forgot, upon lesse quarrels among our selves. For, if there be any such men as Atheists, that deny the beginning of the world, and the marks of Gods provi∣dence, expressed in the government of it (as I would there were none) I de∣mand, how they could be more gratified, than by making it beleeved, that we are no more tied to beleeve Moses writings that we have to come from God,
than we please? For, if it be fifteen or sixteen to one, that the words which we have are not from God, what respect can oblige us to do more? And would Pagans and Idolaters think themselves lesse bound to us, if we could perswade them, that, whatsoever is pretended in Scripture, of a Covenant made by God with Abraham and his posterity, to acknowledge and worship him alone for the true God, may be denied, so farre, as by saying, that no man can say we have any Record of it? As for the Jews, what a favour were it to them, to quit them all that can be alleged against them out of Moses and the Prophets, by saying; That we cannot be assured that it is their writing? For, if it be said, that, what∣soever the Church hath interest to use against Atheists, Pagans and Jews, will be admitted upon Tradition, having renounced Scripture; can it be imagined, that, having granted, that the whole narration, upon which Christianity steppeth in, may have been counterfeited in writing, any man can undertake to show the truth of the same, unquestionable, by word of mouth? Surely it may well a∣stonish a man void of prejudice to see it so carefully alleged, how many ambi∣guities and equivocations necessarily fall out in expressing mens mindes by wri∣ting; never considering, that the same may fall out, in whatsoever is delivered by word of mouth, so much more uncureably, as a man writes upon more delibe∣ration than hee speaks: and, posterity can affirm with more confidence, that which is delivered by writing to have been said, than that which is onely so re∣ported. For, let common sense judg, by what is usually done by men, for the preserving of evidence concerning their estates, whether it be more effectual to have it in writing, or onely by word of mouth. For, whatsoever can be pretend∣ed to come by Tradition from the Apostles, must first have been delivered in the Ebrew language; (at least that language which they spake, and was so near the Ebrew of the Old Testament, that in the New Testament it is called by that name) Thence, being turned into Greek or Latine, it must have come after∣wards into the now vulgar languages of Christendom. Neither can any man i∣magine, how the profession of Christians should be conveyed by Tradition, and not by word of mouth. Where, though they that heard the Apostles certainly understood their meaning; (which there can be no question of, when the intent is, familiarly to teach it) yet, the terms wherein it was delivered not remaining upon record, as much difference may creep in, as there may be difference in se∣veral mens apprehensions, saving that which the communion of the Church de∣termineth, And will any common sense allow, that the meaning thereof shall be more certain than the words are? more certain, than the meaning of written words, which are certain, though obscure, and yet not without competent means, to bring the intent of them to light? But I must not preferr any thing of this nature before any thing wee have in the Scriptures, so long as both sides acknow∣ledg it. I demand then, whether the precept of the Law, which injoyned the Israelites to teach it their children, concerned the written Law or not. The Prophet David Psalm LXXVIII. 1-8. shewes the practice of it, and so do other passages of the Old Testament; and surely there can be no doubt made, that Moses himself did deliver and inculcate the sense of the precepts to his hearers: But will any common sense allow, that hee forgot his text, when hee expounded the meaning of it? Our Lord commands the Jews to search the Scriptures, hee remits Dives in the Parable to Moses and the Prophets. S. Paul presses, that all things that are written are written for our learning, that wee, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: That all Scripture in∣spired from God is profitable—and a great deal more to the same effect; and shall wee, open the mouth of Atheism with an answer, that this concerns not us, who no way stand convict, that wee have the words of Moses and the Pro∣phets, of our Lord and his Apostles? Let this therefore passe for a desperate at∣tempt, of making a breach, for Atheism, Heathenism, Judaism, to enter in, provided that the Reformation should have nothing to say against the Church of Rome. But, let it be demanded, whether any of those that writ for the Church against Heresies were masters of the common sense of men or not? And let it be demanded, when they alleged the Scriptures against them, whether they
thought the meaning of them determinable or not. It is true, Tertullian pre∣scribed against Hereticks that the Church was not tied to dispute with them out of the Scriptures, and certainly had just reason so to do; Because, though they admitted the Apostles to have Gods Spirit, yet they admitted not, that Spirit to have declared to them the bottom of the truth, as to themselves, and therefore made use of the Scriptures as the Alcoran doth; so farre onely, as they agreed with the Traditions of their own Masters, whom they supposed to have the fal∣nesse of the truth: Whereas it is manifest, that Christianity admits no dispute from the Scriptures, but from them, that acknowledg no gifts of Gods Spirit, that suppose not Christianity and the Scriptures. Therefore, those that disputed against the Heresies that grew up afterwards, and acknowledged no revelation, but that which had brought on Christianity, what did they dispute upon? For e∣vidently they neither had, nor used that prescription, which Tertullian insisted upon against his Hereticks. But, as Tertullian might, (though not bound to so much) use the Scriptures against such Hereticks, as well as against Jews and Infi∣dels; did they who succeeded onely use it against succeeding Heresies that own no further revelation than that which Scripture came with, not as necessity, but to show the advantage they had? for, this they must do, if nothing but proba∣bility is to be had from the Scriptures, but the peremptory truth, is, without Scripture, evident in the determination of the present Church, which was first visible in ejecting Hereticks? Certainly, such a breach upon common sense can∣not be admitted, as, for them that have evidence for the truth, to compromise it to a dispute of probabilities. Here therefore, I do appeal to the common sense of all men, that see, how all the disputes that have been made from the begin∣ning, for the Faith against Heresies, do consist of Scriptures drawn into conse∣quence against them, though in behalf of that which they professed to hold from the Apostles; whether all this pains was taken to show, what was probable, or what was true upon the evidence of the true sense of Scripture, falling within the compasse of that which they held from the Apostles. The ground then of that account, which pretends, that wee have no Scri∣pture, is very frivolous. For, if common sense be valued by the experience of those, that handle written Copies, not by the imagination of them that do not; the faults, which it is probable all Copies carry from their makers, cannot en∣danger the truth of the Scripture, but in that one case which hee alloweth to a∣bate his account, that is, when the same fault falls out in several Copies; which is a rare chance. For, where diverse Copies agree in the same fault, it behoveth, that there should be some occasion of committing the mistake, capable to induce several men into the same, the consent of whose Copies may in time create a doubt what is true. But, to imagine, that a fault committed at large by a Co∣pyer, which, it is so great odds, that none else shall fall into; (The truth being one, errors infinite) should indanger the true reading of any writing, is not to appeal to common sense, but to renounce it. For, neither in that one case, where, it is confest there may be danger, are wee left without cure; the conse∣quence of the sense, either alone, or with the help of some Copy, alwaies out∣waying the credit of Copies liable to so many mistakes. Hee that sees not what benefit all records of learning have received, even from negligent Copies, industriously handled, to the preservation of all records, may pretend ignorance in this point. But, for the Scriptures, as common sense bears, that there is more occasion of making faults than in other writings, because more multiplying of Copiesl so, common sense showing, that there is so much more means of correct∣ing them, the danger of changing the text is vanished. Which, if all this were not, common sense, that sees the present text of Scripture make a sense so reasonable, so agreeable, will as much scorn as a reasonable man will scorn to ad∣mit, that this beautifull order of the world comes from the casual interfering of atomes: For, is it not the same case, when it is said, that so constant sense arises from the contingence of errors? And therefore I mervail, that the va∣rieties of readings recorded in Sixtus V his Bible should be alleged to this pur∣pose; Which, though they are the records of errors, yet they are the argu∣ments
of truth; The true reading, by the credit of them, over-balancing all mistakes. And truly, hee that shall not up a just account, of the hinderance, which the variety of reading in the Scripture, gives the resolution of truth, shall finde three or four texts questionable for their reading, by the enemies of the Trinity; In other things, though diverse readings questionable, yet none of consequence to any point in debate: And those I speak of, so questionable, that that either they make no consEquence, there being evidence sufficient without them, or there remains evidence enough to waigh the true reading down. Now, the ceasing of the Languages, in which the Scripture was written, is indeed a difficulty to the attaining of the sense of them, as it is a difficulty to the attaining of the Language: But, either wee suppose the skill of the Lan∣guage attained when it is not, or, being attained, wee must suppose, that which wee have upon record in it, as well understood, (to wit, as to the Language) as men understand one another in their mother tongue. And therefore, the E∣brew and Greek have hard fortune, to lye under contrary charges: As to say, that the Ebrew is obscure because it is scarce, and the Greek is obscure because copious; and, the Scripture being written in the one and in the other, is there∣fore obscure. Certainly, those that spoke Ebrew, and those that spoke Greek had means, to understand one anothers meaning, or else those Languages were uselesse to the end of all Language: And, shall wee imagine, that they deter∣mine not the meaning of the speaker in writing, but when they are spoken, well and good? No. To them that know not the Language, there is no suffi∣cient mark to determine the meaning of what is said in it. It is no mervail: On Gods name, let them learn a little further, and they may discern the marks, whereby the force of signifying is stamped upon the Languages. And truly, the scarcenesse of that Language lies rather in the sloth of learners, (who save a great deal of pains, by perswading themselves, that they know that Language, when they have learned what is to be found in the Scriptures) than in want of words to expresse all conceits. It is an easie thing to imagine, that the writings of later Jewes are not good Ebrew, and indeed it may appear, that, after the Captivity, the Vulgar did not speak it. But, by the Traditions, whereby they determine the exercise, of Moses Law (which, the Jews of Palestine resident at Tiberias agreed to put in writing, about the Emperor Antoninus his time) it appears plain enough, that the Language was preserved alive among the Lear∣ned, and extends farr further, than that which is found onely in the Scripture, though with some little difference: Which, that excellent Master of humane learning Joseph d'Escale seems to mee, very properly to distinguish, by the names of the Ebrew and Jewish Languages; Because this difference may well seem to have begun, from the times of Esdras, when the Tribe of Judah, (with the apperrenances of it) with the recovery of their ancient inheritance, took upon them the study of their Law. And, I appeal to the common sense of all, that have found by reading, with what ease and property, that Language serves to ex∣press all the conceits of their Philosophers and Divines, how beggarly, how unable to determine the meaning of mans minde, wee are to account it. As for the Greek, be it never so defective in those expressions, which the variety of Conjugations in Eastern Languages do produce, hee that knows both the one and the other, shall finde the force of those expressions, signified by other means, in the Greek, and other Languages; Be it never so copious otherwise, hee that will husband his paines to the learning of the Scriptures, shall finde means enough to attain the meaning of them, without undertaking to overcome all that is written in that Language. As for the figurative speech that is used, espe∣cially by the Prophets, and other writings of a Poetical stile, (as the Psalms, Job, the Canticle, and the like, if you reckon them not among the Prophets) as it is not to be denyed, that the stile of them is obscure by that means, so, when wee see the meaning of them determined by the writings of the Apostles, wee must either grant, that means to be sufficient for that effect, or, that the Apo∣stles have alleged them upon no just ground, to no just purpose. Now, that our Lords and the Apostles words are set down in such expressions as the Evangelists
and S. Luke thought meetest; I suppose, hee that hath a due respect for them, will not think to be any argument, that hee who hath the meaning of the Pen-man, hath not the meaning of him that spoke. And if all these be difficulties to the attaining of the true meaning of the Scriptures, sure, the multiplicity of trans∣lations, (those especially, which are the most ancient) by those who understand them, is duely esteemed a help to that end, and not a hinderance. For, as the turning of them into so many Languages prevents all errors of Copiers, and assures the true reading, so, the comparing of the translations with the original (showing how it was understood anciently, by those who were better and nearer acquainted with the mater of them, than wee are, who must have it from them) makes up a commentary of the meaning of the same, and how farr it extends. I do therefore here appeal to the common sense of all them, that have been at charge, or at pains, to procure and compasse the Edition of all translations of the Bible, especially the ancient, in particular the Spanish, Anwerpe and Paris, (which, it is hoped, is now improved to the same purpose here at London) and do challenge all men to say, first, whether the designe be commendable or not, then, whether it can be commendable, if it contribute not to preserve the true reading, to determine the true meaning of the Scriptures. As for that, which, I conceive, I have sufficiently insisted upon, in behalf of the truth, that the writings of the Apostles presuppose a Rule of Faith, received by those to whom they addresse, together with certain Rules, limiting their communion in the service of God, upon supposition of that Rule; I am here to claim the effect of it, that the sense of the Scripture is to be limited to that, which common sense may discover, by the records of the Church, to have been the sense and intent of the same, But, that this should argue an intent in God, not to have given the Scriptures to determine debates that might arise a∣mong Christians concerning the common faith; and that, upon, onely the visi∣ble profession of the Church, all arguments to the contrary from the Scriptures, all clamors of conscience are to be silenced, without reconciling them to the primitive Faith and practice of the Church, (to which, it is evident, that, if the Church be not wanting to their duty, they are reconcileable) this is that which I must and do proclaim to be utterly brutish and unreasonable. And therefore, to proceed to the next point, I grant, and insist, that, nothing but that, which is received from our Lord Christ & his Apostles, can, by any means seem receivable to any Christian: But, whereas it may be received either by writing alone, or by word of mouth alone, or by both; I say, that the receiving of Christianity by word of mouth alone cannot be pretended, (the power of the Church to create articles of Faith, which was never heard of till the quarel with Luther was on foot, being excluded) but supposing it evident to common sense, that the act of the present Church, is the act of the Catholick Church from the A∣postles; Which, so farr as I know, was never heard of till Rushworths Dialog ues came forth. The Christianity, that was from the beginning received by word of mouth, consists in the profession, of believing a certain Rule of Faith, and un∣dertaking a certaine Rule of life, as the Law and condition, whereby all Christians hope to attain everlasting life. Besides, all Christians being, upon this profession, admitted to communicate with the Church in the service of God, aci∣cording to such Rules as determine the circumstances thereof, first brought in by the Apostles; These Rules may also be said to be received by word of mouth, because the practice of them holds by custome from age to age, though the expresse knowledg and profession of them is not the means to save particu∣lar Christians, further than it is the means, to maintain the service of God in the unity of his Church, which is the means of it. Here are then two heads of things received by word of mouth, which, hee that will speak expresly in this point must distinguish. And, according to this distinction I say, that, onely the Rule of Faith, which is the Law of attaining everlasting life, and the communi∣on of the Church, is delivered by word of mouth; though, when I say so I under∣stand, that the true intent and meaning thereof, and what it importeth to com∣mon sense, cannot be excluded. Besides which, there is, of necessity, infinite
mater of discourse, concerning things consequent, or impertinent, or repugnant to the same, some whereof, obtaining credit in some times and some parts of Christendom, comes, by tradition of word of mouth, neverthelesse, to other a∣ges and places, which therefore do truly bear the name of Tradition; Though not as delivered from the beginning by the Apostles, further then, as, by them the means is delivered, whereby it may appear, which of them is consequent, which of them repugnant, which of them impertinent to that which they have delivered indeed. As concerning the Laws of the Church, so certain and so ma∣nifest as it is, that there were Rules delivered by the Apostles, to have the force of Law, in directing the communion of Christians in the publick service of God, to the Unity of the Church; So certain and manifest is it; First, that the same Laws are not capable to regulate the communion of the Church in all e∣states of it, which the change of times should produce; And yet secondly, that, whatsoever should be changed, or taken away, or added to the same, ought to tend to the same intent, which, it is visible, those of the Apostles did purpose. Let any understanding, that is capable, but consider the difference that needs must arise, by the Secular Power undertaking the protection of Christianity, be∣tween the Church afore and the Church afterwards; If hee say, the same Laws will serve to maintain the communion of the Church in both estates, (supposing the society thereof to be the same, upon the premises) I shall then confesse, that it is to no purpose to appeal to any discourse of reason in this whole dis∣pute. I say further, that, among those who professe, that nothing ought to be received for revealed truth, but that which was first delivered by our Lord and his Apostles, nothing ought to have the force of Law, but that which tendeth to the same purpose, with that which they inacted; Nothing hindreth, things to be received into belief and practice, that are really, not onely impertinent to, but inconsistent with that which indeed they have delivered to us. The appeal is to common sense, therefore let discourse and experience satisfie common sense. Religion indeed is a bond, by the condition whereof wee perswade our selves of peace with God; of attaining the good and avoyding the ill, which be∣longs to those that are so or otherwise. And thus farre, it is certain, that Religi∣on is a thing bred in mans nature, which it is impossible for him to shake off or renounce. But is it impossible for him to become perswaded hereof upon un∣due terms? Whence then comes all false Religion, whether of Jews or Pa∣gans? For, we shall not need here to consider Mahumetanes, whose Religion supposeth Christianity, as the corruption of it. Surely, he that considers not amiss, will finde, that it was a great ease to them, that were convinced to acknowledg a God above them, to imagine the name and honor of this God to rest in some∣thing of their own choice, or devising; which being set up by themselves, reason would, they should hope to please, and have propitious, by such obedience and service as they could allow. Correspondently, God, having given the Jewes a Law of such precepts, as might be outwardly performed without inward obe∣dience; whosoever believe, the most difficult point of Gods service to be, the submission of the heart, will finde it a gain, that hee can perswade himself of Gods peace, without it, whatsoever trouble, whatsoever cost hee be at, for that perswasion, otherwise. If then there be in mans nature, a principle of Paganism and Judaism, notwithstanding that men cannot be at quiet, till, by imbracing a religion, they think they are at peace with God; Is it a strange thing, that they who have attained the truth of Christianity should entertain a perswasion of peace with God, upo terms, really inconsequent to, or inconsistent with the true intent of it? Surely, if wee reflect upon the motives of it, and the motives of them, it cannot seem strange. I have said, and it is manifest, that the nature of Christianity, though sufficient, yet were purposely provided not to be con∣straining, that the effect of them might be the trial of those dispositions, that should be moved therewith. And, is it a mervail, that, means to perswade those that have received Christianity, that things inconsistent with that which was first delivered, are indeed consequent to the same, should be left, among those that professe, that they ought to receive nothing, but what was first delivered by our
Lord and his Apostles? I say nothing now of renouncing Christianity, while men professe this; for, I confesse, and insist, that, while men do believe, that there is a society of men visible by the name of the Church, it will not be possible for them to forget their whole Christianity, or to imbrace the contrary of it. But I say, that, notwithstanding the profession of receiving Christianity from our Lord and his Apostles, the present Church may admit Lawes, (whether of be∣lief or of Communion) inconsistent with that which they received at first. I al∣lege further, that, so long as all parts of the Church held free intercourse and correspondence with one another, it was a thing either difficult, or altogether impossible, to bring such things, either into the perswasion or practice of all parts of it, according to the difficulty, of bringing so great a body to agree in any thing, against which any part might protest with effect. And this held, not onely before the Church was ingraffed into the State of the Romano Empire, but also, so long after, as this accessory help of Christianity did not obscure, and in the end extinguish the original intercourse and correspondence of the Church. For then, it grew both possible, and easie for them, who had the Secular Power on their side, to make that, which the authority thereof was imployed to main∣tain, to passe for Tradition in the Church: Seeing it is manifest, that, in the or∣dinary language of Church Writers, Tradition signifies no lesse, that which the Church delivers to succeeding ages, than that which it received from the A∣postles. Adde hereunto the opinion of the authority of the Church, truly pre∣tended originally, within the true bounds, but, by neglecting the due bounds of the truth of Christianity which it supposeth, infinitely extended to all States, wch, Powermay have interest to introduce. For, if it be not impossible to perswade those, who know they have received their Christianity upon motives provided by God, (to convince the judgments and consciences of all that see them, to im∣brace those things, to which the witnesse of them may be applyed) that they are to imbrace whatsoever, either the expresse act, or the silent practice of the Church inforces, whether the motives of Faith be applicable to them or not; Then is it not impossible to perswade them any thing, which this Power shall think to be for their Interest to perswade: For, no mans Interest it can be, to go about to perswade the world, that expresse contradictories are both true at once. And if it were not impossible, that the imaginations of most of them, that dispute Controversies for the Church of Rome, should be so imbroyled with the equivocation of this word Church, as not to distinguish the Infallible autho∣rity thereof, as a multitude of men, not to be deceived in testifying the truth, from the authority of it, as a Body constituted upon supposition of the same; Shall it not be easie for those, who can obtain a reputation of the World, that their act is to oblige the whole Church, to obtain of the same, to make no difference, between that which is presently decreed, and that which was originally delive∣red by the Apostles; The said difference remaining disputable, not onely by any text of Scripture, but by any record of historical truth, testifying the con∣trary to have passed for truth, in any other age or part of the Church. Upon these premises, I do appeal to the common sense of all men to judge, whether the Church, professing to hold nothing but by Tradition from the Apo∣stles, may not be induced to admit that, as received from the Apostles, which indeed never was delivered by the Apostles. For, when the Socinians pretend, that the Faith of the Trinity, of the Incarnation and Satisfaction of our Lord Christ, not being delivered by the Apostles in their writings, crept into the Church as soon as they were dead, they still maintain, that nothing is to be ad∣mitted, but what comes from our Lord and his Apostles; But, upon their sup∣position, that Antichrist came into the Church as soon as they were dead, are ob∣liged to renounce all that can be pretended to come by Tradition, and in that very next age. Which, I yield and insist, that, whosoever shall consider the in∣tercourse and correspondence visibly establisht by the Apostles, between all parts of the Church, shall easily perceive to be a contradiction to common sense. But, when so much difference is visible, between the State of the Church in several ages, and, what change hath succeeded in things manifest, to inferre
what may have succeeded in things disputable; Hee must have his minde well and thoroughly possessed with prejudice, to the utter renouncing of common sense, that can indure, a demand so contrary to all appearance, to be imposed upon his common sense. The same I say to the other demands, of certain and sensible distances of time, which, they that see the end of may be certainly as∣sured, what was received at the beginning of them, and so, by mean distances, this age, what was held by the Apostles; Of the like time, for blotting out the remembrance of the truth, as for introducing falshood. For it is evidently true, that the motives of Christianity could never have prevailed to introduce it into the belief and profession of all Christendom, had they not been true; But it followeth not therefore, that, Christianity beeing settled, and a Power to con∣clude the Church lawfully vested in some members of it, in behalf of the whole, within due bounds; The act of this Power transgressing the due bounds, shall not be able to produce, in so great a Body, an opinion of the like obliga∣tion, upon the expresse act of this Power, as upon Tradition truly derived from the Apostles. For, the truth of Christianity professed, called in question mens lives and fortunes, which they were not therefore so ready to ingage, upon an imposture. But, if when Soveraigns own the act of that Power which conclu∣deth the Church, hee that acknowledges it not, calls in question his estate and reputation, or whatsoever good of this world the protection of the Church in∣gageth. Upon this account, then, it is possible that innovation should come into the Church, without calling in question the common principle, that no∣thing is to be admitted which comes not from the Apostles. Nay, without cal∣ling in question other points of Christianity, so received; Because no∣thing hinders, things inconsistent with, or at least impertinent to that which the Apostles have delivered, to be received, as consequent to that, which indeed they have delivered, though not as expresly contained in the same. And, because I would not speak without instance, in a businesse so general, I demand of those that hold this opinion, whether they believe, that the Greek and Latine Church, at such time as the Schism fell out between them, did both believe Tradition as well as Scripture: And, when it appears, that there was no visible difference between them in that regard, at that time, I shall desire them to tell mee, what they think of their demand, that all Sectaries have alwayes left Tradition, to betake themselves to Scripture alone. For, though I pretend not to suppose ei∣ther the one party or the other guilty of Schism or Heresie in this place; yet I pretend it visible to common sense, that they who pretend to receive nothing but from the Apostles, may think that which is not, to be received from the Apostles, unlesse contradictories may be both true at once. Another instance I will give that learned Gentleman Tho. White, who professeth to put Rushworths Dialogues into the world as his ward, and an Orfane, out of the book which hee hath published of the mean state of souls between death and the general Judg∣ment, to show; that there is a Tradition of the Church, that the greatest part of the souls of Christians that are not damned, continue in a state of joy or grief, proportionable to the affection they had to this world while they were of it, to be purged thereof at the general Judgment, but are not translated, by any pray∣ers of the Church, to the kingdom of heaven from Purgatory pains. For, I de∣mand of him that believes this, whether it be received now or not, how hee will defend his Ward, that maintains the present Tradition to be alwaies the same. For, if it be said, that it is not decreed by the Church, though generally believed and practiced accordingly; I will say that my businesse is done, when the most votes, by so many degrees, are consenting to that, which, hee maintains, is con∣trary to the Tradition of the Apostles, his vote, and perhaps two or three more in the communion of the Church of Rome, not hindring that which is received in practice, to be a more effectual Law in force, than abundance of things in∣acted in writing that will never come to effect. A third instance I will give, in the difference between the Reformation and the Church of Rome, concerning the Canon of Scripture; Supposing, that the late Scholastical History thereof hath made evidence, that those books belonging to the Old Testament, which
the Council of Trent maketh Canonical Scripture, were never received for such from the Apostles: In as much as it is evident, that there were, in all ages of the Church, that did not take them for Canonical Scripture. For, this being suppo∣sed, what question can remain, that this decree cannot be taken to proceed from Tradition of the Apostles; But from a mistake in the Power of the Church, as grounded upon a gift of infallibility, tyed by God upon the visible act of per∣sons inabled to decree in Council? Otherwise, men of reason would not have taken upon them, to make that Canonical Scripture, which, there is evidence, that they never received for Canonical Scripture. And indeed, I, who have no more to demand here, but, that, something may be thought, by the Church, to come from the Apostles, which, in truth, it never received from the Apostles, do seek no more by the premises but this; That no general presumption, from the present Church, be receivable against evidence of historical truth, in the records of by-past ages: That men will not take that, for the Tradition of the Catho∣lick Church, which some part of the Church, they see, hath not owned for such: That they will abate of the generality of their position, as the particulars, out of which the induction must rise, may require. I take not upon mee to say here, that any foundation of Faith, necessary to the salvation of all, hath been, or can have been extinguished by Tradition of the present Church. But I say here, that something may be taken by the present Church to come from the Apostles, which, in truth, comes not from the Apostles. And, so long as that is true, I say, that the choice of Religion cannot be prejudged by common sense, without taking into consideration the weight of those truths which may appear to be held otherwise by the present Church then, originally, they have been received from the Apostles. Now, to that which is said, that, unlesse Christianity continue as it was deli∣vered, the possibilities provided by God to that end will be in vaine; Though it be a dispute as unseasonable here, as to little purpose, yet, because it requires no more than common sense to judge; I say, that the ends of Gods creatures and works are none of Gods ends. My meaning is, that it is one thing to say, God would have this to be the end of his creature; (happinesse, for example, to be the end of man) another thing to say, that hee made man to bring him to happinesse: The difference being the same in the works of his providence, whether it be said, that hee provided such means, as, of their nature tended to propagate the truth of Christianity preached by the Apostles to all posterity; or, that hee intended thereby to propagate the same: In a word, whether it be said to be Gods end, or the end of his works. And truly, hee that sayes it was Gods end, consequently sayes, that God falls short of his end, if it come not to passe. But hee that will speak of God with reverence, must not imagine, that hee hath any end but himself, nor, that hee doth any thing to any other end, than to exercise and declare his own perfecti∣ons. If hee do sundry things, which, of their nature have necessarily such an end as they attain not; it is to be said, that Gods end never fails, in so much as, by failing of the end to which they were made, they become the subject of some other part of that providence, wherein his perfections are exercised and decla∣red. Seeing then, that all Controversies concerning the Faith, have visibly their original from some passages of Scripture, which, being presupposed true before the foundation of the Church, ought to be acknowledged, but cannot be consti∣tuted by it; And seeing that no man, that, out of the conscience of a Christi∣an hath imbraced all that is written, can deny that, which hee may have cause to believe, to be the sense of the least part of the Scripture, without ground to take away that belief; It remains, that the way to abate Controversies, is, to rest content with the means that God hath left us, to determine the sense of the Scripture, not undertaking to tye men further to it, than the applying of those means will inferre. And truly, to imagine, that the authority of the Church, or the dictate of Gods Spirit, should satisfie doubts of that nature, without show∣ing the means by which other records of learning are understood, and so resol∣ving those doubts which the Scriptures necessarily raise, in all them that believe
them to be true, and the word of God; is more than huge cart-loads of Com∣mentaries upon the Scriptures have have been able to do. Which, being written, upon supposition of certain determinations pretended by the Church, or certain po∣sitions, which, tending to reform abuses in the Church, were taken for testified by Gods Spirit; have produced no effect, but an utter despair of coming to re∣solution, or, at least, acknowledgment of resolution, in the sense of the Scri∣ptures. Whereas, let men capable of understanding, and, managing the means heretofore mentioned, think themselves free, as indeed they ought to be, of all prejudices, which the partialities on foot in the Church may have prepossessed them with, and come to determine the meaning thereof, by the means so pre∣scribed, and, within those bounds which the consent of the Church acknow∣ledges; They shall no sooner discern, how the primitive Christianity, which we have from the Apostles, becomes propagated to us, but they shall no less clearly discern the same in their writings. And, if God have so great a blessing for Chri∣stendom, as the grace to look upon what hath been written with this freedom; there hath been so much of the meaning of the Scripture already discovered, by those that have laid aside such prejudices, and so much of it is in the way to be discovered every day, if the means be pursued, as, is well to be hoped, will, and may make partizans, think upon the reason they have, to maintain partialities in the Church. If God have not this blessing in store for Christendom, it re∣mains, that, without or against all satisfaction of conscience, concerning the truth of contrary pretenses, men give themselves up to follow and professe that, which, the protection of secular Power, shall show them means to live and thrive by. In which condition, whether there be more of Atheism or of Christianity, I leave to him, who alone sees all mens hearts, to judge. CHAP. XXXIV. The Dispute concerning the Canon of Scripture, and the translations thereof, in two Questions. There can be no Tradition for those books that were written since Prophesie ceased. Wherein the excellence of them above other books lies. The chief objections against them are questionable. In those parcels of the New Testament that have been questioned, the case is not the same. The sense of the Church. HAving thus resolved the main point in doubt, it cannot be denied notwith∣standing, that there are some parts, or appertenances, of the Question, that remain as yet undecided. For, as long as it is onely said, that the Scripture, interpreted by the consent of the Church, is a sufficient mean to determine any thing controverted in mater of Christian truth, there is nothing said, till it ap∣pear, what these Scriptures are, and in what records they are contained. And truly it is plain, that there remains a controversie, concerning the credit of some part of those writings, which have been indifferently copied and printed for the Old Testament, commonly marked in our English Bibles, by the title of Apo∣crypha; And no lesse, concerning the credit of the Copies wherein they are re∣corded. For, though it is certain and evident, that the Old Testament hath been derived from the Ebrew, the New from the Greek, in which at first they were de∣livered to the Church; Yet, seeing it appeareth not of it self impossible, (such changes may have succeeded in the Copies) that the Copies, which the Jews now use, of the Old Testament, are further from that which was first delivered, than the Vulgar Latine, as also the Copies of the Greek Testament now extant; It is a very plain case, that, this doubt remaining, it is not yet resolved, what are the principles, what the means to determine the truth in maters questionable concerning Christianity. I must further distinguish two questions that may be made in both these points, before I go further: For, it is evidently one thing to demand, whether those writings, which, I said, remain questionable, are to be counted part of the Old Testament or not; Another, whether they are to be read by Christians, either for particular information, or for publick edification at the assemblies of the Church. And likewise, as concerning the other point, it is one thing to demand, what Copy is to be held for authentick, another thing
to dispute, how every Copy is to be used and frequented in the Church; To wit, whether translations in mother languages are to be had, and into what cre∣dit they are to be received. For, it is manifest, that the one sense of both questi∣ons demands, what the body of the Church either may do, or ought to do, in proposing or prohibiting the said writings or Copies, to be used by the members thereof, for their edification in Christian piety; But the other, what credit they have in themselves, upon such grounds, as are, in nature and reason, more ancient than the authority of the Church, and which, the being and constitution there∣of presupposeth. And, as manifest as it is, that these are two questions, so ma∣nifest must it needs remain, that the one of them, to wit, that which concerns the authority of the Church, and the effect of it, does not belong to this place, nor come to be decided, but upon supposition, of all the means God hath given his Church, to be resolved of any truth that becomes questionable. As for the other part of both questions, though it hath been, and may be, among them that will not understand the difference between principles and conclusions, (because it is for their turn, that differences in religion should be everlasting) the subject of great Volumes written for and again; Ye, to them that are content to set aside that which cannot here be decided, I am confident, there remains so little to be said, that the resolution of them will appear to be meer consectaries and inferences from that truth, which hitherto hath been premised. For, supposing that which common sense is able to inform, that the writings which wee call A∣pocrypha, are more ancient than the Church of Christ; And that, whether they were written by inspiration from God, as wee believe the Law and the Pro∣phs to have been, the Church never had any expresse revelation, beside the cre∣dit upon which it received them from the Synagogue; it remains, that, whether they were received by the Synagogue as inspired by God, is all that can remain questionable; Seeing it is not within the compasse of common sense to imagine, that, being not inspired by God at the beginning, when they were penned, they can become inspired by God, by virtue of any act of the Church, inducing them to be received for such. Here then is to be seen the use of that distinction, which was made, between the Church, as a Society of men, visible to common sense, and the same Church, as a Society of men founded by God, and visible onely to the faith of Christians. For, the belief of this later, presupposes the truth of Christianity, the motives whereof, without more ado, must evidence the truth of the Scriptures: And so this question must be decided by such means, as are more evident than the being of the Church in this later sense, to wit, by the being thereof in the former sense. And this is that which I said, that the testimony of the Synagogue, in maters of this nature, is, every whit, of as much force, as the testimony of the Church; Both of them proceeding upon the same evidence, which, the visible consent of such a company of men advanceth to common sense. In fine, if it may appear, that the writings in question, were, from the beginning, admitted by the Synagogue in the nature of writings inspired by God, there will remain no cause why they should not be received into the same credit with other wri∣tings, whereof the Old and New Testament consisteth; If it may appear to the contrary, it will be utterly in vain to allege any act of the Church, to inforce that, which is, as evidently beyond the Power of the Church, as it is evident that there is such a thing as the Church. Neither can there be any question, whether these writings were ever received by the Synagogue, in this nature, see∣ing it is evident, that they do not receive any Prophets after Malachi. I will not undertake, that they do not believe, that any body, after that time was in∣spired by God to foretell things to come; For, that is not all that belongs to those, whose writings are to be received as inspired by God. It must appear further, that they are sent by God to his people, with commission to declare his will to them; There must be evidence, that they are moved to speak by the Holy Ghost, and by consequence, the people of God, to whom they are moved to speak, obliged to receive them: How else should the gifts of Gods Spirit, and the commission upon which they that have it are sent, challenge, of duty, the
acknowledgment of Gods people? I reade in Josephus, of divers things, fore∣told with truth, after this time, nor I do I finde my self obliged to maintain, that the motions were not from God. But, in as much as they were not furni∣shed with such means as God appoints, to manifest unto his people, whom hee sends on his message, they are not to receive them as sent from God; whatsoe∣ver his secret purpose may be, in sending such motions; but shall alwaies remain obliged, to govern themselves according to his will otherwise declared. Now, there is nothing more manifest, than the declaration of Josephus, intending to acquaint the Gentiles with the Faith and Laws of the Jews; That, untill the time of Artaxerxes that succeeded Xerxes, (being, in his opinion, the time whereof I speak) the Prophets had written the relation of their own times: But after that time, things were written indeed, but not with the like credit, be∣cause there was no succession of Prophets. Cont. Ap. I. And what can be more agreeable to the conclusion of the Prophet Malachi, IV. 4—where, having war∣ned them to give heed to the Law of Moses, the Statutes and Ordinances which God by him had given Israel; Behold, saith hee, I send you Elias the Prophet, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come, and hee shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and of the children to the Fathers, least I come and smite the Land with a curse: Which, the Gospell tell us, was fulfilled, in send∣ing John the Baptist, to make way for the Christ, the Chief, and end of all the Prophets, Luke I. 17. Mat. XI. 14. XVII. 12. according to the saying of the ancient Jews, that the Christ is to be annointed, that is, solemnly invested in his Office, by Elias. And for this reason, when Judas Maccabeus purged the Temple, and the question was, what should be done with the stones of the Al∣tar that had been polluted, it is said 1 Mac. IV. 46. And they laid up the stones in a fit place, in the Mount of the Temple, untill a Prophet should come and give answer concerning them. And, speaking of the persecution after the death of Ju∣das, it is said, 1 Mac. IX. 27. And there fell out so great tribulation in Israel, as had not been, from the day that no Prophet had been seen in Israel. And this time it is, whereof it is either said, or prophesied; Psal. LXXIV. 10. Wee see not our to∣kens, there is no Prophet any more, neither any that understandeth any thing. Now it is manifest, that, in the Scriptures, as well as in the Jews writings, the name of Prophet is not understood onely of foretelling things to come, but of utte∣ring things unknown to humane understanding. And so, the Law and the Pro∣phets contains all the Scriptures of the Old Testament. If therefore there were no Prophesie from those times to the coming of our Lord, and John the Baptist, it followeth, that there is no Scripture inspired by God left us by those times, according to the words of Eusebius in his Chronicle at the XXXII year of this Artaxerxes; Hucusque Hebraeorum divinae Scripturae, annales temporum continent. Hither to the divine Scriptures of the Hebrews contain the annals of the times. And the Synagogue in S. Jerome, in Es. cap. XLIX. lib. XIII. Post Aggaeum, & Zachariam, & Malachiam, nullos alios Prophetas usque ad Joannem Baptistam videram. From Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy to John the Baptist, I had seen no other Prophets. And so S. Austine de Civ. Dei XVII. 24. Toto ille tempore ex quo redierunt de Babyloniâ, post Malachiam, Aggaeum, & Zachariam, qui tunc prophetaeverunt, & Esdram, non habuerunt Prophetas usque ad Salvatoris adven∣tum. All that time from their return from Babylonia, after Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy, who then prophesied, and Esdras, they had no Prophets till the Savi∣ors coming: Excepting those whom wee finde mentioned in the Gospels. And truly it is manifest by historical truth, that there was a part of that Nation, that gave themselves to use the Greek Language in there dispersions, whereas, those that returned into the Land of Promise, as well as those that remained in Baby∣lonia, had learned the language of that Countrey, being very near their own, which was retained onely amongst the book-learned. Seeing then, that it is manifest, that these books were committed to writing in the Greek, for the most part at least, it cannot in reason be imagined, that the whole Nation acknow∣ledged them, as Scriptures inspired by God must have been acknowledged; which, no man can say, that ever they came generally to be used by the whole
Nation, or could come to be used, being onely in Greek. Wee shall not finde much of them translated, for the use of them that conversed in the Ebrew, un∣lesse it be Tobit. For, Ecclesiasticus, it is true, was first written in Ebrew, and but translated into Greek; When the Old Testament was translated into Greek, then, and among them that used it, were they added to the writings of the Prophets, and so received by the Church, that received those Scriptures from them in Greek, in the same nature, and upon the like credit, as it was visible they held them, from the time that first they were received. It is now no mervail, to see some men, upon the truth of these reasons, quite renounce all the advantage which Christianity hath, by the witnesse, which these writings, being impartial, as uttered before it came into the world, do render it; because they are unduely advanced by others, to the rank of those that are inspired by God. For, the spirit of contradiction naturally carries weak men, to oversee, to destroy their own Interest, so they may be farr enough from those whom they desire to bear down. So, wee are content to yield the Socinians all the advantage, which the consent of the Church gives us against them, upon condition, that the differences wee have with the Church of Rome, may be de∣cided by Scripture alone; And so are wee content to betray the Church, to fight, without the armes that are to be had out of these books, that wee may be free of them, when they seem to crosse some prejudice, wherein wee have inga∣ged our selves. But, if that which hath been said, of the fulfilling of the Pro∣phets in the literal sense, at this time, between the return from Captivity, and the coming of our Lord, be not premised amisse; Without doubt, all the world could not recompense the losse of the books of Maccabees, and the use of them; to the understanding of the Prophets, so inestimable is the benefit of them to that purpose. And truly, I should not stick to the reasons which I have premi∣sed, if I should not observe here, that, when that people began to be persecu∣ted for their Religion, by the Gentiles, it pleased God so to order the mater, that, for their comfort, and resolution in adhering to it, the truth of the Resurrecti∣on, and Judgment, and the World to come, should be openly and clearly recei∣ved and professed; which, though never questioned, yet had been sparingly and darkly preached by the Prophets themselves. Wee see it in the exhortations of the mother of the Maccabees to her children, 2 Mac. VII. 23. 29. and in their own protestations; according to the words of the Apostle, Heb. XI. 35, 36. that they suffered in consideration of the world to come. And, it is as well to be seen in those visions, whereby the Resurrection is figured out to the Prophets Daniel and Ezekiel. (for in their time began the persecution of Gods people) And, as in their time those revelations were granted, so, by their doctrine, and the doctrine of the Prophets their successors, were the people of God fortified against Apostasy, by the assurance of the resurrection and the world to come. And by this means also, and upon this ground, that inward and spiritual obedi∣ence, which the mystical intent of the Law requireth, in order to everlasting life, is so clearly and so plentifully expressed in those moral writings, of the Wisedom of Solomon, and Ecclesiasticus; that it is a great mervail, to see those, who are so eager to perswade Christian poople, to be informed in the Law of Moses and the Prophets, (though many times, not knowing the reason upon which the obligation of the Law ceaseth, they are not onely scandalized thereby with Jewish opinions, but lost, and seduced to be circumcised) so violent to pro∣hibite them the information, which, from hence, they may have in their Christianity. For, so sure as the Apostle, in the eleventh to the Ebrews, shows, that all the Fathers were saved upon the same terms as Christians are; so sure as the Fathers of the Church, as I have elsewhere alleged, convince the Jews; that the Fathers before the Law were saved as Christians, and not as Jews, so sure an advaatage hath Christianity, fro all that is written before it came in force. Whether, because it could not have been received by the Synagogue, had it con∣tained things contrary to that rule of piety, and means of salvation, which, in the Synagogue, (within which, it is acknowledged on all sides, that, means of salvation was found) was in force; Or whether, because, being written by the
immediate successors of the Prophets, they had, as it were, the sound of that doctrine still in their ears, which they had received from them by word of mouth. For, hee that would make a question, that the doctrine of the world to come, is more plentifully and clearly delivered in these writings, than in the Scriptures of the Old Testament inspired by God; And, by consequence, that inward and spiritual obedience, which becomes due in order to the same, more plentifully here described; hath no more to do, but to turn over the books, and compare them, which will not fail to justifie what I affirm. As for the book of Judith, (though perhaps, ignorant people may scandalize themselves at it) yet I shall professe to think it no disparagement to the credit, or to the right and due use thereof, if the conceit which Grotius hath published, and confirmed by several circumstances, observed in the tenor of the book, should hold, both in it, and in the book of Tobit: To wit, that it was not written for a history, nor requireth historical faith, that such a thing was ever done, but as an allegory, or figure, de∣scribed by way of Romance, to expresse the malice of Satan under the shadow of Nebuchadnesar against Jewry, signified by Judith a widow and fair, exerci∣sed by his Deputy Holofernes, in the person of Antiochus Epiphanes, but trusting in God for deliverance; The rest serving to fill up the relation. I will not say so much of the book of Tobit, because it is so farr from creating any difficulty in point of time, that it helps very much to dissolve those difficulties which are made otherwise. But this I will confidently say, that, supposing it to be a meer parable, relating what hapned to a true Israelite in whom was no guile, continuing faithfull to God and to his people, in a difficult time of persecution; it will be of no lesse consequence, to the animating of Christians in the like course, then, supposing the thing related to have come to pass. As for the History of Susanna, what pains Origen hath taken to perswade the learned Julius Afri∣canus, (for to him, as wee learn by S. Jerome in Catalogo, his leter of this sub∣ject is directed) that it is a true story, every man that will take the pains to per∣use that leter may see. Some say, that the Jews have the same story, differing in the relation of it, in that they make the two Elders to be punished by Nebu∣cadnezar, not by their own people. And, though Origen is witnesse that the Jews had the Power of the Sword sometimes in their dispersions; Yet under the Chaldeans, when they were lately transplanted, it is like enough they had it not. For these two Elders, the Jews, they will have to be Ahab and Co∣laiah, of whom you reade Jer. XXIX. 21. And truly there is appearance, that this relation, being delivered from hand to hand among the Jews, was at length penned by some of them that used the Greek, and so added to the Greek Bible; For, you have in the Great Bible, two several Editions of it in the Syriack, much differing one from the other in litle circumstances; Though one of them gives the two Elders other names than the Jews do. Which, as it will not allow the Writing to be inspired by God, so will it inforce as much edification from it, not detracting from the truth of it. For what doth it detract, that hee that writ it useth an allusion from the names of Trees under which they accuse her to have committed uncleannesse, which the Greek onely bears? Daniel answering to him that saw her under a Holm tree, in Greek , to him that said, under a Mastick tree, ; This is indeed an argument, that hee who penned it in Greek, was willing to bring in a figure, to set forth a conceit, which the Ebrew would not bear, (for Origen cannot perswade mee, that there can have been those names for these trees in the Ebrew, though now un∣known to us, vvhich hold the same allusion; a chance of ten thousand to one) but is the writing of ever the lesse effect and consequence, to the incouraging, and vvarning of Gods people to vvalk in his Lavv? I vvill here adde the considera∣tion of that, vvhich, I observe to be common to many of them, and, in my o∣pinion serves to shovv, hovv much there is in them of the sense of the Nevv Te∣stament, and of the doctrine of our Lord and his Apostles. This consideration rises thus. S. Jerome in his Preface to the Books of Solomon saith, that some an∣cient Church Writers ascribe the Book of Wisedom to Philo the Jevv: Not meaning, (as hee expresly addeth) that Philo that lived under Caligula, vvhose
works wee have, but another that lived under Onias the High Priest. Therefore, whatsoever may have been said since S. Jerome, of the author of this book, can∣not make it to be of the age of Caligula. S. Augustine de Civ. Dei XVII. 20. saith, that Ecclesiasticus and it both have been ascribed to Solomon (as S. Jerome also in Dan. IX. saith, that Ecclesiasticus was then called Solomons Wisedome) propter nonnullam eloquii similitudinem: Because there is some resemblance between the frame of Solomons stile and that which they use. Which as it is most true, so is it manifest, that there is no maner of resemblance between the stile of them, and of our Philo. As for the mater of the work, the addresse which hee ma∣keth to the Kings and Princes and Judges of the earth, I. a. VI. 1, 2-10, 22. ma∣nifesteth, that it is intended for an exhortation to the Gentiles, under whose power Gods people was, not to persecute them for serving the onely true God, but rather, to learn the knowledg and worship of him themselves. This is the occasion of setting forth the Wisedom of God, from whence the Law, (in which the wisedom of the Nation consisted, according to Moses Deut. IV. 6, 7.) came, and which dwelt afterwards, as in Solomon, so in the rest of the Prophets and Patriarchs from Adam downwards, as you may see, from that sixth Chapter, in the processe of the Book. This is the intent of that which is said, concern∣ing the wisedom of that people coming from God, in the Book of Baruch III. 12-38. For, intending to exhort them, to stick fast to God, and not to fall a∣way to the Idols of the Nations, in the Captivity, as the Prophets Esay and Je∣remy had done, (which is the cause, why it is ascribed to Baruch) hee puts them in minde, that it was none but God, that could discover that way of wisedom, which the Law taught Israel; Which wisedom, saith hee, afterwards was seen on earth, and conversed among men: For so I construe the words, not to mean, that God was seen on earth and conversed among men (not because it is not true, but because it is not so plainly said in the writings of the Prophets) but the wisedom of God was seen on earth, and conversed among men; to wit, in the Prophets who spoke by the word and wisedom of God. In like maner, when the three Squires of the Body to King Darius undertook to plead, what is of most force; the third, having named women to be the strongest, addeth, that Truth prevaileth over all; Meaning, that the truth which God, by his Law, had declared to his people, should prevail over all that is strong in this world; And so incouraging the King, to pro∣tect it, by countenancing the building of the Temple: As you may see in the third of Esdras II. III. 34-40. Which, I suppose here, to be a piece that comes from the Egyptian Jews, being first read in the Greek Bible, and not in any record of the Jews otherwise. Finally, Ecclesiasticus, commending the Wisedom which hee pretendeth to teach, and, for the mater of his commenda∣tion, having recourse to the original of it, descants indeed upon Solomons plain song, in the VIIIth and IXth of the Poverbs, (and therefore delivers no new re∣velations, but the right intent of that Prophets doctrine) but recommends the Wisedom of his Nation, farr beyond all that can be said of any Wisedom of the Gentiles, as coming from that Wisedom, by which God made the world, and governs it ever since, Ecclesiasticus I. XXIV. from which also the Law and the Prophets came. Now Ecclesiasticus, though first penned in Ebrew, yet was translated into Greek in Aegypt, as the Prefice witnesses. Supposing then, the interest of Christianity against Judaism to consist in that which the Fathers of the Church do plead; That the same Word and Wisedom of God, which first dealt with the Patriarchs, which gave the Law to Moses, and afterwards spoke by the Prophets, in after time dwelt in our Lord Christ Jesus and delivered the Go∣spel; I demand, what could have been said, more to the purpose of Christianity against Judaism, by those that lived under Moses Law? There is a question, whether the Apostles, S. Paul, and whosoever it was that writ the Epistle to the Ebrews, do allege these Books, and allow them for their Authors, when they call our Lord Christ the Image of God, 2 Cor. II. 4. the Image of the invisible God, Col. I. 15. the resplendence of the glory of God, and the express image of his substance. Ebr. I. 3. the Power of God and the Wisedom of God, 1 Cor. I. 24. When they say, that all things in heaven and earth were created by him, and to
him, and subsist through him, as the first-born of the whole creature, Col. I. 16, 17. that the world was made by him, and, that hee sustaineth and moveth all things by his powerfull word, Ebr. I. 2, 3. For, how like are these things to those which wee reade in Ecclesiasticus I. 1, 4. All wisedom cometh from the Lord, and is with him for everlasting. Wisedom was made before all things, and the understanding of prudence from everlasting. And XXIV. 14. . Before the world, from the beginning hee made mee, and for ever I fail not; Having said, in the beginning of the Chapter, according to the Latine Copy; Ego ex ore Altissimi prodivi, primogenita ante omnem creaturam. I came forth of the mouth of the most High, the first born before every creature. And again, Ecclesiasticus I. 9, 10. The Lord himself made her, and saw, and numbred her, and poured her upon all his works. With all flesh shee is, according to his gift, and hee furnisheth her to them that love him. And XXIV. 5-9. I came out of the most High, and covered the earth like a mist. I dwell in the highest, and my throne is in the pilar of cloud. I alone compass the circumference of heaven, and walk in the bottom of the deep. In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, in every people and nation is my inheritance; Adding, that, seeking rest among men, shee found it no where but in Israel. And in the book of Wisedom VII. 22.-27. For there is in Wisedom an understanding spirit, holy, onely begotten, mani∣fold, subtile, thinn, nimble, perspicuous, undefiled, plain to be understood, inviolable, loving goodness, quick, not to be hindred, beneficent, loving to men, firm, sure, not so∣licitous, that can do any thing, that survayeth all things, and passeth through the purest and finest understanding spirits. For Wisedom is nimbler than all motions, and attaineth and passith through all things because of her pureness: For it is a vapor of the power of God, and a sincere effluence of the glory of the Almighty, therefore no pollution can happen to it. For it is the resplendence of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirror of Gods working, and the image of his goodness: Which being one can do all things, and remaining in her self reneweth all things, and passing into pious souls in all ages, makes them friends of God, and Prophets. And IX. 9, 10, 11. And with thee is Wisedom that knoweth thy works, and was present when thou madest the world, and knoweth what is pleasing in thine eyes, and right in thy com∣mands. Send her from thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy glory, that shee may assist and labor with mee, and I may know what is pleasing before thee. For shee knoweth and understandeth all things, and will guide mee wisely in my doings, and keep mee in her glory. Can any man reade these things, and not remember the beginning of S. Johns Gospel; In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by it, and without it was nothing made that was made? Can any man conceive, that, the Apostles should call our Lord Christ, the Word, the Power, and the Wisedom of God, that made all things in heaven and in earth, it self being brought forth before all creatures, supporting and moving all things, which was with God from everlasting, that hee is the image of God, the shine of his glory, the cha∣racter of his substance; That the successors of the Prophets should describe the Wisedom of God, to be the Word of God that dwelt in the Prophets, and the Power of God that made all things, being it self brought forth before all things, that sustaineth and governeth all things; to dwell by the throne of God, as the shine of his light, the miror of his works, the breath and vapor of his power and glory, and from thence to come and take possession of the souls of Prophets; and not acknowledg all this to come from the same fountain? Espe∣cially, being perswaded afore, as all that are not Jews must be perswaded, that the same Spirit and Word of God, (qualified as Wisedom describeth it) which, possessing the souls of righteous men, in that measure whereof each of them was capable, made them Gods Prophets; dwelt in Christ without measure, ac∣cording to the fulnesse of the Godhead, as the Apostles have told and said, John I. 14, 16. III. 34. Col. II. 9, 10. Truly, if any man say, as I know it is said, that the same sense may be derived by the Apostles, from the glory of God in Ezek. I. 28. from the attributes of the Messias Psal. II. 7. 2 Sam. VII. 14. Esa. IX. 6. from the making of the world by Gods wisedom, recorded Psal. XXXIII. 5.
CXXXVI. 5. Jeremy LI. 15. X. 12. especially from that which Solomon hath written of Wisedom, being present with God from everlasting, and doing all his works, Prov. VIII. 11-31. I will not contend with him about it; Though, in my own judgment, seeing it cannot reasonably be denied, that these writings, being extant long afore, went then with the rest of the Greek Bible; And, seeing the texts that are alleged do not direct us to understand, how the Word and Spi∣rit and Wisedom of God, by which the Law and the Prophets spoke, dwelleth for ever in our Lord Christ, as these passages of their Successors do; I do firmly believe, that they signifie their allowance of them, whose doctrine they use. But, it is enough, that it may hereby appear, as it must needs appear, that they give us good and sound commentaries upon so high a point of the Prophets do∣ctrine, their predecessors, when the Apostles, that follow them, hold such cor∣respondence with them in it. Onely hereupon, I will from hence draw the rea∣son, why, the inward obedience to God in Spirit and truth which the Gospel re∣quireth, is so plentifully preached in all those writings which wee call Apocry∣pha; Whereas, in our Saviors and his Apostles time, and much more afterwards, they promised themselves the kingdome of heaven, upon the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees; That is, upon the outward and carnal observation of Moses Law, and preciseness in all those little niceties, which their Masters had fensed it with. For, it is no mervail, that they, who, under persecution, promi∣sed themselves a part in the resurrection of the righteous, cleaving to God and his Law; should finde themselves tyed to that obedience, in spirit and truth, which God, who is a Spirit, sees and allows. But lesse mervail it is, that, having attai∣ned the carnal promises of the Law, in the possession of the Land of Promise, they should fall away from the like zeal, and yet promise themselves the world to come, upon that form of godliness which they observed, being destitute of the force and power of it. As an argument, that this consideration is well grounded and true, I will here adde the authority and practice of the primitive Church, prescribing these books to be read by the Catechumeni; or, those that professed to believe the truth of Christianity, and offered themselves to be instructed in the mater of it, in or∣der to Baptism, and being made Christians. For, seeing these might be as well Jews as Gentiles, this signifies, that the doctrine of them was held by the Church, a fit instruction towards Christianity, even for those, that were already acquainted with the doctrine of the Prophets. S. Athanasius then, in Synopsi, testifieth, that these books were read to the Catechumeni. To the same purpose it is read in the Constitutions of the Apostles, though the place is not at hand at present. And that which the last Canon of the Apostles prescribes, that, besides the Canonical Scriptures, the book of Ecclesiasticus be read by the youth, seems to tend to the same purpose. To the same purpose Dionysius de div. Nom. cap. IV. calls the Book of Wisedom an Introduction to the divine Oracles. But, let no man think to inferr, that the Apostles took these Books for Scripture inspi∣red by God, because I grant that they borrowed from them in their writings; Origen hath met with this objection, Prol. in Cant. where hee observeth; That the Apostles have borrowed some things out of Apocryphal Scriptures, (as S. Jude out of the books of Enoch, and the departure of Moses) and yet addes, that wee are not to give way to the reading of them, because wee must not trans∣gresse the bounds which our Fathers have fixed. Where, you see, hee distinguish∣eth those books which the Church did not allow to be read, under the name of Apocrypha, from those which it did allow to be read, and are therefore more properly called Ecclesiastical Scriptures, (which name hath particularly stuck, by way of excellence, upon the Wisedom of the son of Sirach) though I contend not about names, when wee call them Apocrypha, because I see that S. Jerome hath sometimes done it. And, if S. Paul have alleged Aratus, Menander and Epimenides, heathen Poets, hee did not thereby intend to allow the authors, but the mater which hee allegeth. If these things be so, I shall not desire to abridg any mans liberty, from ar∣guing against the mater of these Books, to prove them not inspired by God, be∣cause
not agreeing with those, which, wee know, and agree to have been inspired by God: But I shall warn them that take upon them thus to argue, first to look about them, that they bring not the unquestionable parts of Scripture into an undue suspicion, for agreeing in something, for which they have conceived a pre∣judice, that these Books are not to be received. The design of Judith, and her proceeding in the execution of it, is charged not to agree with Christianity, nei∣ther is it my purpose here to maintain that it doth. But, I am more than afraid, that those who object this, do not know how to distinguish it from the fact of Jaell the wife of Heber the Kenite, in the book of Judges, which the Spirit of God in Deborah the Prophetesse so highly extolleth. The like is to be said of the like passages, questioned in the book of Tobit and the Maccabees, and name∣ly, the fact of Razias, killing himself, least hee should fall into the hands of per∣secutors, which seemeth to be related with much approbation, 2 Mac. XIV. 41-46. For, to distinguish this fact from Samsons, it will not serve the turn to say, that Samson did it by inspiration of Gods Spirit, supposing afore, that it was contrary to Gods declared Law to do it. The difficulty being greater, in saying, that the declared Law of God is violated by the motion of Gods Spirit, when as, the Spirit of God is not granted to any man, but upon supposition of ac∣knowledging Gods declared Law. For howsoever Saul, or Caiaphas, or Balaam may be moved by the Spirit of God, to speak such things, as, by the Scriptures inspired by God, wee learn that they did speak; Yet, that God should imploy upon his own Commission, (as the Judges, of whom it is said, that the Spirit of God came upon them, were manifestly imployed by God) whom hee favored not, is a thing which cannot agree with the presumption which all Christians have, of the salvation of the Fathers. As for the passage of Eccles. XLVI. 23. which seems to say, that it was the soul of Samuel the Prophet, and not an evil Spirit assuming his habit, that foretold the death of Saul; I do not understand, why all this may not be said, according to appearance, not according to truth: For, it will still make for the honor of Samuel, that the King, whatsoever opinion hee had of this means of fore-knowledg, should desire to see Samuel, as him, whom, in his life time, hee found so unquestionable. But, if it be said, that this can∣not satisfie the leter of the Scripture, yet can it not be said, that, as Saul, a wic∣ked man, did believe, that hee might see Samuel, so, a good man at that time might not have the same: Being then no part of the truth, which true piety ob∣liged all men to acknowledg. In the book of Tobit, there are several things besides, questionable. But, they that imagine conjuring, in the liver of a fish, to drive away an unclean Spirit, do not consider those exorcisms, whereby, it is evi∣dent, both by the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, besides divers of the most ancient Fathers of the Church, that the Jews, both in our Lords times and af∣ter, did cast out unclean Spirits. For, what force could they have, but from the appointment of God, from whom, at first, they were delivered, for a testimony of his residence among his people? Which makes me stick to condemn that relation of the Jews in the Talmud, extant also in Suidas, that there were admirable re∣medies delivered by Solomon, which hee caused to be writ upon the walls of the Temple; though they commend King Ezekias for causing them to be done out, when it appeared, that the virtue of them was such, that the people forgot their recourse to, and dependence upon God, because they knew so ready help else∣where. And truly it is nothing strange to mee, that the Jews, living under the Persian Empire, and seeing, that there were seven chief Princes which had the great credit in it next the King, the successors of the seven , (that is, those seven that killed him that usurped after the death of Cambyses as some∣times I have conceived; who, having the privilege of perpetual accesse to the King, as Herodotus testifieth, are therefore said to see the Kings face, Esther I. 10, 14—Esther VII. 14.) I say it seems not strange, that, expressing and think∣ing of God as of a great Prince, (as doth the whole Scripture, speaking in those terms that men are most apt to conceive) they should attribute unto him the like attendance of seven Angels, as his principal Ministers, the book de Mundo un∣der Aristotles name, comparing him also with the King of Persia. And yet I
will not grant, that the seven Spirits before the Throne of God in the Revela∣tion I. 4. IV. 5. V. 6. are those seven Angels, because there are seven virtues of Gods Spirit recounted in Esay XI. 2, 3. which the seven Spirits before Gods Throne may well serve to express; The seven Angels that blow the seven Trum∣pts, Revel. VIII. 2. being onely that number of Angels, (whether the prin∣cipal of Gods Ministers or not) who appear seven, to represent the plagues of the Trumpets and Vials in seven, as the seals of the Book afore. Neither is there any hope or fear, that any mater of historical truth can be discovered in them, which may justly charge them with imposture; as if the authors of them could be thought ignorant of the state of Gods people, living, as they did, so high in time. In vain it is to imagine, that, when Judith VIII. 6. is said to have kept, not onely the Sabbaths, New-moons, and Festivals of the Law, but also the dayes afore, which, by the Talmud Doctors wee know, were afterwards in use a∣mong the dispersions of the Jews; Hee who writ this book forges, when hee sayes they were so anciently in use. For, either hee must prophesie, or they must have been in use when the book was writ: And whether in use or not, when the story is said to have come to passe, will be of no consequence to him that believes it to be of no consequence, whether a Parable or not. As for the pretense of superstition, which, the credit thereof may be said thereby to maintain; if it be no superstition, for the people to whom our Lord preached to observe all that the Scribes and Pharisees injoyned them, because they sate in Moses his chair, much lesse shall it be superstition for Judith, or for those that lived when the book of Judith was penned, to have served God two dayes, by the appoint∣ment of those that sate in Moses chair, when as Gods Law named but one. And so, when the history of Susanna saith, that the Jews were allowed in their di∣spersions, to judge maters of life and death among themselves; though this per∣haps was otherwise under the Chaldeans, and, that, hee who penned it mistook in that circumstance; yet justly and certainly might it have been presumed, (though Origen had never interposed to justifie a thing, which, upon better, be∣cause anciente credit of this author, had been justified before) that such a power had been exercised at some times by the Jewes, in their disper∣sions. Before I go further, it will be requisite to answer an objection, which, I must confess to be material, but withall, apprehended for more dangerous than it need; To wit, that some part now received for Scripture of the New Testa∣ment, (the Epistle to the Ebrews, and that of S. James, by name, the Revelati∣on of S. John, and some other small pieces) have been sometimes questioned, and since are received, in that nature. And what, then, should hindet those books that sometimes have been questioned, whether of the Old Testament or not, to be now received for such upon the decree of the Council of Trent? I say then, that is manifest to him, that will take the pains to consider it, that the writings of the Apostles were first deposited with those parts of the Church, upon occasion, and for use whereof they were first penned; As, for the pur∣pose, their Epistles, with those Churches to which they were sent, (where Ter∣tullian, in his prescription against Hereticks, testifies, that the authenticks and originals of them were extant) and the Revelation of S. John with the seven Churches. Neiher is it to be imagined, that the Collection, which now wee call the New Testament, was then any where extant. Nay, it is manifest by the beginning of S. Luke, there went about certain Gospels, which Origen, and S. Ambrose upon that place, following him, sayes, were afterwards disallowed. Adding, that the gift of discerning Spirits, mentioned by S. Paul 1 Cor. X. 10. was then extant in the Church, (as in the Synagogue, when it was to be discer∣ned whether true Prophets or not) that the Church might rest assured of the writings of those whose commission had been so verified. It is therefore reaso∣nable to think, that those writings, that had been received by some Churches, upon the credit of their Authors, known to have been inspired by the Holy Ghost, gave others an umbrage of something not agreeable with Christianity; (as the Epistle to the Ebrews, of refusing Penance, the Revelation, of the King∣dom
of a thousand years) when they came first to know them, which from the beginning they had not done, much lesse, the doubt, whether inspired by God or not. Neither is the case otherwise, excepting terms of scorn which may have been used, either in Luthers refusing S. James his Epistle, or, when the Epistle to the Ebrews is questioned by Erasmus, or Cardinal Cajetane; as that of S. Jude of late by Salmasius. But there is alwayes means to redresse any part of the Church, or any Doctor of it, in any such mistake, so long as there remains means to certifie them, from what hand they have been received, to wit, from persons, in whom the Church was certified, that the Holy Ghost spoke. Which being certified, reason would, that, not onely particular persons, but Churches lay down their jealousies, by understanding such words as cause jealousies, so, as they may best agree with the common Christianity. But what is all this to the wri∣tings of those, who can by no means be supposed to have written by the Holy Ghost? Shall any act, any decree of the Church, create them the credit of wri∣tings inspired by Gods Spirit, which before that act they had not? And there∣fore, the case is not the same which the writings, which, we know, never could nor can be received, standing the evidence, that no evidence can ever be made, that they were inspired by Gods Spirit, or, that the authors thereof ever spoke by the same. And, with this resolution, the testimonies of Ecclesiastical writers will agree well enough, if wee consider, that, to prove them to have the testimony of the Church, to be inspired by God, it is not enough to allege, either the word or the deed, either of Writers or Councils, alleging the authority of them, or calling them Holy, Divine, or Canonical Scriptures; Nothing but universal con∣sent making good this testimony, which, the dissent of any part creates an ex∣ception against. For, if those, to whom any thing is said to be delivered, agree not in it, how can it be said, to be delivered to them, who protest, not to have received it? Wherefore, having settled this afore, that no decree of the Church inforceth more, than the reason of preserving unity in the Church can require; wee must, by consequence say, that, if the credit of divine inspiration be de∣nied them, by such authors, as the Church approveth, no decree of the Church can oblige to believe them for such; though, how farr it may oblige to use them, I dispute not here. It shall therefore, serve my turn to name S. Jerome in this cause. Not as if Athanasius in Synopsi, Melito of Sardis in Eusebius, S. Gregory Nazianzene, abundance of others both of the most ancient Writers of the Church, and of others more modern, who justly preferr S. Jerome in this cause, did not reject all those parts, or most of them, which the Church of England re∣jecteth: But because, were S. Jerome alive in it, there could be no Tradition of the Church for that, which S. Jerome, not onely a member, but so received a Do∣ctor of the Church, refuseth. For, it will not serve the turn to say, that hee writ when the Church had decreed nothing in it; who, had hee lived after the Coun∣cil of Trent, would have writ otherwise: The reasons of his opinion standing, for which no Council could decree otherwise. Hee would therefore have o∣beyed the Church, in using those books, which it should prescribe; But, his be∣lief, whether inspired by God or not, hee would have built upon such grounds, the truth whereof, the very being of the Church presupposeth. Nor will I stand to scan the sayings of Ecclesiastical Writers, or the acts of Councils, concerning the authority of all and every one of these books, any further in this place. There is extant of late, a Scholastical History of the Canon of the Scripture, in which this is exactly done; And upon that I will discharge my self in this point, referring my Reader, for the consent of the Church, unto it. And what impor∣teth it, I beseech you, that they are called Sacred or Canonical Scriptures? As if all such writings were not holy, which serve to settle the holy Faith of Christi∣ans. And though it is now received, that they are called Canonical, because they contain the Rule of our Faith and maners, and perhaps are so called in this notion, by S. Augustine, and other Fathers of the Church; Yet, if wee go to the most ancient use of this word Canon, from which the attribute of Canoni∣cal Scripture descendeth, it will easily appear, that it signifieth no more, than the list or Catalogue of Scriptures received by the Church. For, who should make
or settle the list of Scriptures receivable, but the Church that receiveth the same? it being manifest, that, they who writ the particulars knew not what the whole should contain. And truly, as I said afore, that the Church of Rome it self doth not, by any act of the force of Law, challenge, that the decrees of the Church are infallible; So is it to be acknowledged, that, in this point of all o∣ther, it doth most really use in effect that power, which, formally and expresly it no where challengeth; Proceeding to order those books to be received with the like affection of piety, as those which are agreed to be inspired by God, which, it is evident by expresse testimonies of Church writers, were not so received from the beginning by the Church. So that, they who made the decree, renouncing all pretense of revelation, to themselves in common, or to every one in parti∣cular, can give no account, how they came to know that which they decree to be true. So great inconveniences, the not duely limiting the power of the Church contrives even them into, that think themselves, therefore, free from mistake in managing of it, not because they think they know what they do, but because they think they cannot do amisse. It remaineth therefore, that, standing to the proper sense of this decree, importing, that wee are to believe these books, as inspired by God, neither can they maintain, nor wee receive it: But if it shall be condescended, to abate the proper and native meaning of it, so as to signifie onely, the same affection of piety moving to receive them, not the same object, obliging Christian piety to the esteem of them; it will remain then determina∣ble, by that which shall be said, to prove, how these books may or ought to be recommended or injoyned by the Church, or, received of and from the Church. CHAP. XXXIII. Onely the Original Copy can be Authentick. But, the truth thereof may as well be found in the translations of the Old Testament, as in the Jewes Copies. The Jewes have not falsified them of malice. The Points come neither from Moses, nor Esdras, but from the Talmud Jewes. AS to the other point, it is, by consequence, manifest, that the Church hath nothing to do to injoyn any Copy of the Scripture to be received as authentick, but that which it self originally received, because it is what it is, be∣fore the Church receive it. Therefore, seeing the Scripture of the Old Testa∣ment was penned first, and delivered in the Ebrew Tongue, (for I need not here except that little part of Esdras and Daniel, which is in the Chaldee, the same reason holding in both) that of the New in the Greek; there is no question to be made, but those are the authentick Copies. Neither can the decree of the Council of Trent bear any dispute, to them who have admitted the premises, if it be taken to import, that the Church thereby settleth the credit of Scripture, inspired by God, upon the Copy which it self advanceth, taking the same away from the Copy which the author penned; That credit depending meerly upon the commission of God, and his Spirit, upon the which the very being of the Church equally dependeth. But it is manifest, that it cannot be said, that the said decree necessarily importeth so much; because it is at this day free for every one to maintain, that the Original Ebrew and Greek are the Authentick Copies, the Vulgar Latine onely injoyned, not to be refused in act of dispute, or que∣stion; which hindreth no recourse to the Originals, for the determining of the meaning which it importeth. Hee that will see this tried, need go no further, than a little book of Sorbonne Doctor called Valerianus de Flavigny, Professor of the Ebrew in the University of Paris, written in opposition to an opinion, ven∣ted in the Preface to the great Bible lately published there, in disparagement of the Ebrew Copy of the Old Testament. Where hee shall see that opinion re∣futed with that eagernesse, and the contrary attested by the opinions of so many Divines, of so great note in the Church of Rome, since that Council, that no man that sees them can deny, that, notwithstanding the decree, it is free for every
man to maintain, the original Copies to be authentick. And truly, hee that should affirm, the credit of the Scripture to stand upon the decree of the present Church, or upon the testimony of the Spirit; must, by consequence, have recourse to the same visible decree, or to the same invisible dictate, whensoever it shall be necessary to accept or refuse the reading of any text of Scripture, with that faith, which, if it be false, the whole truth of Christianity will be forfeit. What Rushworth and his possession would do, to evidence, what reading of the Scri∣pture is indeed authentick, when as it doth not appear what is the reading which the Church is truly in possession of, let him advise. For, in that case hee must ex∣presly avow the consequence of his position, that the Scripture is not considera∣ble in resolving Controversies of Faith: Because the Church is not in possessi∣on of the certain reading of any Scripture. For, if hee say, hee hath made short work in that question, having discharged the Scripture of being necessary to the Church, and therefore acquitted himself of any necessity to show, how wee may come by true Scripture; and in stead thereof, and all other means of deciding Controversies in the Church, established the tradition presently in possession; First, it will be easier for mee, to verifie the short Rule of Faith, by the Scri∣ptures interpreted according to that, which, by records, may appear to have been from the beginning of force in the Church, than it will be for him to show, what is the Tradition which the Church is in possession of at present: And that, this being showed, I shall not need to fear any great danger that hee may ob∣ject, from the variety of reading which may be found in several Copies, the ne∣cessity of salvation being secured. And then, in the next place, to say; That the Scripture is not necessary, though not for the salvation of every Christian, yet, for the salvation of the Body of Christians, which is the Church; Though, that faction which separation ingenders will suffer no opinion to be plausible, but those which are in extreams. Yet I hope, the malice of Satan hath not yet debauched the ears of Christians to indure. And thus, as afore it was settled, that the whole Scripture is received for the word of God, upon the credit of Tradition; so, of every part and parcel of it, wherein the credit of several Co∣pies consisteth, it is consequently to be said, that nothing can oblige the faith of a Christian, to receive it, unquestionably for the word of God, the Tradition whereof is not unquestionable. But, thus mch being settled; That, what was originally delivered in Greek and Ebrew, is to be received for the authentick Word of God; What was o∣riginally delivered in Greek and Ebrew, may still remain questionable. That is to say, this being agreed, it may still remain questionable; what Copies they are, that do contain that, which was originally delivered in Greek and Ebrew. How probable it is, I need not yet say; but, any man of common sense must say, that it is possible, through the changes that time is able to produce, that the translations shall prove better than the originals, and that the Scriptures shall be truer read among those that have received, than among those that delivered them. And this is indeed the true state of the question, which is now come to be disputed, upon due terms, as it seems; To wit, whether the Ebrew Copies which now wee have from the Jews, and the Greek Copies of the New Testa∣ment now extant, contain that Scripture, which all Christians are bound to re∣ceive upon their Christianity, not onely in opposition to the Vulgar Latine, which the Council of Trent injoyneth, and to the authority of the present Church, (thinking that it is concluded in that decree) but in opposition to that Tradition, which other ancient Copies, either original or translated, may and do contain and evidence. In which point, I shall in the first place professe, as con∣cerning the Old Testament, that I finde it no inconvenience, but a great deal of reason to grant, that, at what time those books were made up into a Body, and consigned unto the Synagogue, the reading which wee have received from them was not delivered as unquestionable, (so that it should be any prejudice to the Law of God to suspect it) but as the most probable, and, by admitting whereof, no prejudiee to the said Law could follow. And, the safety of this position, both Jews and Christians will witnesse with mee. For if the Jews rruly ac∣knowledg,
and insist, that their Judaism is sufficiently grounded and witnessed by the leter of the Old Testament which wee have; the Christians, that their Christianity is as sufficiently to be evidenced, by the Copies wee have, as Chri∣stianity was intended to be delivered by the Scriptures of the Old Testament; Is it possible, that it should be a mater of jealousie for mee to admit, that, in that Body of the Old Testament which the Christians have received from the Jews, there may be found some passages, the reading whereof was not received as un∣questionable, when the Body of the Old Testament was consigned to the Sy∣nagogue, from whence the Church receiveth it? I say not when this time was, nor would I have that which I affirm here, to stand upon a circumstance so dis∣putable. I do believe the Jews, when they tell us of the men of the Great Synagogue, after the return from the Captivity; from whom, and by whom, the Scriptures, they believe, were settled and delivered to their posterity. I do also believe, that this Assembly might and did indure, whilest the Grace of Pro∣phets had vogue, and was in force among Gods people. For, if I believe them when they tell mee, that there was such a company of men; I cannot disbelieve them, that the Prophets Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi, the Scribe Esdras, (the same with Malachi, as they tell us, for any thing I know; for why should I not believe, Malachi, being appellative, and signifying my messenger, to be Esdras his surname, given him from that which is prophesied Mal. III. 1?) Mordecai, Nehemias, Josue the son of Josedok, and many others of that time were of it. But, shall I believe, that their Prophetical grace was imployed to decide the true reading of the Scripture? shall I believe, that a new revelation was given, to notifie how every leter and syllable was to be read, when, neither the consequence of the mater required it, and, sufficient means had been given to certifie common sense how to proceed? I know the good Father S. Irenaeus was made to believe, that the Scriptures were quite lost during the Captivity of Ba∣bylonia; and, that the Copies wee have, contain onely that, which Esdras, by in∣spiration of Gods Spirit, writ anew for the books of the Old Testament. I doubt not there are enow that finde this unreasonable, which cannot hear with∣out a great grain of jealousie, that Esdras, (supposing him the man, that made up and consigned the Body of the Old Testament to the Synagogue) should de∣liver any thing, but upon such credit, that, if any syllable of it should be admit∣ted questionable, the Law of God it self must become questionable; To wit, because Esdras is supposed to have been indowed with Gods Spirit, though it cannot be supposed to what purpose. For, otherwise, why should it seem so dangerous to believe, that there are faults in the reading of the Jews Copies of the Old Testament which wee use? That excellent Humanist Joseph Scali∣ger hath maintained, that there are corrupt readings in the Copies that wee use, more ancient than Esdras. Ludovicus Capellus at this day maintaineth, that the Ebrew Copies may be mended, not onely by other texts of the Old and New Testament, but by the Translations which have been made, before those corru∣ptions might prevail. I can neither pretend here to maintain, nor to destroy that which either of them hath said. I will say further to the same purpose. The Syriack of the Old Testament, which is a translation made by Christians, out of the Original Ebrew, seemeth to have followed another reading than that which wee finde in our Ebrew Copies, and that many times considerable. I will give you a few instances. Gen. II. 2. It hath been thought so strange, that God should finish the work that hee had made upon the seventh day, who is said else∣where to have made heaven and earth in six dayes; That the Jews have repor∣ted, that the Greek translates it the sixt day, least the Gentiles should stumble at it. But, when wee see the Samaritane and the Syriack follow the Greek, shall not the credit of them balance the credit of the Ebrew Copies? Gen. XLIII. 28.—wee are brought in, that hee may roule himself upon us, or, fall upon us.  is read many times in the sense of casting down a mans self prostrate. That it can signifie simply, falling, I do not believe any Ebrew can ju∣stifie. Reade but with the Syriack , changing onely  into , and the sense will be as proper as the Ebrew, to put tricks upon us. Num. XXXI.
28-47. according to the Ebrew, the spoil being divided in two, the army are commanded to consecrate one of five hundred to God, the Congregation, one of fifty: In the Syriack, both, one of fifty. And the numbers specified after∣wards, differ accordingly. Now, whereas these are consecrated to God as the first-fruits of the spoil; it is manifest, that one of fifty was the legal rate of first-fruits, which, any man might exceed, but no man was to go lesse: As S. Jerome upon Ezekiel, agreeing with the Talmud, witnesseth. Which is the rea∣son why I must account this reading considerable, notwithstanding the Ebrew. 1 Sam. XVII. 12. And the man went among men for an old man, in the dayes of Saul. Translate; And the man in the dayes of Saul was old and stricken in years; Reading with the Syriack , not with the Ebrew ; And then, let any man that understands Ebrew and sense tell mee, which is the more proper Ebrew, which is the more proper sense. 2 Kings X. I. Jehu writ and sent leters to Samaria, to the Princes of Jezreel, the Elders, and to those that brought up Ahabs children. Here is a great question, which all that maintain the Ebrew to be without fault will have much ado to answer; How should Ahab, sending to Samaria, send to the Elders of Jezreel? And the Syriack assoils it not, accord∣ing to the Paris Copy. But, in the readings of the Great Bible it is noted, that our Copies reade it not. And truly hee that would say, that wee are to reade the Elders of Israel for the Elders of Jezreel, might have much to say for himself. But that the Elders of Samaria should be the Elders of Jezreel cannot be rea∣sonable. 2 Kings XVIII. 27. Rabshakeh said unto them; Hath my master sent mee to speak these words to thy master and to thee, or to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their dung and drink their piss with you? So wee reade it. But, in conscience, were it not farr better sense to reade it with the Syriack; That they may not eat their dung and drink their piss with you? For, how could hee have said a fitter reason to make the people mutiny, then by telling them, that his master had sent them that good counsail, that they might not, by stand∣ing out the siege, be put to eat their own dung and drink their own piss, with Ezekiah and his Counsail? I might have brought more than these, but it is a work by it self, for him that would try what that Translation would afford, and this may serve for an Essay. And therefore, to mee it seemeth farr safer to yield that it may be so, than utterly to ruine the credit of Gods Law, in the opi∣nion of those men, who, being told, that no tittle thereof can be questionable, without granting that it came not from God, do neverthelesse finde sensible reason, to doubt of the reading of some passage. This being said, in the next place, I shall as freely professe, that I finde no rea∣son in the world to suspect, that the Ebrew Copies which wee now have from the Synagogue, are maliciously corrupted and falsified by the Jews. I grant, that precious Saint of God Justine the Martyr did so believe, and so charges them Dial. cum Tryphone: and Eusebius Eccl. Hist. IV. 18. is bold to pronounce, that the Jews were convinced by him in this point. But without disparagement to the great merit, wherewith that blessed Martyr hath obliged Christs Church, it may and must be yielded, which I said before; that a person so curious in all things which hee could inquire out, tending to the advantage of Christianity, hath suffered himself to be imposed upon, in divers particulars of historical truth, concerning that purpose. And, that this is one of them, I shall, for proof, need no more, but to send them to the place, and desire them to consider, whe∣ther those passages which hee alleges to have been falsified by the Jews, were indeed so read as hee recites them, in the true Greek Copies of the Old Testa∣ment, at that time: Or, whether hee was imposed upon to believe, that they were true Copies which reade them as hee does, though indeed they were not. Neither do I finde, that the Christians after him have thought themselves obli∣ged to follow that reading, which hee, as falsified by the Jews, professeth to re∣store. And truly, though (in regard of the bloudy hatred of the Jews, which the Christians, at that time, when their departure was fresh, might justly impute the greatest persecutions to, that they indured) no suspicion upon them but may seem just; yet I would have this limited, so farr as there appears reason to be∣lieve
that it may be true. For, from the time that the study of Gods Law was in request among them, that is, as I conceive, from the return from Captivity, (where, it seems, they were settled in a deep detestation of Idols, and took in hand the teaching and learning of the Law, as God had commanded in it) I say, from that time, they seem to have been possessed with a disease on the other hand, of a superstitious esteem of the very leters and tittles of it. Which rn∣ders it a thing no way credible, that they should make it their design, to falfie those which they held in so superstitious a reverence. And truly, hee that con∣siders, how necessary the preserving of the Old Testament intire must needs be, to the propagation of Christianity which God had designed; will easily say, that this perverse zeal of a thing to the leter of the Law, was purposely imployed by the providence of God, to work his Gospel the freer passage, by presuming the leter of the Law unquestionable. S. Austine therefore calleth the Jews capsarios Ecclesiae, as those that keep the records, and carry those books for the Christians, which serve to cut their own throat. And, had it been their design to falsifie the Scriptures, would any reason allow, that they should practice it in such places, as concerned Christianity little or nothing, rather than in those which they chal∣lenge most interest in? For, without doubt, it is hard to name any place contro∣verted between the Jews and Christians, for the reading of it, that is of conse∣quence to the truth of Christianity. I confesse the reading of the Christians Psal. XXII. 17.  is true, and not that of the Jews ; for what good sense can they make of it? But I do not therefore see they intended to falsifie the true reading of it, who have, of themselves, set a mark of a doubtfull rea∣ding upon the place. So, in Esa. IX. 5. the modern brew reads  the Latine seems to have read : but, any man that knows the Ebrew will allow mee, that the first reading will bear the sense of the later, and his name shall be called: So farr there is no evidence of falsifying, as the end of it appears not to be obtained, by admitting that reading, which you pretend for∣ged. How farr it concerns either the credit of S. Paul, or the truth of Christi∣anity, that Psal. XIX. 5. wee reade  as Rom. X. 18. not, as wee have it this day in our Copies  I am willing to referr unto judgment; Knowing that, whatsoever be decreed will not be of force, to conclude so great a presum∣ption as wee have in debate. For, suppose wee, that they had never so much minde to do such a wickednesse; and consider on the other side, that the separa∣tion of Christians from Jews was not made in a moment, but that, so long as there was hope to winn the Jews, they conformed themselves to serve God with them, and without doubt, carried a greater or a lesse party in all Syna∣gogues, where Christianity found entrance, (which, how soon it found entrance into the whole Empire, the very writings of the Apostles may serve to assure us) I say suposing all this, wee cannot doubt, that, at the separation, the Chri∣stians were possest of Copies which the Jews warranted, in so many parts of the Empire. And will any common sense allow, that it should be possible for them, to corrupt their own Copies, whether in Ebrew or in Greek, and the Christians not convict them of it? knowing them both able, and willing, and obliged so to do. Seeing then wee must conclude, that, what fault soever may have come in∣to the Copies which the Jews at present send us, it cannot be presumed to have come upon prepensed malice, but upon such casualties, as the propagating of all records is subject to; it will be fit, as a furzher step to our proceeding, to in∣quire in the next place, whether the points, signifying the vowels whereby the sense of the Old Testament is now determined, are from the Spirit of God, or invented by man, and allowed by the Synagogue. A conceit as eagerly maintained by some, that would magnifie their profession of the Ebrew, as if the credit of the Scripture, and by consequence of Christianity, were to stand or fall with every jot or tittle of the Jews Copies, as, of the Law, our Sa∣viour saith it doth. Which, hee that considereth the intent of the Old Testa∣ment to serve principally for a motive, to introduce Christianity, (but, to deter∣mine the mater of it, no otherwise, than first the meaning thereof shall be de∣termined
by the New) will never grant; Though freely allowing the utmost of our Saviours meaning, that every tittle of the Law continues in force under the Gospel, to the effect whereto it was intended, not of the Leter, but of the Spirit. Those that would have these points to carry the credit of Gods Word, do faintly maintain that, which the Jews as familiarly ffirm, as they do believe all their Constitutions to be Gods Law by word of mouth; to wit, that they were delivered to Moses in Mount Sinai. But they seem to insist peremptorily, that, if not delivered by Moses, at least they were settled by Esdras, and his companions of the Great Sygogue, or Assembly, which I spoke of so lately. And truly, there is no question to be made, but this must have been done while the Spirit of God was among them: But this being granted, hee that should thereupon presume, that the Spirit was given to this effect, of settling the mea∣ning of the Scriptures, must demand it gratis, or rather for lesse than nought, considering what appearance I have made, that the Copies were settled, not by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but by Tradition of historical truth. Yet, not insisting upon this, I must professe, I cannot but mervail, what probability any man can imagine, that this method of determining the reading and sense of the Ebrew of the Old Testament, which, according to the nature and custome of the Eastern Languages, originally consists of consonants onely; should be as ancient as Esdras his time. I make no question, that there must be a certain method of reading things written by consonants onely, otherwise, they had not, in that estate, means to understand one another in writing. But this, in maters of common sense and effect, the meer use of speaking would easily fur∣nish all that had practice of writing and reading with. For, what great difficul∣ty could remain in reading that, which was of it self understood? The neces∣sity of this method in writing, is the difficulty of understanding; that is to say, a capacity of being determined to several senses, in those writings, to which it is applyed. Suppose now, that to be true, which I showed afore to be proba∣ble, that, from the Captivity, the study of the Law, came in request according to the Law; From that time it must be known amongst them, how the Scri∣ptures were to be read. And truly, from that time, the Scribes were much more in request; though I have showed elsewhere, that their profession began under the Prophets, being nothing else but their Disciples, which wee reade of in their writings. I have also showed, that the profession extended from the Judges of the Great Consistory, to School-masters that taught children to reade, and No∣taries that writ Contracts. These mens profession consisting in nothing else but the Scriptures, (for what learning had they in writing besides?) is it strange, that children could be taught by Tradition to reade it, though the vulgar language was somewhat changed? This supposition indeed will inferr, that the reading could not be so precisely determined, for all to agree in the same: But it will also inferr, that, the more the study was in use, the more precise determination they must needs attain. Now I desire the indifferent Reader to consider two points, both of them certain, and resolved in the Tradition of the Jews; The first, that this method of points is part of the Law delivered by word of mouth; as appears by the Tradition in the Gomara, that hee that hath sworn, that such a one shall never be the better for him, may teach him the Scriptures, because that they may be done for ire, but hee may not teach him the points, because the Law by word of mouth, must not be taught for hire. The second, that it was never held lawfull to commit this civil Law to writing, till the time of R. Juda, that first writ their Misnaioth, or repetitions of the Law, upon a resolution ta∣ken by the Nation, that, the preservation of the Law in their dispersions did necessarily require, that it should be committed to writing; as Maimoni, the Key to the Tamud, in the beginning, and divers others of the Jews do witness. Hee that would see more to justifie both these points, let him look in Buxtor∣fius his answer to Capellus I. 2. where hee hath showed sufficient reason to resolve against his own opinion; That, all the Jews say of the points delivered to Mo∣ses in Mount Sinai, is to be understood, of the right reading and sense of the Law, which must be delivered from hand to hand, but was unlawfull to be com∣mitted
to writing before the beginning of the Talmud by R. Juda: To wit, with authority; For, it was lawfull for Scholars to keep notes of their lessons. Up∣on these premises I inferr, that there were no points written in the Jewes Bi∣bles before this time; and that, upon this decree, they began to busie themselves in finding a method by points, and applying the same to the Scripture; though, it is most agreeable to reason, that it should have been some ages before it was setled, and received by a Nation so dispersed as they were. And herewith a∣greeth all the evidence which the records of that Nation can make. Though I repeat not here the testimonies in which it consisteth, having been so effectually done already in books for the purpose. CHAP. XXXIV. Of the ancin est Translations of the Bible into Greek first; With the Authors and authority of the same; Then into the Chaldee, Syriack, and Latine. Ex∣ceptions against the Greek, and the Samaritane Pentateuch. They are helps ne∣vertheless to assure the true reading of the Scriptures, though with other Co∣pies; whether Jewish or Christian. Though the Vulgar Latine were better than the present Greek, yet must both depend upon the Original Greek of the New Testaent. No danger to Christianity by the differences remaining in the Bible. THe first turning of the Bible into Greek, the common opinion saith, was done by the authority of the High Priest and heads of that people resi∣dnt at Jerusalem, and by men sent on purpose, (VI of every Tribe, in all LXXII, called therefore by the round number for brevities sake, the LXX Trans∣latos) to Ptolomee Philadelphus. But this relation suffers many difficulties, that have been made of late years, and indeed, seems to come from a writing pre∣tending the name of Aristeas, a Minister of the said Prince, from whence Phi∣lo and Josephus seem to have received the credit of it; Who, being of those Jews that used the Greek tongue, may very well be thought to cherish that re∣port which makes for the reputation of their Law, with them that spoke it. Jo∣sephus, wee know, in other points, hath related Legends or Romances, for hi∣storical truth; as that of the acts and death of Moses, and that of the third of Esdras, concerning the dispute of the three Squires of the Body to King Da∣rius. As for Philo, wee have S. Jerome, who hath made sport of the legend, hee ells of this businesse: To wit, how that, being shut up every man in a several room, at the end of so many dayes, they gave up every man his Copy, translated all in the same words to a tittle. Which rooms, Justine the Martyr, couzened by the Jews of Alexandria, reports, were extant in his time, and that hee had seen them; in his dispute with Trypho the Jew. But the particulars are too many to finde a room in this abidgment. Those that would be further informed in this point, may see what Scaliger hath said against this Tradition, in his Annotations upon Eusebius his Chronicle, and what Morinus and others have said for it. But, though wee grant the book of Aristeas to be a true History, not a Romance, which w will do that reade it, (for the roughnesse of the Greek makes it ra∣ther the language of some obscure Legendary, then of a Courtyer at Alexan∣dria) though wee grant, that there were LXXII sent from Jerusalem to Phila∣delphus, and did translate him the Law; because, besides the agreement of all other Jews and Christians, Aristobulus a learned Jew of Alexandria, writing to Polomee Philometor, (in Eusebius de Praepar. Evang. XIII. 7.) an exposition of the Law, some CXXX years after, averrs it; yet will not that serve the turn, to make this Copy which wee have their work. Because the same Aristobulus, together with Josephus and Philo, the Talmud Jews besides, and S. Jerome among the Christians, do agree, that those LXXII that came from Jerusalem translated one∣ly the five books of Moses, as you may see them alleged in a late discourse of the late Lord Primate of Ireland, de LXX. Int. Versione, Cap. I. Now it is most evident, that the Copy which wee have is all of one hand, and, that it can by no
means be thought, that the five books of Moses, which are part of it, were trans∣lated by any body, but by him that translated the rest. Therefore, wee are as much to seek for the author of this Translation, as if wee did not grant, that e∣ver the Law was translated by LXXII persons sent from Jerusalem to Philadel∣phus. And therefore, I make no difficulty to grant, that this Translation, (which cannot be ascribed to those LXXII) was made by the Jews of Alexandria, or Aegypt, where the Jews injoyed great liberties from the first Ptolomees time, flourishing in learning, and neglecting their own language for the Greek, where∣upon they were called , that is to say, Jews that spoke Greek. But I say withall, that I do not understand, why the reputation of this Translation should be ever a whit the worse, than if it had been made by LXXII sent from Jerusa∣lem to Alexandria on purpose, supposing it to have been done by the Jews of Alexandria. The reasons why I think it was made by the Jews of Alexandria, supposing the translating of the Law by the LXX, I confesse are but probabili∣ties, but which, finding the truth ballanced by the difficulties premised, seem to way down on that side. First, in Caninius his Hellenismus, at the Imperfect Tense,  Boeoticè & Chalcidicè . Quae forma LXX Int. frequens. Nam Asianis etiam vernacula. Lycophron, . For , the Boeotick and Chalcidick saith , which form the LXX Translators frequent. For it is the Asiaticks mother language. Lycophron uses . That which hee saith of the Asiatick Greeks I have not yet found. All that use this dialect, so farr as I have observed, are the Greek Bible, the books wee call Apocrypha, and Epiphanius; Excepting Lycophron, who was born at Chalcis in Euboea, standing upon the confines of Boeotia; but lived at Alexandria: And therefore, I conceive, Caniniu should have counted it Alexandrian, and not Boeotick or Chalcidick. The like I say, when, for  in the second Aorist, or indefinite tense, hee makes the Boeotick to say . For, in the same authors, namely, the Greek Bible, the Apocrypha, Epiphanius, and Lycophron, you shall finde the like, and in some of them, if my memory fail mee not,  for , and  for ; which dialect, Caninius also alleges, out of some Grammarians. Now I have not found this Greek used by any author that lived in Palestine, where Epiphanius, though hee conversed much, yet cannot well be thought to have learned his Greek. And therefore it is to mee a mark, that an Alexandrian rather than a Palestine Jew should make it. Secondly, whereas by Josephus Antiq. III. 9. by S. Jerome, Hesychius, and many others, it is manifest, that the Jews Shekel was equal to the Attick tetradrachme, or piece of four drachmes, it is alwayes translated by them , or piece of two drachmes. A thing which hath bred strange opinions in some mens fansies, and caused whole books to be written, that the Jews used two Shekels; and, that the Shekel of the Sanctuary was double the vulgar. Whereas all this difficulty va∣nishes, if wee say, that they translate it , by the Alexandrian drach∣ma, because that was indeed double the Attick. For first, Julius Pollux Onomast. IX. 6. affirmeth, that the Talent of every Greekish State consisted of VI M drachmes, of the same coin, as the Attick Talent contained VI M. Attick drachmes. Then, Festus in the word Talentum saith, that the Alexandrian Ta∣lent contained XII M. Attick drachmes. Which cannot otherwise be true, un∣lesse the Alexandrian drachme be double the Attick. Now, it is no lesse impro∣bable, that Palestine Jews, though translating at Alexandria, should translate according to the value of that coin which was current at Alexandria, (all other Writers testifying, that in Palestine they accounted otherwise) then it is pro∣bable, that Alexandrian Jews should do it. So long then, as I am peremptorily barred, from believing, the Translation which wee use to be the work of any LXXII sent from Jerusalem, I shall accept of these inklings of historical truth, that intitle the Egyptian Jews, who first took up the Greek, to it. For, as for the difference of Copies, which, I grant, is very great, in the Greek Bible, I suppose, no man in his right senses will argue, that it is derived from any other Copies than one, which, by the wantonnesse of Copyists having suffered some
change in lesse maters, discovers the same plainsong, by variety of descants that are framed upon it. As for the credit of this Translation, why should it be thought ever a whit the worse, coming, from the Egyptian Jews, than, those of Palestine? My reason is; I demand what there is to be found in all the writings of that Nation since the Prophets, of like consequence to Christianity, with that which the Jews of Aegypt have transmitted to us: Why the Greek Bible should not be as well thought of, coming from them, as if it came from LXXII men sent from the High Priest at Jerusalem. For, here I set aside all prejudicate fansies, and reports of inspiration, by which it is said, that there LXXII all translated the Law in the same words, as meer fables. I go to issue, upon evidence of that which ap∣pears in this translation, compared, both with the present Jews Copy, and o∣ther translations which the Church useth of many ages. Onely I question, why it should not be of as good credit, coming from the Jews of Alexandria, as from LXXII sent from Jerusalem. The prejudice that is alleged against it, is an addition to the Book of Esther in the Greek, which sayes thus;  In the fourth year of the raign of Ptolomee and Cleopatra, Dojitheus, calling himself a Priest and Levite, and Ptolomee his son, brought the foresaid leter of Phrurim, (which you have in the Greek Bible, after Esther VIII. 12.) translated, as they said, by Lysimachus son of Ptolomee, of Jerusalem. This Ptolomee and Cleopatra are those, by whose per∣mission, Onias and Dositheus, (whether hee that is here named, or another of that name) Jews, having faithfully served them in their warrs, built a like Temple to that of Jerusalem, in the Country of Heliopolis in Aegypt, as Josephus contr. Ap. II. & Ant. XIII. 6. testifieth; Incurring thereby the like crime of Schism, as the Samaritanes had committed, in setting up their Temple on Mount Geri∣zim; and undertaking to serve God there, after Jerusalem was lawfully chosen, for the place to which the Law confined Gods service. And so, this translation is supposed to come from the Jews of Aegypt, when they were under that Schism, and the sacrilege of it. To which I answer, that, neither it doth appear by this addition to Esther, (which, in one of these two Copies, which the late Lord Primate of Ireland hath published out of the Earl of Arundels Library, appeareth not at all) that, therefore, the whole translation was made then, when it saith this leter came; Nor that, if it were then made, it had any relation to, or dependance upon their Schism, or the sacrilege of it. For, though Josephus sayes, that Onias found Priests and Levites of his minde to serve God there; and though hee sayes elsewhere, that Onias did this out of contention, which hee had with the Jews at Jerusalem, having banished him; Thinking to draw the multitude from them, to the Temple which hee had built de Bello Jud. VII. 37. yet, these are rather arguments, that the Body of the Jews at Alexandria did not submit to his premises whatsoever, his credit with the King might ob∣lige them, to permit particular men to do. And Josephus Ant. XIII. 6. imme∣diately after the building of this Temple, telleth us of a trial between the Sa∣maritanes and Alexandrian Jews, before the same Philometor, whether the Tem∣ple at Jerusalem, or that on Mount Gerizim were according to Gods Law. And that those Jews were so zelous in the cause, that they consented, what side were cast, those that pleaded for it to be put to death; Which, accordingly, was ex∣ecuted upon Sabbaeus and Theodosius, that pleaded for the Samaritanes. Now, though Josephus say not, that this, which hee relateth presently after the build∣ing of the Temple, came to passe after it in time; yet it is utterly incredible, that those, who had showed such zeal for the Temple at Jerusalem, should, the next day as it were, that is, in the same Kings raign, run into the same crime, whereof they had convicted the Samaritanes. Certainly, when the addition to Esther saith, that the leter which hee had inserted was translated into Greek by Lysima∣chus son of Ptolomee a Jew of Jerusalem, it is no sign, that there was any pre∣tense
of Schism, between the Jews of Jerusalem and those of Alexandria, on foot. And therefore, this aspersion takes away nothing from the credit of the Greek Bible. I am further confirmed in this opinion, by considering the writings of Philo the Alexandrian Jew, though I am not moved by them to think hee was a Chri∣stian, but onely to conclude, that hee cannot be convinced to be no Christian. Three things I allege out of him, as steps which hee hath made, beyond the rest of the Jews, towards a Christian. The first; That hee hath followed the Go∣spels, in reproving the Tradition of the Elders, for which they neglected to ho∣nor their parents, as the Law commandeth. The Tradition was this, as wee finde by him, in his book ; If a man vow, that his Father or Mother shall never be the better for any thing that is his, it shall not be lavv∣full for him to maintain them out of his goods. For, Korban signifies anathema; And, hee that said, Be it Korban, whatsoever thou maiest be the better for, of mine; In his anger, to Father or Mother; said in effect; Be it anahema; That is, be hee accursed that touches it. In this point then, Philo follovvs the doctrine of Christ, against the Tradition of their Elders. The second is his exposition of Deut. XXVIII. 46. The stranger that is within thee shall get above thee more and more: And thou shalt come under him, more & more: in his book . The stranger truly, lifted aloft with good success shall be gazed at, as admired and coun∣ted happy for two the greatest excellences; That, having turned to God, hee hath received the most proper reward, a firm rank in heaven, not lawfull to be expressed. But the right born, imbasing and counterfeiting the coin of his birth, shall slide down till hee come to the very depth of darkness; That all men, seeing these examples, may grow sober, considering how God accepts that virtue which springs from an ene∣my stock, bidding the root farewell, but the shoot welcome, that is grown to a stock, because by tillage it is changed to bear good fruit. For, hovv vvould a Christian ex∣pound this text against the Jevv, in the mystical sense, but by making the Chri∣stian the stranger, vvhom this text prophesieth of, that hee shall have the upper hand of the Jevv; as Origen more than once, if my memory fail mee not, out of this place of Philo, hath done? The third consists of those things vvhich hee hath said, in so many places, concerning the Word of God, agreeable to those pas∣sages of the Wisedome of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, and Baruch, vvhich I compa∣red afore vvith the doctrine of the Apostles, concerning that Wisedom of God vvhich is his Word; of vvhich you have enovv in Grotius his annotations upon those texts, but much more might be produced. For, vvhosoever compares them together, shall finde, that he vvho said them vvas not far from the Christian Faith. For, if it be objected and said, that there is no evidence, that ever this Philo pro∣fessed Christianity, vvithout vvhich, he cannot be counted a Christian; It may rea∣sonably be ansvvered, that, during the time vvhen the Synagogue vvas at a bay, vvhether to receive Christianity or not, (at vvhat time it is plain they did not per∣secute it) nothing can be said, vvhy it might not be professed, by any Jevv of those Synagogues vvhich stood so affected to it; not onely vvithout any mark of apostasie upon him among his fellovvs, but even vvith that trust, vvhich, vvee knovv this Philo had among the Jevvs of Alexandria, being deputed by them to Ca∣ligula, in business concerning their vvhole subsistence. For, if those vvho vvere baptized by John the Baptist vvere not thought to depart from the Lavv, vvhy should those vvho vvere baptized into Christ; vvhether the effect of both Ba∣ptisms vvere the same or diverse, the Lavv continuing in practice long after that time? I must therefore professe, to allovv the opinion those, that vvill have this vvork
to have been done by the Jews of Alexandria, of which, wee know, there was a very great Body, from the time of the first Ptolomee; who, having taken up the Greek in stead of their Mother tongue, necessarily required, that they should have the Scriptures in it. It is then agreeable to reason, that this translation, be∣ing made so soon after the study of the Law came in request, and so farr from Je∣rusalem; should acknowledg more difference of sense, arising from the divers wayes of determining those words that are written without vowels, than those that are of a later date, when the reading was better determined by custome and practice. Which, accordingly, wee see, is come to pass. For, the translations into the Greek that were made after the time of our Lord, by Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, (no Christians) and, the Chaldee of Onkelus and Jonathan, who, whatsoever time they were made in, are later than so; though wee cannot say that they do alwaies and in all things agree, either with one another, or with the Ebrew Copies which wee use; yet must wee needs say, that there is a great deal more agreement between them visible, than there is between the Greek of the LXX, and any of them, judging of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, by the remains of them recorded by the Fathers of the Church. As for the Syriack and Vulgar Latine, both made by the Christians, and the former justly challen∣ging as great antiquity, (and therefore as great credit) as the early coming of those parts to Christianity, (& thereupon, the necessity of having the Scriptures) inforces; it is manifest, that they were translated out of Copies, which were had from the Jewes, and yet that the sense was not determined in those Copies, as it is by the vowels determined in the Ebrew Copies wee use. Whether that, in S. Jeromes time, the method of points was not complete, and written into their books, or whether they would not suffer such Copies to go out of their hands, for the use of Christians. I confesse, I have met with a passage in the Gemara, Brachoth cap. ult. that seems to argue the contrary. It is reported there, that R. Akiba, (about Adrian the Emperors time) decreed, that they were not, (saving your presence) to wipe the backside with the right hand, because it shows the ac∣cents of the Law . For, if there were then accents to be showed, certainly there were vowels. But, the Glosse of R. Solomon Jarchi clears the mea∣ning of the passage to be no more than this; that, by holding the right hand up or down, they signified how the lessons of the Law were to be sung, according to that, whether Musick, or howling, which still, it seems, they use in their Syna∣gogues. Now, to come to the resolution of the point propounded; I think it not unfit, to divide from the rest, the Greek and Samaritane Copies, because a rea∣son is pretended, why they should never be taken into consideration, when there is any question of the true reading of the Old Testament; whatsoever account is to be had of the rest. By the Scripture of 2 Kings XVII. wee understand, that the Samaritanes, at their first planting, were Idolaters, and worshipped God as the God of that Countrey, not as the one true God that made heaven and earth; In which worship there must needs be as much Idolatry, as in the Athenians worshipping the unknown God, among innumerable Idols: Though that title yiel∣ded S. Paul an argument against Idols. When the Temple and City came to be restored, under Esdras and Nehemias, they offered themselves to assist the work, pretending, that they they worshipped the true God onely, Esdras IV. 2. And what reason can wee have to doubt, that they said true in it? For when, in opposition to the Jews, they had built themselves a Temple upon Mount Geri∣zi, and sacrificed there, as the ten Tribes did at Bethel and Dan from Jeroboams then, there can no question be made, but that they sacrificed to the true God, though not, according to the true intent of his Law, at Jerusalem, but as Schis∣maticks, where they pleased themselves. Whatsoever then was the reason, why, under Esdras and Nehemias, they were not admitted to build the City and Tem∣ple with the Jews; (as just there might be, and no doubt was, though wee sup∣pose them not to have been Idolaters) from the time that they were thus reje∣cted, I make account, wee may clearly say, that they have been and are Schisma∣tical Jews, professing the Law, but according to a Copy of their own, which, for a
rar monument of antiquity, is printed in the Great Paris Bibles, and so ex∣tolled, by those that pretend to oblige the Christian world by publishing the same, as if it were the true Copy of Moses. As for the rest of the Old Testa∣ment, seeing it cannot be said, that ever they admitted either the writings of the Prophets, or the Resurrection and world to come, which under them was more and more declared; I leave to those of better skill to consider, whether this were not the reason, why they were refused the communion of the Jews under Esdras and Nehemias. This is the original credit of this Copy of Moses Law, which cannot be greater than the credit of those that use it: But it is alleged, over and above, out of an extract from Eulogus Patriarch of Alexandria, in Photius, that this Copy was falsified by Dositheus, a Doctor of such credit among the Samaritanes, that Origen upon S. Mathew XXIV. informs us, that hee pre∣tended to be the Messias, whom the Samaritanes, as Jews, did expect. As for the Greek of the LXX. it is alleged, that, by comparing it with the original, (which is the most effectual conviction of common sense) it may appear, that they who made it, never intended to translate the Ebrew which they had before them, but to inlarge, abridge, and change the sense and mater of it, as best pleased their own fansies, though, to what purpose, it is hard to affirm. This is alleged to be visible in the Book of Job, the Proverbs, Esther, and, I know not whether any other parts of the Old Testament. Supposing these exceptions made to those two, the ancientest Copies, (besides the Ebrew) that the world has, I will not enter into the dispute concerning the true Copy of the LXX, which, every man knows, what difficulties it becomes lyable to, by the diligence & industry of Origen; who, that it might appear at one view, what the difference was between the Greek and Ebrew Copies, first, set a mark upon every word, which the Greek of the LXX had exrssd, more than the Ebrew contained; then, under another mark, added to the same Copy, that which, being found in the Ebrew, was not found translated in the Greek of the LXX. For, those marks being afterwards left out, by the negligne of Copyists, there came into the common use of the Church, a mixt Copy, of the Greek, according to the LXX, and that which the Ebrew had more than the Greek, according to Theodotion, whom Origen had stuck to in that businesse. Whereby, and by several Copies, corrected and ordered by Luciane, Hesychius, and others, to set a period to this dis∣order, it is become impossible to say, what is the true Grek of the LXX, or Alexandrian Jews, in abundance of places. But this dispute, I conceive, I shall not need to enter into, having nothing to do here to say, how well or how ill the Church hath been served, by the multiplying of several Copies, whih is a far di∣vers point, that may come to hand in due place; But, only supposing things to be as they are, what means we have, to assure our selves of unquestionable Scripture, in order to the deciding of difficulties in mater of Religion, which not onely or∣dinarily, but universally, have their beginning from some uncertainty in the mea∣ning of the same. But, supposing the Greek and Samaritane lyable to these ex∣ceptions, supposing that wee have a very nient translation of the Old Testa∣ment, into that language which the Jews from the Captivity used, (for, what can be the reason, why the Jews should turn it into Chaldee, but for the vulgar use of their people?) that wee have the vulgar Latine, and that ancient and worthy Christian translation into the Syriack, is there any body will undertake to say; Either, that, having these helps, wee cannot assure our selves of the Scripture which God delivered to the Church, so farr as the necessity of the Church requi∣reth to be assured of it; Or, that nothing but the Copy, which now wee have from the Jews, is to be regarded, God having provided us so many helps over and above? For, suppose the Samaritane Copy of the Law to have been fli∣fied by Desitheus, must it not needs have been falsified upon some certain design? And will one certain design require, or will it indure, that all should be falsified, whether it concerned that design or not? So, suppose those Jews of Alexan∣dria, who turned the Old Testament into Greek, gave themselves liberty to make the Book of Job, the Proverbs, more of the Old Testament if more can be al∣leged, not what the original contained, but what themselves fansied would be
handsom; shall wee therefore say, the whole work is not a translation but a Romance, which, wee see stick so close to the original, in the most of the Scri∣pture? Surely, the very great antiquity of both Copies, and the experience, which, all that study the Scriptures with an intent to clear the meaning of them, have, of the great advantage, which the comparing of the Greek advances, more and more every day, to that design, will no way indure, that it should be counted no translation of the Old Testament: Or that, though a man pretend not to build upon the credit of either of those Copies alone, in opposition to the E∣brew which wee now use; Yet, the agreement of them with other Copies, to∣gether with the reason, and consequence, or pertinence of sense inforced by the text of the Scripture, may give him just ground to assure himself, and the Church, of the true reading of the Scripture, yea, though the present Ebrew should not agree with others. For, I shall not need here to say, what or how great faults may be found in our Ebrew Copies, who had rather be assured that there were none at all to be found, greater or lesse; But that wee, (who neither relye upon the dictate of the Spirit, to them that are able to conclude the Church, nor, much lesse, to par∣ticular Churches, for assuring the true reading of Scripture) are not bound to resolve our faith in it into the present Tradition of the Synagogue, having, over and above, so considerable helps to the verifying of the same. For, magnifying first the providence of God, in that the Jews, having Christians in utter hatred, should neverthelesse, neither be willing, for their interest, nor able for their ma∣lice, to falsifie those things in their own books, which bear witnesse against them∣selves; Seeing God hath given the Church, that most ancient Greek Transla∣tion, which is commonly ascribed to LXX Interpreters sent from Jerusalem, but more justly to the Jews of Alexandria, besides that Copy of the Law which the Samaritanes still use; Since wee have considerable remains of those Greek Translations made by Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, the Bodies whereof, to the great losse of the Church, have perished with the worthy labors of Ori∣gen, in joyning them in columes to the Ebrew; Since wee have those ancient translations into the Chaldee, which the Jews make so much esteem of; Since wee have the Syriack and Vulgar Latine made by Christians, (to say nothing of the Arabick, whether made by Jews or Christians, or of any other though anci∣ent translations, which have not had the like use and credit in the Church) So far am I from giving way to that unreasonable demand, so destructive to the being of Christianity, that wee cannot assure our selves that wee have any Scripture; That in all that I have to say, or shall have said, concerning the dispute on foot in England about Religion, I shall neither undertake to assure men that will be content with reason, that I allege nothing for Scripture which I cannot justifie so to be, or else, undertake to resolve that which shall come in debate, without the help of that which I cannot assure to be such. Not intending, in that which follows, to allege any more evidence hereof in the particulars, than I have done in the premises; But, building my self upon the resolution premised, and in∣tending, that there shall be nothing to be objected, from the true means of que∣stioning and settling the true reading of the Scriptures, that may breed any con∣siderable scruple, concerning the truth of those Scriptures, which I shall imploy to my purpose. As for the part of the difficulty which remains, concerning the true reading of the New Testament, it is in vain, to maintain the decree of the Council of Trent, by pretending, that the Greek Copy, out of which the Vulgar Latine was translated, vvas more intire, and of better credit, than the Greek Copies novv extant: Understanding that decree, to make that Copy authentick in point of faith, by virtue of any gift of Infallibility intailed upon the decrees of the present Church, For, if it be onely made authentick, because the use and credit of it is not allowed to be questioned in the Church, it is another question, as I have said already, vvhich I pretend not to touch in this place. For, supposing the Copy from which the Vulgar Latine was translated, to have been better than any Greek Copy now extant, the credit of the Vulgar Latine is not to be ascri∣bed
to the decree of the Council that decrees this, any more, than the funda∣mental Laws of this Kingdom of England were the fundamental Laws thereof, by virtue of any Act of Parliament, by which they were not constituted, but declared and acknowledged to be such. And, if the credit of the Vulgar La∣tine be derived from the Greek Copy, out of which it was translated, then is it no further authentick, than, as it expresseth the authentick reading, which then was found in the Greek, out of which it was translated. And so, the whole cre∣dit of the Scripture is resolved into the credit of the Originals, whereof wee stand possest, in the translations of them that remain, in whatsoever Language. So that the question comes to be the very same that remained before, concerning the authentick Copy of the Old Testament, and the resolution clear, that the Original Greek is the authentick, the reading thereof being first assured, neither by the dictate of Gods Spirit, to any persons inabled to oblige the Church by their decrees, nor to any never so good Christian, much lesse by the Tradition of any particular Copy which the Church stands possest of, but by that Tradition which is justified and assured by all Copies, wherein the leter of the Scripture is recorded to the Church. For, though I do, for disputation sake suppose, yet do I not grant for a truth, that the Copy out of which the Vulgar Latine was transla∣ted, is to be held of better credit than that, out of which that excellent transla∣tion into the Syriack, which, to the great benefit of Christianity, these last ages have brought into Europe, was made. The antiquity of this later, and the emi∣nent helps which it hath contributed toward the understanding of the New Te∣stament, being so great, as the Vulgar Latine, though very learned, and there∣fore very helpfull, can never out-shine. And yet will I never grant, that ei∣ther one or both of them, and that, with the help of the Arabick and other the most ancient Translations which the Church beside may have, are not to give account to the consent of many Copies now extant, nay, to the credit of some one, if it should so fall out in any passage, that the sense of the Scripture, which cannot be made out by the rest, is clear to common reason, according to that one: Whether such a case do ever fall out in any part of the Scripture or not; The assurance of Christianity not standing in this, that either this or that is, or must needs be true, but in this, that the Church is assured in all cases. But, by this it may appear, how innocent, the resolution of the authentick Original of the Old Testament, vvhich I have premised, is, and hovv safely I ground my self, not upon the credit of the Jevvs Copy, but upon all the records vvhereby the Church assureth the Tradition of the Scripture; In that it is freely confes∣sed, that the difference of reading vvhich can become questionable, notvvith∣standing the superstitious diligence of the Jevvs in preserving their Copy, is nei∣ther so frequent, nor any thing so vveighty, as in the Nevv: Which, hovv much more considerable it is tovvards the upholding of our common Christianity, is plain enough, to him that shall have perused but the premises. And surely, vvere it not true, as hath been premised, that a certain Rule of Faith vvas from the beginning delivered to the Church, it vvould seem strange, that wee cannot deny, that there have considerable differences crept into the reading of the New Testament, so much more nearly concerning our salvation than the Old, in the reading whereof, through the diligence of the Jews, there remains no considerable difference. But if wee remember, that S. Paul makes the ministery of Preaching the Gospel, to be the ministery of the Spirit, in opposition to the ministery of Moses in giving the Law, which was the ministey of the leter, wee shall finde, that Faith, the receiving whereof qualified Christi∣ans to be indowed with the Holy Ghost, to be of such sufficience, that, remain∣ing intire, wee need not think the Church disparaged, if the records thereof suf∣fer decay, so long as the effect of them remains written by the Holy Ghost, in the hearts and lives of Christians. Alwayes, it being unquestionable, that there are considerable differences remaining in the reading of the New Testament, it will be a very great impertinence, to fore-cast any danger, in granting, that some question may be made to the Jews Copy of the Old Testament, though neither so frequent nor so considerable. And all that hath been said hath issue in this
consequence, to justifie, and to recommend to the world, the usefulnesse of the design lately set on foot in London, for printing the Bible, with the most ancient and learned Translations in columns; most agreeably to the design of Origen in his Terapla, Hexapla, and Octapla, that is, Old Testament of four, six, and eight columns, recording the several numbers of Translations or columns, whereof his several Editions consisted. For in a word, this furniture, and that, which serves to the same purpose, (for who will undertake that one book shall contain all?) is the Instrument I appeal to, for evidence of the Scripture which wee have. And further, here is the original means of determining the sense of the same, though, besides this, I have claimed many other helps to be requisite to that purpose. The end of the First Book. LAUS DEO.
OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE. The second BOOK. CHAP. 1. Two parts of that which remains. How the dispute concerning the Holy Trinity with Socinus belongs to the first. The Question of justification by Faith alone. The Opinion of Socinus concerning the whole Covenant of Grace. The opinion of those who make justifying Faith the knowledge of a mans Predestination, op∣posite to it in the other extream. The difference between it and that of the Anti∣nomians. That there are mean Opinions. THE greatest difference that is to be discerned, among those things that concern the duty of all Christians, consists in this; that some of them concern Christians as Christians: others, as members of the Church. For though all Christians, as Christians, are bound to be members of the Church, (in as much as it is a part of their profession, to believe one Catholick Church) yet, their obligation, to be Christians, being in or∣der of nature and reason, before their obligation to be members of the Church, (because the very being of the Church presuppo∣seth all that are members of it to be Christians) that obligation which is ori∣ginall and more ancient, must needs be presupposed to that which is grounded upon it. Of what consequence it may be, to distinguish this difference in the matter of Christian duties, will perhaps appear in due time. In the mean I shall freely say my opinion, that all the Divines in the Christian world cannot more pertinently, and to better purpose, comprise the subject which they pro∣fesse to be imployed about, then by dividing it into that which concerns Chri∣stians as Christians, and, that which concerns them as members of the Church. For mine own present purpose, it is evident that the disputes which divide us do concern, either the state of particular Christians towards God, or the obli∣gation they have to other Christians as members of the Church. So that, the matter which I propose to my insuing discourse is sufficiently comprised in two heads; one, of the Covenant of Grace; the other, of the Laws of the Church. I know it may be said, that the heresie of Socinus is of the number of those that have footing among us, and, that the principal point of it, concerning the faith of the holy Trinity, comes not properly under either of these heads. And I deny not that it is very dangerous for us in regard of two points, that have so great vogue among us: The first is the cleare sufficience of the Scriptures, commonly passing so without any limits, that it seems to follow of good right, that what is not clear out of the Scriptures to all understandings, cannot be necessary for the salvation of all Christians to believe: So that no man can be bound, to take that for an Article of his Faith, against which they
can show him arguments out of the Scriptures, which he cannot clearly assoile. The other is, that they put it in the power of Christians to erect Churches at their pleasure (though supposing the Faith which Socinus teacheth, and pre∣tending to serve God according to the same) without communion with, or ob∣ligation of dependance one upon another, either in the Rule of Faith, or ser∣vice of God according to it, wherein they may seem elder brothers to those who have put the like principle in practice among us, though without suppo∣sing any other Rule of Faith, then that which every Church so constituted shall agree to take for the sense of the Scriptures. Now, how soon it may come into the mind and agreement of a Church so constituted, to take up the profession of Socinus for the Rule of their Faith, I leave them that are capable to judge, if yet we have no experience of it. But I have observed by reading Socinus his Book de Christo Servatore (one of the first, if not the first of all the Books whereby he declared his heresie) that being extreamly offended at his adver∣saries opinion, he seems to have been thereby occasioned to fall upon another extream, of denying the satisfaction of Christ: and so, by degrees, his Godhead, as the only peremptory principle to destroy the satisfaction of Christ, and by consequence as well that reason of the Covenant of Grace which the Church, as that which his adversary maintaineth. Conceiving then, his error about the Covenant of Grace to have occasioned his error in the Faith of the holy Tri∣nity, I conceive I shall handle the chiefe Controversies in Religion that divide the Church at present (according to the title of my Book) though I maintain not the faith of the Trinity against Socinus, otherwise then as the mainte∣nance of the Covenant of Grace, grounded upon the satisfaction of Christ, (as that upon his Godhead) shall require. Another reason I had, because this Heresie seems to be too learned to become popular among us, though branches of it may come to have vogue. For though there hath been but too much, either of wit or Learning, imployed in framing the Scriptures to the sense of it, in the chiefe points of Christianity; Yet is it hard to make the vul∣gar understanding not onely of hearers, but of teachers, such as these times allow, capable of that sense, to which they have framed the most eminent pas∣sages of the Scriptures, and the grounds of it, together with the consent and agreement of the severall points of Christianity among themselves, according to it. Upon this consideration, I charge not my selfe with the maintenance of the Faith of the holy Trinity, otherwise then as the consideration thereof shall be incident to resolve the nature of the Covenant of Grace, which is the first part of my purpose. Therefore (that a few words may propose many and great difficulties) from whence it comes, and what it is, that renders Christians acceptabe to God, sand heirs of everlasting life, who, as men, are his enemies by sinne here, and ubjects of his wrath in the world to come; this I conceive to be the sum of what we are to inquire: Concerning, in the first place, that disposition of mind, which qualifies a man for those blessings which the Gospel tenders, upon that condition which the Covenant of Grace requires: and in the second place, whether this disposition be brought to passe in us by the free Grace of God, and the helps which it provides, or by the force of nature: that is, by that light of understanding, and that freedom of choice, which necessarily proceeds from the principles of mans nature. It is well enough known, how great dis∣pute there is between them that professe the Reformation and the Church of Rome, whether a man be justified before God in Christ, by Faith alone, or by Faith and Works both,▪ speaking of actuall righteousnesse; or, if we speak of habituall righteousnesse, by Faith and Love. For, though the whole Garland of supernaturall vertues concurrs to the habituall righteousnesse of Christians, which is universall to all objects & actions: Yet, seeing the reason of them all is derived from that which Faith believeth, and the intent of all refer∣red to that service of God which love constraineth, where Faith and Love are named, there the rest may well be understood. Whether Faith alone there∣fore, or Faith and love, so much the parties must, in dispite of them, remaine
agreed in, that there is some disposition, or act of mans mind, required by the Covenant of Grace, as the condition that qualifieth a man, at least for so much of that Promise which the Gospel tendreth, as justification importeth. But this being supposed and granted it may and must be disputed, in what considera∣tion it qualifieth for the same: Which is, to make short, whether the inward worth of that disposition, whatsoever it shall prove to be, oblige Al∣mighty God to reward it with that which the Gospel promiseth: Or whether, in consideration of the obedience of Christ, performed in doing the message which he undertook, of reconciling Man unto God, he hath been pleased to proraise that reward, which is without comparison more then can be due to that disposition which he requires, as the condition to qualifie us for the promise. Here must I relate the position of the Socinians, concerning the intent of Christs comming: Not to purchase at Gods hands those helps of Grace which inable Christians to become qualified, for the promise which the Gospel tendreth, which the Church, with S. Austin in the dispute with the Pelagians, cals therefore the Grace of Christ: Not to reconcile us to God, in the nature of a meritorious cause, his obedience being the consideration, for which God accepteth that disposition, which qualifies us for the promise of the Gospel, as the condition upon which he tenders it: But to yield us sufficient reason, both to perswade us of the truth of his message, (as by the rest of his works, so especially by rising again from the dead) and also to induce us to imbrace the Gospel, by assuring us of the fulfilling of that promise to us, which we see so eminently performed in him, by that height to which we believe him to be exalted; and then having induced us to undertake the Gospel of Christ to secure us, both of protection against the enemies thereof here, by that power which he that went before us in it hath obtained for that purpose, and of our crown at the judgement to come. And all this, not in any consideration of the merits and sufferings of Christ, but of Gods free Grace, which alone moved him to deale with us by Christ, to this effect, and to propose a reward so unpropor∣tionable to our performance, which would not redound to the account of his free Grace, if it should be thought to have been purchased, either by the satisfa∣ction of Christ, in regard of our sins to be redeemed, or by his merits, in regard of the reward to be purchased. As for the matter of Justification by Faith alone, it is to be observed, that Socinus is obliged by the premises to understand that Grace, for which the Gospel is called The Covenant of Grace, to be no Grace of Christ: that is to say, not given out of any consideration of his merits and sufferings, which they neither acknowledge to have been tendred by our Lord, nor accepted by the Father, to any such effect or purpose. But nothing hinders him therefore to acknowledge it the Grace of God; that is a meere grant of his free goodnesse, whatsoever condition he require thereby, to qualifie him that imbraces it for the promises which it tenders, provided it be such as he that it is tendred to can accomplish. For, that Faith which alone justifieth according to S. Paul, he maketh to consist in believing the Truth of Christianity, and sincerely indeavouring to bring forth the fruits thereof, out of a grounded confidence of obtaining the said promises. And that in consideration hereof, those that thus believe are counted righteous before God; that is treated as if they had been originally righteous, and not sinners before they came to believe. As for the Sacrament of Baptism, making no more of a Church, then of an arbitrary Society, of so many as agree to serve God together in the same Faith, it is no marvel if he make it a meer Ceremony, the use whereof was during the time of the Disciples of our Lord, and the conversion of Jews and Gentiles to Christianity by their preaching, to signifie the purifying of them by that Faith, to which they professed thereby to be converted: which intent ceasing in those, who being born of Christian Parents, were never tainted with the filthinesse, either of Jewes or Gentiles, by consequence, that ceremony, though it may freely be used by Christians, in the nature of a thing indifferent, yet ought not to carry that opinion, as if any mans salvation depended upon it.
And having related this opinion, I must relate another opposite to this in another extream, which is the opinion of those that hold that Faith which alone justifieth, to consist in believing, that a man is predestinated by God to life from everlasting, as being of the number of them whom Christ was sent to redeem, exclusively to the rest of Mankind: And that therefore the whole consideration for which this Faith justifieth, is the obedience of Christ, im∣puted unto them which are of ths number, upon no other account, then the eternall purpose of God to give him for them alone, whereby his sufferings are theirs in Law, as much as if they had been performed by themselves, the condition of Faith serving only, to limit a qualification, without which this purpose availeth them not, being limited to take place, from the time that this purpose of God is revealed unto them, the revelation whereof, they suppose to be that Faith which alone justifieth. Who they are that maintain this opinion, I will not here dispute, which I intend to show cause, why it is to be thought so ill of, that I could with, that no man that is called a Christian would own it: And perhaps many of those, who, either expresly, or in effect do hold it, do withall hold other points, which indeed and in effect, are contradictions to it: Neither can I say, that our Presbyterians are parties in it; but this I say, that this is the opinion, in opposiion to which Socinus brought in the Opinion hitherto described, voiding the Grace and satisfaction of Christ, by declining to the other extream, as any man may see, that with a little care shall peruse the fourth part of his Book De Christo Servator, Cap. III. IX. X. And therefore I conceive, I may justly infer, that to maintain this extremity (which he not consulting the Catholick Church and the Faith thereof, thought necessary to the voyding of that other extream, which he found inconsistent with the principles of Christianity) he proceeded so far, as to deny any Godhead, any being of Christ, before his birth of the Virgin: taking away, by consequence, that reason and ground both of satisfaction for sin, and of merit of Grace which the Church ascribeth to his obedience and sufferings, and placeth the Godhead of Christ (which he acknowledgeth so far, as to tender him the worship that is proper to God, at least in some circumstances) in that height of eminence to which God hath exalted him, for undertaking and performing the Commission of reconciling Man to God, though bound to it as a meer man, and Gods Creature before he undertooke it. And thus you see, how that part of Socinus his Heresie, in denying the Faith of the Holy Trinity, indirectly commeth in, to the question of the Covenant of Grace: Seeing it is manifest to the sence of all men▪ that had he not questioned the Godhead of Christ, there had been no pretence, of bringing the Faith of the Trinity into any dispute. But of what consequence, this opinion concerning Justifying Faith and the nature of it is, to the substance of Christianity, it will be time to consider, when I have shewed why it is not true: In the mean, I shall note here another opinion, differing in somewhat, but agreeing in much with this which I take to be the opinion of our Antinomians, but shall not be much troubled, if any man shall dispute that I mistake it. For seeing them so full with a blas∣phemous conceit of Gods Spirit, that they would think it a disparagement to it, to be tied to any dispute of reason, (though upon supposition of the Christian Faith) to distinguish between principles and conclusions, to infer a certaine position from certain grounds, even of Scripture; I cannot think it any great imputation to misunderstand them, whose perfection it is not to understand themselves. For when I name Antinomians, I intend to comprise in, the opinion which I refute, all our Anabaptists, all our Familists, all our Enthusiasts and Quakers, all Sectaries whatsoever, that do believe them∣selves possessed of the Spirit, not presupposing, not only the beliefe of that Faith which is necessary to the salvation of all Christians, but also whatsoever else it shall appear, that the condition of the Covenant of Grace importeth. The having of Gods Spirit, as it inferreth a right to everlasting life; so, suppo∣sing whatsoever the Covenant of Grace importeth.
But by the noise which they make with the free Grace of God, and the Cove∣nant of Grace, I conceive, the main of their position lies, in one step beyond that extream, which I described even now, in opposition to Socinus; That we are justified by the obedience of Christ, performed for them, for whom God appointed it, and therefore imputed to them from everlasting, by vertue of that appointment made from everlasting, but revealed to them by that faith, whereby they know themselves to be elected to life from everlasting, not de∣pending upon the revelation thereof, but the revelation upon the being of it. And, upon this ground it is, that they say; that God sees not, nor can see sin in his Elect, that all their sins are pardoned before they are done, and that there is no mortall sin but repentance, implying the want of saving faith, with which no sin can stand, nor any thing be but sin without it, and the like blasphemies innume∣rable. I know there are other Opinions of Justification by faith alone among those that professe it, according to the senses which they may have, of the nature of justifying faith, and those perhaps of greater vogue, than this which I have named: Neither is it my intent to involve those that maintain Justification by faith alone in the blame, which I charge the opinions hitherto described with. The reason why I mention these opinions here is, because they are in the extreams, and therefore the mention of them seemed to propose the state of that question, which I pretend to resolve. For my way shall be, in the first place, to answer the question proposed, concerning that disposition which the Covenant of Grace requireth the mind of him to be formally affected with, that will be qualified for the promises which God therby tendreth: Making this account, that the treating of it will give us an overture, into the consideration, both of the effective cause, that produceth it in those that have it, and also of the meritorius cause that moveth God, both originally to grant the said ef∣fective cause, and consequently to accept the effect thereof, for a competent qualification of them that have it, for the promises which God by his Gospel tendreth those that receive it▪ CHAP. II. Evidence what is the Condition of the Covenant of Grace. The contract of Bap∣tism. The promise of the Holy Ghost annexed to Christs, not to Johns Baptism. Those are made Christs Disciples as Christians that take up his Crosse in Bap∣tism. The effects of Baptism according to the Apostles. TO proceed to as brief and as clear a resolution of that point as I can pro∣pose, I say; That a sincere and resolute profession to undertake Chri∣stianity, and to live according to it (believing as our Lord Christ hath revealed, and living as he hath taught) consigned to God in the hands of his Church, by the Sacrament of Baptism, is that condition which the Covenant of Grace requireth, to qualifie us for the promises which it ten∣dreth. This resolution is directly against the Antinomians, and those that believe that a Christian is justified by the obedience of Christ, imputed from everlasting to them whom he came to save; Which indeed nullifieth the Cove∣nant of Grace, and converteth it to a meer promise on Gods part, requiring no condition on mans part to be performed by him, to qualifie hm for it. But, this resolution opposing that conceit so roundly, as positively to expresse the condition which I intend to maintain; It will serve, both against the conceit of Socinus, that justifying faith is nothing but a firm beliefe, that those who believed the Gospel purposing to live as God requireth, are accepted by him as righteous, Baptisme into the profession of Christianity not inclu∣ded. But also of those, that will have it to consist in the knowledge of our being predestinate to life from everlasting, revealed by Gods word, and sealed
by his Spirit. The proofs of it I will divide into three heads: For, consisting of so many branches as you see, it cannot be expected, that those Scriptures which shall serve to evidence it, should every where expresse all the parts of it. It is enough if the severall parts of it, out of which the whole results, be de∣monstrable by severall ranks of Scriptures. The first of those Scriptures that concern the profession which God, by our Lord Christ, requireth (and he by his Apostles, and the Church after them to the worlds end) of them that will be qualified for the Promises which the Gospel tondreth: which I put in the first place, expresly, because they seem to contain the most visible and express ar∣guments, that the principles and practice of Christianity can yield, to inforce this truth. The second shall be taken from the nature of faith, and the attri∣butes ascribed to it by the Scriptures, in justifying, saving, regenerating, or adopting us for sons, giving us the spirit of Gods sons, remitting our sins, and the rest that we expect at Gods hands by vertue of his Covenant of Grace. The last shall be from those passages, of the Apostles chiefly, and consequently of other Scriptures that they expound, wherein it is denied, that we are saved, or justified by Works, or by the Law; but affirmed that we are saved and justified by Grace and by faith: The due sence and intent whereof is the thread, to guide us through the intricacies of this whole dispure. Though, when this is done, I shall not wish any man to resolve himself, in this, or in any other point of the whole book, till he hath gone through the whole, and considered what resolution this generall infers, to all other branches or depen∣dances of it; And therefore shall think he does nothing, that goes about to disprove any part of it, without shewing the resolution, which his opinion infers, to those other points or dependances, that the Reader may have the choice before him, which he thinks most consequent, in reason, to the principles of Christianity received on all sides. I will begin with the words of the Apostle, 1 Pet. III. 20, 21. where this seems to be couched in terminis: He saith, that the long suffering of God waited in the dayes of Noe, while the Arke was making, in which a few, that is, eight souls, were saved: the antitype whereof, Baptism, now saveth us, (not the laying down of the filth of the flesh, but the having of a good conscience towards God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The water of Baptism saveth us through the temtations of the World, as they were saved through the deluge: And what can be done more then to save us? let no man think to defeat this. by striving about words, that, to save, and to justifie, is not the same: If Bapism import the condition of the Covenant of Grace which saveth us, our justification will necessarily be wrapt up in the same packet, though to justifie and to save be severall conceits. And is it not strange that any man should be perswaded, that there is nothing said or meant of the Baptism of water in all this passage, but of the Baptism of the Spirit, as that which moves a good conscience to professe Christianity? For, how can Baptism by the Holy Ghost and fire be the antitype of the waters of the deluge, as the Baptism of water is, and as that Baptism which the Apostle speaks of is? The correspondence be∣tween the types of the Old, and the antitypes of the New Testament, by vertue of the premises consists, in the correspondence between the temporall delive∣rance of that time and the spirituall deliverance of this, both in order to the everlasting deliverance of the World to come. Now it is certain, that the visible Ceremony of Baptism signifies the temptations of this World, out of which we escape, by the means of that Sacrament, as he that is baptized rises out of the water again. According to that of the Psalm LXIX. 1, 15. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul. And, Let not the water-stood drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: And let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. And XLII. 9. One deep calleth another, because of the noise of thy water-pipes: All thy waves and billows are gone over me. Whereupon S. Paul Romans VI. 3, 4, 5, Know ye not, that as many as have been baptized into Christ Jesus, have been baptized into his death? We are therefore buried with him by baptism into death, that as Christ was raised from the dead by the
glory of the Father, so we should also walk in newnesse of life. For if we have been planted into the like death of his, then shall we be also into the like of his rising again. For when he saith again, Rom. X. 7. Who shall go down into the deep; to wit, to bring up Christ from the dead? He sheweth plainly, that by the waters of the deep, he understands death: whereby I suppose it appears sufficiently, that the water of Baptism, not the fire of the Holy Ghost, is the antitype to the waters of the deluge. Besides, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is not called Baptism, but by resemblance of the fire thereof infusing it self into all the soul, as the whole body is drenched in the waters of baptism. Therefore it is not cal∣led absolutely Baptism, but with an addition abating the property of the sense, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire. Therefore where the term Bap∣tism stands without this addition, or any circumstance signifying the same, it cannot be understood. Again, the interrogating of a good conscience,  signifies, as all men of learning agree, metonymically, or by Synecdoche, the answer, or rather the stipulation, consisting of the in∣terrogatories of Baptism, and the answer returned by him that is baptized, undertaking to believe and to live like a Christian. For it is manifest, that it Fath been alwayes the custom in the Church of God, as still in the Church of England, (which S. Peter here shews that it comes down from the Apostles) to exact of him that is baptized, a solemn vow, promise, or contract, to stand to that which he undertaketh. And this it is which the word  here signifies, whereof he that doubts, may see enough in Grotius his Annotations to make him ashamed to doubt any more. When therefore S. Peter saith, that Baptism saveth us, not the doing away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience towards God, he does not intend to distinguish the Baptism of water from the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, in opposition to the same; But to distinguish in the Baptism of water, the bodily act of cleansing the flesh, from the reasonable act of professing Christianity, which, being done out of a good conscience towards God, he saith, saveth us; And that by the resurre∣ction of Jesus Christ: By vertue whereof S. Paul also saith, that, if we planted into the like death to Christs death, we shall also be planted into the like resur∣rection of Christs; Supposing that whosoever is baptized takes upon him the profession of Christs Crosse, that is the bearing of it, when his Christianity cals him to it. For when our Lord saith in the Gospel, I have a Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straitned till it be accomplished? Luk. XII. 50. And again to the sons of Zebedee, Mat. XX 22. Are ye able to be baptized with the Baptism which I shall be baptized with? He shews sufficiently that his Baptism is his Crosse. In consideration whereof, that is, of undertaking to bear it, out of a good conscience, as Christ was raised from death to life again, by the Spirit of Holinesse, which dwelt in him without measure; So those that are planted into the likenesse of Christs death in Baptism, are promised the Grace of Gods Spirit to dwell in them, and to raise them from sin here, to the life of Grace; and from death hereafter to the life of Glory in the world to come, as I shewed you in the first Book. So that S. Pauls argument proceeds not upon consideration of the Ceremony of Baptism, and the naturall resemblance it hath with the duty of a Christian, to rise from sin, because he professes to die to it: For that were to think, that the Apostles have but weak argumens to inforce the obligation of Christianity with, when this prime one is made to signifie no more then an indecorisne, impertinence, or inconsequence in, signify∣ing and professing that by our Baptism, which by our lives we perform not. But, maketh Baptism the protestation of a solemn vow and promise, to God and men and Angels, to live for the future, as the profession of Christians im∣porteth. And is it possible to show man, overtaken in sin, a more valuable consideration to expect salvation upon, (and therefore a stronger means to in∣force the performance of what he hath undertaken) then his own ingagement upon such a consideration as that? We are therefore baptized with Christ un∣to death, because we have undertaken, upon our Baptism, to mortifie our selves to the world, that we may live to Gods service: And upon that condition, we
promise our selves, that we shall be raised from the dead again, though by ver∣tue of Christs rising again: Being buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him, by faith of the effectuall working of God, which raised him from the dead, saith S. Paul, Col. II. 12. For, by obliging our selves to the profession of Christianity, from a good heart and clear conscience, we obtain the promise of the Holy Ghost, whereby God effecteth the raising of us to a new life of righteousnesse, necessarily consequent to the mortifying of sinne. Besides these, how many and how excellent effects are attributed to Baptism, in the writings of the Apostles? which, without S. Peters distinction, might seem strange, that they should depend upon the clensing of the flesh; but, that they should, by Gods appointment, depend upon that ingagement, whereby we give our selvs up to Christ for the future, according to his distinction, not at all. For, that this ingagement should not be effectuall, till consigned unto the Church at Baptism, cannot seem strange to him that believes the Catholick Church to be, as I have shewed, a corporation founded for the maintenance and exercise of that Christianity, to which we ingage our selves by Baptism. When the Jewes were pricked in heart to see our Lord, whom they had cru∣cified, to be risen again, and asked the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we doe? Acts II. 37, 38. Peter saith unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you, unto remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Which, if it depend upon Baptism, what promise of the Gospel is there that does not? To the same purpose, Heb. VI. 6. It is impossible for them that have once been inlightned, and tasted the heavenly gift, and become partakers of the Holy Ghost: Where you see, that upon inlightning, that is Baptism, we become partakers of the Holy Ghost. And this consideration utterly voides the only reason why our Lord, when he sayes to Nicodemus. John III. 5. Veri∣ly verily I say unto thee, unlesse a man be born again of waer and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; should not seem to speak of the Sacrament of Baptism. For at that time. neither was the Sacrament of Baptism instituted, nor the promise of the Holy Ghost annexed to it. The Holy Ghost, that is to say, the gift of the Holy Ghost, is no where promised be∣fore the ascension of Christ. For, besides that which I alledged in the begin∣ning, to show, that it presupposeth Christianity; When it is said, John VII. 37. The Holy Ghost was not yet, because Christ was not yet glorified: The de∣pendance thereof, upon the glorifying of our Lord is plainly expressed. And that according to S. Paul, Ephes IV. 8. 12. Shewing out of Psal. LXVIII. 18. that the graces of the Holy Ghost, by which the Church is united and compa∣cted into one Body, are sent down by God, as a largess, in consideration of the advancement of our Lord to the right hand of God, as in honour of that triumph: Wherewith agreeth S. Peter, Acts II. 33. Being then exalted to (or by) the right hand of God, and having received the gift of the Holy Ghost, (as it is also called, Acts X. 54.) he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. Now let any man say, that these visible operations of Holy Ghost, (where∣by the world was to be convinced of the presence of God in the Church of Christians) these indeed depend upon the ascension of Christ: But, without the invisible operation of the Holy Ghost no man ever to salvation from the beginning; (supposing this for the present, but not granting it, if any man that is a Christian demand proof for it) Though this be true, yet it was not ex∣presly promised by God, nor expresly Covenanted for by man, till the pub∣lishing of Christianity upon the ascension of Christ. Therefore, the Baptism of repentance which John preached, was without question effectuall, to the re∣mission of sins, as the Gospels propose it, Mark I. 4. Luke III. 3 For if I maintain the salvation of those, who, living under the Law, understood the Covenant of Grace to be folded up in it, by the preaching of the Prophets, much more easily can I maintain the salvation of those, who have imbraced the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins. which Jon Preached, provided that they came to Christ, to whom John Baptist sent his Disciples so soon as
the command of Christianity should take place, and not otherwise. But, not by vertue of the Covenant of Grace published, which it was not to be till the ascention of Christ, but by vertue of the Covenant of Grace vailed under the Law, which was not unvailed as yet, during the time of passage from the Law to the Gospel, when the baptism of John might take place. Neither was the baptism of John in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, which baptism our Lord never established till after his rising again, Mat. XXVIII. 19. but in the name of him that was comming, as S. Paul saith to the Disciples Acts XIX. 4. John truly baptised the baptism of repentance, saing to the people, that they should believe on him that was comming after him, that is in Christ Jesus: which words, some have endeavoured to set upon the rack, and to pull them from those which follow; but they hearing this, were bapti∣zed in the name of the Lord Jesus, as if they were not S. Lukes words, but S. Pauls speaking of S. John's hearers, that they were baptized by him in the name of the Lord Jesus. A thing altogether unreasonable to imagine, that the Disciples of John should make a question, whether our L. Jesus were the Christ or not, as Mat. XI. 2. Luke VII. 18. if they had been from the beginning baptized in his Name. And the words might have served to represse this conceit, in them that had submitted to take the meaning from the words, For it is, , not , which their meaning (were it the meaning of the text) would require. Nor is it strange, that they who had been bap∣tized into the profession of admitting him that was comming for the Christ, in hope by him to have remission of sins, as their Fathers had alwayes hoped, acknowledging our Lord Jesus not only to be the Christ, but further, sent by the Father to send the Holy Ghost, should be baptized again in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For the receiving of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of S. Pauls hands, which followeth in S. Luke, is sufficient evi∣dence, that it is the baptism of Christ, and not of John Baptist, whereof he speaketh. Let us hear, then, the Commission of our Lord Christ to his Apostles, Mat. XXVIII. 19. Go make Disciples all Nation; babtizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.  in Greek, in the Syriack  from  & , if we insist upon the property of the word must necessarily signifie make Disciples. But who are Christs Disciples? Those that take up his Crosse to follow him: Those that will do whatsoever he commandeth: Those that bear much fruit: Those of whom our Lord saith, John VIII. 34. If ye abide in my Word, then are ye truly my Disciples. As I shewed you before, speaking of the profession of Christianity. This before Christs death, and the institution of Baptism. Afterwards, who are his Disci∣ples, Acts XI. 26. It came to passe that the Disciples were first called Christians at Antivchia. First at Antiochia; but afterwards, all over that Book, as well as afore, they are oftner called Disciples then Christians. Neither is the name given to any but Christians, saving those Disciples which I spoke of just now, who, under the baptism of John, had given up themselves to our Lord Jesus as the Christ, but through invincible ignorance, knew not yet that the gift of the Holy Ghost presupposed Christs Baptism, being ready, as we see, to receive it, so soon as they understood it, by the means of S. Paul. Now there is nothing more manifest, than, that the gift of the holy Ghost is promised by our Lord in the Gospel to supply the want of his bodily presence, and therefore, when he declared unto them his departure, and not much afore it. Which things, if they be true, of necessity the promise of the Holy Ghost is annexed to the precept of being baptized, given by our Lord at his departure, and from that time to take place. Neither is the meaning of his commission in the words alledged, that they should first teach, and then baptize; (though teach∣ing that which Christianity professeth is necessarily presupposed to baptizing, namely, that Catechising which I spoke of afore) but that they should make men Disciples, by baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, limiting thereby, the quality of Disciples, to which the Holy Ghost is
promised, to those who should have received the Sacrament of Baptism, and so been made Disciples. Seeing then it appears so plentifully, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost, promised by our Lord, a little before his departure, to supply his bodily presence, is limited by him to the Sacrament of Baptisme, Of necessity, that new birth by Water and the Holy Ghost, which our Lords words to Nicodemus require, of all that shall enter into the Kingdom of hea∣heaven, dependeth upon the Sacrament of Baptism, whatsoever Nicodemus might understand by the terme of water, at the time when our Lord spake them, and this promise was not published. Of which I shall have occasion to say more in another place. Neither will is be to the purpose, to object, that it is the actuall assistance, and not the habituall gift of the Holy Ghost, that regenerateth (supposing for the present, but not granting that which all that pretend to Christianity do not acknowledge) and therefore that the promise of the Holy Ghost, to succeed upon Baptism, no way obligeth us to under∣stand that water, which, with the Holy Ghost, regenerateth, of the water of Baptism; For, the actuall assistance of the Holy Ghost, regenerating a man to become a Christian, may well be understood to go before the habituall gift of the Holy Ghost, upon Baptism. And in my opinion is to be understood, when our Lord goes on and saies; That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Marvell not that I said unto thee; ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where it lifteth, and ye hear the noise of it, but cannot tell whence it commeth, nor whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Holy Ghost. And therefore what shall hinder water and the Holy Ghost to signifie one and the same thing in this place, the cleansing vertue and operation of the Holy Ghost, being often signified under the figure of Wa∣ter in the Scriptures? So that Water and the Spirit may well stand here for no more than the Spirit that cleanseth; I say all this will not serve the turn. For, the habituall gift of the Holy Ghost, being promised Christs Disciples upon his departure to inable them to make good what they undertake by being hs Disciples: it is manifest, that the actuall assistance of the holy Ghost, regene∣rating to Christianity, only prepares the way for it. Seeing then, that the gift of the Holy Ghost depends upon the Water of Baptisme, it is manifest, that the cleansing vertue of Gods Spirit, in the new birth of sinners, comes not to effect without the same. I will further draw into consequence those texts of Scripture which I alledg∣ed in the first book, to show, that there was a certain Rule of Christianity de∣livered by the Apostles, and acknowledged by them that undertook to be Christians, for there are some of them that signifie plain enough, that this acknowledgment was made at their baptism, as the condition which it praesup∣posed. When S. Paul thanketh God for the Romans that they had obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which had been delivered them, Rom. VI. 17. What is this obeying from the heart, but that answer, or stipulation of a good conscience towards God in Baptism, which S. Peter saith, saveth us, as you have seen? And S. Paul to Timothy. 1 Tim. VI. 12. 13. Fight the good fight of Faith, lay hold of eternall life, to which also thou wast called, and madest a good profession before many witnesses. I charge thee before God that quickeneth all things, and Christ Jesus that witnessed the good Profession under Pontius Pi∣late, that thou keep the command unspotted and blamelesse, unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. What profession was it that our Lord died to witnesse, but, that he was ordained by God, the King of them whom he was sent with the Gospel to save? in regard whereof he is called by the Apostle Hebr. III. 2. the Apostle and High-Priest of our Profession; Because he bore the Crosse afore us, to witnesse that righteous cause▪ which we are to maintain by bearing the same. And what is that profession which Timothy made afore many wit∣nesses, but that of bearing Christs cross when he was baptized? And what is the commandement which he is charged to keep unspotted and blamelesse, but that Christianity which he became charged with at his Baptism? Wherefore when S. John alledgeth an Unction from the Holy one, even our Lord Christ,
which teacheth Christians all things, so that they need not be taught to avoid the Heresies of that time, because they knew the truth; hut withall chargeth them to abide in that which they had learned from the beginning, and in that Unction which teacheth them all things: He sheweth us manifestly, that the Unction of the Holy Ghost is granted by our Lord Christ to teach us all things which we have learned; To wit, that we be not seduced from that which we have learned from the beginning of our Christianity. Now, as it hath ap∣peared, that this Christianity was then learned and acknowledged in order to Baptism, so likewise, that the gift of the Holy Ghost dependeth upon the same. Otherwise, what shall we say to S. Peter ascribing remission of sins to Baptism, Acts 11. 38? What shall we say to Ananias exhorting S. Paul, Acts XXII. 16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord? What shall we say to S. Paul, affirming that, as many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Gal. III. 27. and that those that are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death, Rom. VI. 4. Which is to say, that God on his part granteth them power to perform that which they on their part professe to undertake? And again Eph. V. 25, 26. Christ gave himselfe for his Church, that he might sanctifie it, by cleansing it with the laver of water through the Word. And again, Titus III. 5, 6. Not by works of righteousnesse which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the laver of rege∣neration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he powred upon us plentifully, through our Saviour Jesus Christ. And the Apostle to the Hebrews X. 21, 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts cleansed from evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, let us hold fast the profession of faith, without declining from it. what starting hole is here left for him that had a mind to prefer his own prejudices before the Word of God, to avoid the evidence of these testimonies, for the con∣currence of Baptism to the qualifying of a Christian for the promises of the Gospel? What room is there left, so to interpret and understand Justifica∣tification by Faith alone, or the nature of that Faith which alone justifieth, that a man may be thought to be ingrafted into Christ by a living faith, before and without being baptized? He that admitteth S. Peters distinction shall not need to marvel, that God should appoint the cleansing of the soul to depend upon the washing of the body, seeing the profession of true Christianity, ob∣liging him that is baptized both to God and to his Church (the power of bap∣tizing into which is the power of remitting sins by the keys of the Church, as I proved in due place) by the same appointment annexed to the same. And upon this ground it is that S. Paul says, 1 Tim. V. 8. that he who provides not for his own, especially for his Family, hath denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Because that Christianity to which he is tied by his baptism obliges him to it. And the Apostles Jude 4. 2. Pet. II. II. affirm, that the Gnosticks did deny the Lord Jesus Christ that bought them: who certainly renounced not the profession of Christians which they counterfeited, but lived not according to it. Whereupon we read in S. Paul of those that retain a fashion of godlinesse, but deny the power of it, 2 Tim. III. 5. And that professe to know God (doubt∣lesse as Christians, if of Titus his charge) but deny it by their works, Titus I. 16.
CHAP. III. The exhortations of the Apostles, that are drawn from the patterns of the Old Testament, suppose the same. How the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament are the same, how not the same. How the New Testament and the New Covenant are both one. The free-will of man acteth the same part in dealing about the New-Covenant, as about the Old. The Gospel a Law. BEsides all this, I argue the same from the Old Testament, as the passages of it are imployed and expounded by our Lord and his Apostles in the New. S. Paul inforceth the observing and fulfilling of our Christian profession, specially not to communicate in the worship of Idols, thus: 1 Cor. X. 6. 11. These things came to passe for patterns to us, that we should not lust for evil things, as they also lusted: Nor be Idolaters, as some of them; As it is writ∣ten; The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play. Nor go a whoring, as some of them did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Nor tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed by Serpents. Nor mur∣mur, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these things happenned to them for figures, and are written for our warning, on whom the ends of the world are come. If these things fell out to the Fathers, that they might be figures for Christians, and that they were punished for transgressing the Covenant which they had made with God, is it not manifest, that the punishments which the Apostle threatneth Christians with, must come, for transgressing the second Covenant of Grace, which the Gospel introduceth (consider again the Apostles argument Hebr. III. 7-13. Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as at the pro∣vocation, in the day of temptation in the wildernesse, where your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years, wherefore I was wroth with that generation, and said, They always erre in heart, and know not my wayes, So that I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my rest. take heed, brethren, that there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbeliefe, in departing from the living God: But exhort one another every day, while it is called to day that none of you be hardned with the deceit of sin. It is manifest, that his intent is, to warn them of the crime of Apostasie, in renouncing Christianity, for the persecutions which the Jewes then followed them with, as the whole Epistle witnesseth, and here the very terms of an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, do evidence. And therefore in the end of the Chapter; Who did he swear should not enter into his rest, but those that were disobedient? And we see they could not enter for unbelief. , those that were dis∣obedient to Gods Law, which they had plighted their Faith to keep, could not enter into his rest of the Land of Promise, , for unbelief, or unfaith∣fulnesse whether you will. Therefore they that depart from God, having un∣dertaken the profession of Christianity, shall not enter into his everlasting rest of the Kingdome of Heaven, whether for unbelief, or unfaithfulnesse, For, as they are disloyall to their Promise, so, by Apostasie, they fall into the condition of Infidels. Can this Argument proceed upon any other terms? And, proceeding upon these, doth it not suppose an ingagement claiming loyalty? Is not the rest of Christians, which he mentioneth, as clearly the Kingdom of Heaven, as the rest whereof the Psalm speaks was the Land of promise? wherefore he inferreth upon the words quoted; For we are become partakers of Christ, if we hold the ground of our confidence, or the principle of our expectation firm to the end. The ground of a Christians confidence, or, that from whence his expectation of the promise commences, which he cals , being nothing else but the condition which he undertaketh, upon supposition of Gods promise. Wherefore S. Paul thus inferreth the warning
afore rehearsed, 1 Cor. X 1.-5. Now I would not have you ignorant. Bre∣thren, that our Fathers were all under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and all were baptized into Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and all ate the same spirituall meat, and drank the same spirituall drink. For, they drank of the spirituall Rock that followed them: now the Rock was Christ. But with most of them God was not well pleased; For they were felled in the Wildernesse. Did you ever read in the Old Testament that the Israelites were baptized, because they passed the Sea, under the Cloud, without a drop of water to wet them with? But, this we read, that God, by Moses, had delivered them, and thereupon they agree to leave Aegypt under his conduct. Hereupon infucs the drowning of their enemies in the red Sea, while they are protected thereby, with the Cloud also over their heads. This therefore was the beginning of that Peoples ingagement to God, under the conduct of Moses; Which though by & by they departed from at Marah, and elsewhere, mutiny∣ing against Moses, yet being reconciled to God by his patience and goodness in fulfilling their desires, they also tooke upon themselves to obey him, and to keep the the Sabbath, Exod. XV. 25, 26. XVI. 27, 28, 29. Untill being come to Monnt Sinai, they received the Decalogue, and afterward the whole Law, as it was renewed by Moses a little before his death, though, in effect, they had submitted to whatsoever should be required in Gods name by Moses, when they passed the red Sea, under his conduct. Only it is to be observed, that the Covenant of Circumcision, which God had made with Abraham, when he gave him the Land of Promise, remained for their Title to it, when the promise thereof became limited by the Law; Which limitation, because they submitted to by leaving Aegypt under the conduct of Moses, and, being shadowed by the Cloud, saw their enemies drowned in the red Sea, therefore are they elegantly said by S. Paul, to be baptized into Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea. For if, being redeemed from the Aegypt of this world, we undertake to leave it under the conduct of our Lord Christ; If, hereupon, our sins be drowned in the waters of Baptism; Were not they baptized in the same sense, as we passe the red Sea at our comming out of Aegypt? But both upon supposition of the correspondence between the two Testaments, without which, all this ar∣gument could neither have force nor relish. And therefore I cannot but ad∣mire, to see men learned in the Scriptures to maintain by this place, that the Sacraments of the Old Testament are the same with the Sacraments of the New; Not distinguishing, whether immediatly, or by way of correspondence. For, if you make the Kingdom of Heaven and the Land of Promise all a thing, then is Baptism, and the passage of the red Sea all one. But then, it will be all one to believe in Christ, and to submit to his conduct to Paradise, as to be∣lieve in Moses, (as the Israelites did hereupon, Exod. XIV. 31.) and to put themselves under his conduct to the Land of Promise; Which is my Argument. But if, setting aside the correspondence, you make their ingagement to God under Moses for obtaining the Land of promise, one thing, and our ingage∣ment to God under Christ, another; Certainly, the immediate assurance of this, and the immediate assurance of that, (which by means of the correspon∣dence becoms also the assurance of this) are severall things. And, if there be, between the Old and New Covenant, that correspondence, which makes that the figure of this, they may as well be said to be one and the same, (and, by consequence, the Sacraments of them) as a mans Picture is called by his name, when, seeing the Pictures of our Princes, for example, we say, This is H. the eight, and this Queen Elizabeth. But to say, that the Sacraments of the Old Law do immediately figure or assure the same thing, which the Sacraments of the Gospel do, is the same thing as to say, the rest of the Land of Promise, and the everlasting rest of the Kingdom of Heaven are both one and the same. Let us now see, by what right, that is, upon what ground S. Paul argues that, concerning the Gospel, from the words of Moses, Deut. XIII. 11.-14. which is manifestly said by him concerning the Law; Rom. X. 6.-10. The righteousnesse that is of Faith saith thus: Say not in thine heart; who will
ascend into Heaven? To wit, to bring down Christ: Or, who will go down into the deep? To wit, to bring up Christ from the dead: But what saith it? The Word is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart. That is, the word of Faith which we Preach; That if thou shalt confesse with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart a man believes to righteousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation. The argument is this; If Moses duly warn the Israelites, that they have no excuse for not obeying the Law which he had put, as it were, in their mouths, and into their hearts, so plainly had he taught it them: then cannot those that hear the Apostles Preach the Gospel excuse themselves in not obeying it, being so plainly shewed; That, if they professe Christ with their mouths, believing with the heart, that God raised him from the dead, they should be saved; That this word of Faith is put, as it were, in their mouths, and in their hearts. Can this be made good to be Moses his meaning, not supposing that the Spirit of God intended the Gospel by the Law? Or can it be denied so to be, supposing it? If therefore the profession of an Israelite tie him to the Law of God, given the Jews, shall not the profession of a Christian tie him to the Law of God, given the Jews, shall not the profession of a Christian tie him to the Law of God given the Christians? Shall not the professing of Christ, which the Apostle speaks of, be the undertaking of it? For S. Paul, by saying, that they were baptized into Moses under the Cloud and in the Sea, plainly sheweth, that, as their undertaking to march under the conduct of Moses towards the Land of Promise through the red Sea, was rewarded by God with the drowning of their enemies, and the overshadowing of the Cloud: So our undertaking to follow Christ towards that Kingdom, which he obtained by his Crosse, is rewarded with the extinguishing of sin and the refreshing of the Holy Ghost, in our travel to the world to come. And therefore, the ingagement of the second Covenant being inacted and settled upon us, by the Sacrament of Baptism, the promises of the Covenant must needs depend upon the same. What else shall the name of a New Covenant, or a New testament signifie, if we will not have them to signifie nothing? Some man perhaps may marvel whence it comes, that the agreement between God and his ancient People be∣ing alwaies represented in the Old Testament, in the nature and terms of a Covenant, the New is, by the Apostle, proved to have the nature of the last Will and Tessament of our Lord Christ, Hebr. IX. 16, 17. But, if this Testa∣ment be also a Covenant, (as the same Apostle saith, Hebr. VIII. 9. He hath obtained a more excellent Ministery, by how much he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is inacted upon better promises) there will be no cause to mar∣vell. The Greek word , in ordinary Greek, signifies no more, than a mans last Will and Testament; But, in the use of the Jews that spoke Greek, such as are the Apostles, the translators of the Old Testament into Greek, and others, it fignisies also a Covenant. If further it pleased God, that our Lord Christ should die, to assure us of everlasting life on his part, which thereby he purchased, obliging God on his part to give it to those that shall be found qualified for it, well may the Apostle affirm, that it is the last Will and Testament of him who died to make it irrevocable; (because mens Wills are not so till death) But it containeth nevertheless a Covenant, because men become not Sons of God by birth, but by choice, accepting the adoption which is tendred, being also their New-birth. Whereupon it follows, Hebr. IX. 18. Whence, neither the first was dedicated without bloud. Making the first Covenant a Testament also, because the sacrifices which it was dedicated with, signified the death of Christ, whose Testament the New Covenant is. Now every Covenant, every Contract whatsoever is a Law, which the parties in∣tercbangeably tie themselvs to, being free before: Neither can it be a Cove∣nant that imposeth nothing upon one of the parties. I know; the promise of God, not to destroy the World any more by water, is called many times, his Covenant, and the Rain-bow the sign of it, Gen. IX. 9.- 17. whence it may be argued, that nothing hinders a Covenant to be no more then a bare Promise.
And truly it is properly , that is, a disposition, though by free promise, it is , or a choice, according to them that will have that to be the ori∣ginall of the Word. He that would be contentious, might have ground to dispute, that this promise of God was not without a condition annexed unto it. For the tradition of the Jews is now generally received by men of Learning that God gave Noah and his Sons seven Precepts to observe, which were visi∣ble during the time that his People lived in the Land of Promise, as being the condition, upon the undertaking whereof, strangers were protected by Gods Law among them. Which if it be true, it can no way seem unreasonable to say, that the undertaking of these precepts was the condition, upon which it plea∣sed God to secure them from the waters of another deluge: reserving him∣self neverthelesse the liberty of destroying the world by fire, when that Cove∣nant which was to succeed this, and all the additions to it, under Abraham or Moses, should have wrought the effect for which it was tendred, in the salvation of Mankind. And thus it might be said, that the name of a Covenant is properly attributed to this promise, because of the condition annexed, though not remembred in the Scripture. But, seeing the word Covenant is manifestly used in the Scripture, to signifie a decree of God, or the declara∣tion of it, as when it speaks of Gods Covenant with the day and the night; I shall not need to ground my selfe upon any such nicety as this, provided and understood alwaies, that the annexing of a condition necessarily determines and limits it to signifie a Contract, not a bare decree or promise. Which easily appeareth in the Covenants whereof we speak, because they are treated. For, to induce a man to imbrace a promise, which, being of advantage brings no burthen within it, is not for the wisdome of God to send his Son to do, be∣cause none but a mad man can refuse it. But, where God sends his Son to tender mankind terms of reconcilement, where he suffers death, to undergo and execute his Commission, where he sends his Disciples, authorized by the evidence which his Spirit gives, that he sent them, but obliged to undergo death in testimony of the same; There, I suppose, there is such a condition an∣nexed, which, they that have reason to be satisfied of the truth of the mes∣sage, may doubt, whether to make themselves parties to, by imbracing the profession of it. Hear the Apostle 2 Cor. V. 18, 19, 20. All is of God that hath reconciled us to himselfe by Jesus Christ, and given us the Ministery of reconcilement: As, that God was about reconciling the World to himselfe by Christ, not imputing to them their transgression. and placing in us the Ministery of reconcilement. We are therefore Ambassadors in Christs stead; As if God did exbort by us; In Christs stead we beseech you, be reconciled to God. If all that is said in the Bible, of the second and New Testament, or Covenant of Grace, imported no more, but a bare promise, was mankind so void of reason, as to need all this, to perswade him to imbrace his own happiness tendred without any reputed disad∣vantage? For though, to forsake the world and our selves be really an ad∣vantage to the most noble parts of humane nature; yet, because that is not seen but by Faith, not imbraced without disadvantage, in regard of the present world, that which is really a difficulty to the imbracing of Christianity, I admit, as in the reputation of them to whom the Gospel is preached, to be a disadvantage. And therefore, with them to whom the Gospel is preached, the case is the same as with Cain, when God said to him, Gen. IV. 5. If thou dost well shalt thou not be accepted? but if thou dost not well, sin lieth at the door: As with the Israelites, when God said to them Deut. XXX. 15. Behold, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil: Whereas I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his wayes, and to keep his com∣mandements, and statutes, and judgements, and thou shalt live, and increase, and the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in the Land whither thou goest in to possesse it; In fine, as with them to whom it is said, Ecclesiasticus XV. 14,- 17. He made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his own Counsel; Keep the Commandements and faith, if thou wilt; To do things acceptable to him.
He hath set before thee fire and water, stretch forth thy hand to whether thou wilt. Life and death is before man, and that shall be given him which he liketh. That is to say; so manifest as it is, that God, when he tendred the Law to the Israe∣lites, tendred them their choice, whether they would undertake to live accor∣ding to it, upon condition of obtaining the promises tendred with it; So evi∣dent is it, that God, tendring the Gospel in the same terms, to all that are invited to undertake Christianity, tendreth it upon condition of living ac∣cording to it. And therefore, that, as well in matter of Christianity (in the imbracng or rejecting, in performing or failing of it) the choice of free will is evidently seen and exercised in, as any thing else wherein one man contracts with another; The nature and consideration of a Covenant holding as fully in this, as in humane contracts. Which if it be true, we must not be nice in allowing the Gospel of Christ; the name & nature of a Law, thogh the name of the Law (being already possessed by the Law of Moses) when it is put with some addition incompetent to the Law of Moses, cannot be understood of any thing else. For, if every contract be a Law to the parties so soon as it is inacted, then can it not be denied, that the Covenant of Grace is a Law to them that ingage in it, unless we would have God tied by his promise, and Christians free from any obligation, yet nevertheless inti∣tled to the same. For, what is a Law, but the condition, by observing whereof, every man maintains his estate in the Commonwealth whereof he is? Which, he that would not have Christianity to be, in regard of the world to come, what would he have Christians to be but Libertines and Rebels? True it is, God imposeth it not, as upon his subjects; but tendreth it as to his rebels, for the condition upon which they may become his subjects instead of his rebels; And that is a just reason why it is called a Covenant, rather than a Law; And that reason justly reproves the Leviathans imagination, that it can oblige neither more nor less than the Law of Nature. For, being positive, as tendred by the meer will of God, and upon what terms he pleased, (as the Precepts thereof, which are Gods Laws to his Church, and the institution of the Church it selfe is meerly positive) there is no reason at all to presume, that the moral Precepts which are in force under it are bounded by the Law of Nature. Though, whether it be so or not, I undertake not here to determine. But, we know what S. Paul saith, Rom. III. 27. Where is boasting? It is shut out. By what Law? Not by the Law of works, but by the Law of Faith; That is, by the Gospel, which requireth that Faith, of which, I am inquiring wherein it consists, for the condition of obtaining the promises which it ten∣dreth. And S. James 11. 8. 12. If ye fulfill the Royall Law, which saith; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self, ye do well. And, So speak ye, and so do ye, as being to be judged by the Law of Libertie. For, the liberty of being Gods sub∣jects, and under Gods royall Law, the Gospel giveth. Neither is S. Paul otherwise to be understood, when he saith, Rom. VIII. 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus hath freed me from the Law of sin and of death; The imbracing of the Gospel being the Law, that is, the condition, upon which we become partakers of the Holy Ghost, free from sin and from death. And truly, I cannot but pity the blindness of error, so oft as I remem∣ber, that I have heard Antinomians alledge the words of the Prophet Jer. XXXI. 31,-34. quoted by the Apostle to show the difference between the first and second Covenant, Heb. VIII. 8,-11. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will settle with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah a new Covenant, not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I tooke them by the hand, and brought them out of the Land of Aegypt, (for they abode not in my Covenant, and I neglested them, saith the Lord) For, this is the Covenant which I will make with the house of Israel, after those dayes, saith the Lord; Putting my Laws into their mind, I will also write them upon their hearts, and I will be to them for their God, and tey to me for my people. Nei∣ther shall they teach every man his neighbour, and every man his Brother, saying; Know the Lord; For, they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest;
I say I cannot but pity them, that, upon these words ground themselves, that the Covenant of Grace is a meer free promise, not onely freely made, for so I say it is free, (for what but Gods goodness moved him to tender it?) but freely, without condition contracted for at their hands. For, cannot God by his Prophet, foretell the effect of the Covenant of Grace, but he must be presumed, to set down the terms of it? And, if he express them not there, is he the less free to demand them when he tenders them? Especially, the Cove∣nant it self being to remain a secret. till Gods time to reveal it? I say then, that this Prophesie hath taken full effect in the lives of those, who, submitting themselves to the terms of Christianity, have received of God the gift of the Holy Ghost, to understand their profession, that they might live according to it; But, that this gift of the Holy Ghost, that is to say, the habituall assistance thereof, neither was due, nor bestowed, but upon supposition of Chnstianity professed by baptisme, which God, by our Lord Christ hath revealed, to be the condition which he requireth of them that will injoy the same. CHAP. IV. The consent of the whole Church evidenced by the custome of chatechising. By the opinion thereof concerning the salvation of those that delayed their Baptism. By the rites and Ceremonies of Baptism. Why no penance for sins before, but after Baptism. The doctrine of the Church of England evident in this case. BUT I am now come to the argument, that is to be drawn from the pra∣ctise of the universall Church, to my purpose. And truly, he that shall consider, for what reason, the Apostles should require those whom they had converted, to be baptized, will find himselfe intangled in rendring it, unless he settle the ground of it upon the obligation of professing true Christianity: And the effect of it, in admitting to the unity of the Church, which may require the performance, and maintain the exercise of it. And the consequence thereof, they that are, or shall be imployed by the Church, to preach to un∣believers, will find to be such, that either they must insist upon the terms which I hold with them, or, they shall make them but aequivocall Christians; That is, such as may wear the Cross of Christ, to man for a cognizance, but not in the obligation of their hearts to God, rather to suffer death, than, either to profess or act against that which he hath taught. The next point, in the visible practice of the Catholick Church, is the custome of catechizing: The circumstances whereof, for time and manner, though no man can mantain to have been the same in all Churches, yet it may be argued, to have been ge∣nerally a time of triall, for them that had been wonne to believe the truth of Christianity how they were likely to apply themselves to live like Christians, and what assurance or presumption the Church might conceive, that they would not betray the profession thereof. And therfore I appeal to the common sense of all men, whether they that exercised this course did not admit men to Christianity and baptism, upon the condition of professing and undertaking so to do. Besides those things which I alledged in the first Book, in the Con∣stitutions of the Apostles, in the most ancient Canons of the Church, and ge∣nerally in all Church writers we read of Missa Catechumenorum, and Missa fidelium; In English, the dismission of Scholars, and the dismission of Believers: Because, during the Psalms, & during the reading of the Scriptures, & expoun∣ding the same, reason was that learners should be present, as well for their instruction in Christianity, as for discharge of their uty, in the praises of God, and prayers to God: Though, the same prayers were not to be offered to God for Learners, as for believers, but they were to be dismissed with pe∣culiar prayers of the Church for their particular estate, such as yet are extant
in the ancient Offices of the Church. I say there was reason for these orders, supposing that Scholars were to be admitted Christians upon this presumption; Otherwise none. And, hence it commeth, that the assembly of the Church, being first by a Synecdoche called in Latine Missa, from the dismissing of it which it ends with, (as in Greek , in Latine Collecta, for the assem∣bling of it) the word Missa Latine, as  in Greek, is now come to signifie the Sacrament of the Eucharist, (which came after the dismissing of Learners, but went afore the dismissing of believers) being the principall office for which the Assemblies of the Church were held. But I will remit those that would understand the weight of this argument, to that which they may read in Clemens his Poedagogus, where they shall find the conversation which the Church required of those who professed to be Scholars of Christianity, and to stand for baptism, described in all the parts of it. Perhaps somewhat in the way of Plato his Common-wealth, or Xenophons education of Cyrus, expres∣sing many times what should be, rather than what was: But still, what the Church, on the behalfe of God, required at their hands, till being come to the end of the book, he who had approved himselfe by his conversation likely to make a good Christian, is, in the end of it, inducted by the Chatechist into the Church, to demand that baptism, which, by this time, he hath learned what it charges him with. And if this be not argument enough, what the Church in Gods behalfe demands of them that would be Christians, it will be in vain to apply reason, to argue any thing that is questionable. For it is visible, that the time of any mans continuing Catechumenus, or a Probationer in Christianity, was required upon no other ground, nor to any other purpose, but that the Church might be reasonably or legally (that is, according to custome) assured, that the party pretending to baptism was really resolved to stand to that, which Christianity should require at his hands. This, the conversation of severall years for triall, the frequenting of Gods ser∣vice in the Church, the hatred which he needs must undergo from the enemies of the Church, Jewes and Gentiles, must needs signifie, supposing Christians to be reasonable people. But that exception which I alledged out of the Con∣stitutions most clearly: That if any mans zeal to Christianity should be found so fervent, that there was no reason to suspect his sincerity, then the regular time of continuing in the state and rank of Catechumenus, or a Scholar of Christianity, might be abridged by the Church. For this is the same confide∣ration, which takes place, in many penitentiall Canons of the Church after∣wards: That if any man should demonstrate that zeal and eagerness, in de∣testing the offences through which he had failed, which might ground a confi∣dence of his sincerity for the future, the regular time of his Penance, might be abridged. The ground whereof is to be seen in the example of S. Paul, abating the rigor of his censure, upon the incestuous person at Corinth, though not only in consideration of the persons own zeal, but of the Churches submis∣sion, to acknowledge themselves parties to his crime, for bearing him out against the censure due to it before. And this indulgence, consisting in the relea∣sing or abating of regular penance, is without all quession, according to the will and word of God. Consider further another custome of the Church, during this primitive estate. Many men that were convicted in their judgements of the truth of Christianity, finding dfficulty in undergoing the Crosse of Christ, and perse∣cution for Christianity, at least, willing to avoid it, though they went so far as to professe themselves Probationers in Christianity, yet went not so far as to pretend to Baptism, least, by being admitted to it, they should make themselves liable to persecution as Christians. These men, if any thing fell out to make themselves liable to persecution as Christians. These men, if any thing fell out to make them think their lives to be in danger, would, neverthe∣less, desire to be baptized in their beds of sickness. Neither did the Church make any question of granting it, presuming that those, who, by the hand of God had been driven to demand it, would prove true to that, which, by
such an exigent they had been driven to seek. Nevertheless, these are those Clinic. whom we read of in the ancient Records of the Church, of whose sal∣vation though there were that presumption, in regard whereof they were ad∣mitted to baptism, yet not without some scruple. Upon what account? Not because they were not so well drenched with water, being baptized in their beds, as others: But because their resolution, to abide by the Christianity which they professed at their baptisme, was counted more questionable than theirs, who had frankly without reservation, abandoned themselves to it. Tertullian in his Book De Bapt. cap. XIX. argues, that none should make hast to Baptism, that are not provided of that resolution, which the per∣formance of that which they undertake by it requires. And, upon this account, he advises to delay the baptism of Infants to mans estate, nay, of single per∣sons, because of the temptations to which they are subject, till they resolve to serve God, either in the state of virginity and widowhood, or of wedlock. What the consequence hereof is, in the matter of baptizing Infants, his reason must determine. And that sufficiently appears to be, upon the profession which Baptism undertaketh; For, that which he apprehendeth is, that, not ha∣ving well understood and digested what it is they undertake, they should fail in making it good. And truly let any man tell me, why there should be so much doubt made of the salvation of those that died before baptism in the an∣cient Church, notwithstanding that they had professed, not only to believe the truth of Christianity, but also, that they intended to undertake the pro∣fession of it, and were indeed of the rank of Catechumeni, Scholars or Proba∣tioners in it? For it is manifest, that, aster persecution was ceased, there were many and many, who, professing Christianity, forbore neverthelesse to be baptized, sometimes many years, sometimes till death. (as we see by the great Constantine, who having professed so long before the beliefe of Christia∣nity, was not baptized, neverthelesse, till a while before his death) sometimes therefore were prevented by death, and died unbaptized, of whose salvation there was some difficulty made in conceiving full assurance, as it appears by the arguments, wherewith S. Ambrose comforts himselfe in the case of the Emperour Valentiniane, and his brother Satyrus. Not that there could re∣main any doubt in the salvation of those, who, having resolved to undertake and profess Christianity, by being baptized, should be intercepted and cut off by inevitable casualties of mortality, not procured by those delayes, which the want of zeal in that resolution had brought to pass: For, it is clear, that those who suffered death in the profession of Christianity, left no doubt in the mind of any Christian, whether they should be saved or not, suffering for Christ before they were baptized. But because those who might have had means and opportunity to be baptized, at such times, and upon such occasions as the rules and customes of the Church furnished, by neglecting the same, ministred some ground to presume, that they had not in them that resolution to undergo the Crosse of Christ (in, and for the performance of that which baptisin under∣takes) in consideration whereof he grants those promises which his Gospel proclaimeth. And, having said this, I conceive, I need say no more, to show the necessity of Baptism, according to the doctrine and practise of the whole Church, which I proved afore by the Scriptures. For, if those who professed to believe Christianity, and had resolved to enter into that estate and life which it required, came under a doubtfull repute, as to their salvation, among Christians, where they were intercepted by death before they were Christened by baptism; well may the unavoydable casualties of mortality dispense in the necessity of an act, the means whereof may depend upon some∣thing else beside his will that wants it; But it appears therefore a necessary in∣gredient, in the condition which qualifies for the promises of the Gospel, when the desire of having it. if it were possible, appears absolutely undispensa∣ble. And this shall save me the labour of producing the testimonies of Church Writers, to evidence the sense thereof in all ages. For the sense of the Church cannot be so effectually evidenced, by the sayings of particular persons, of
what authority soever in their own Churches, as it is evident by the customs really in force, which it appeareth, that particular persons held themselves obliged to follow. And therefore to the opinions presently on foot; Of the Socinians: That baptisme was necessary under the Apostles, to profess that purity of life which Christianity promiseth, when men were converted from Jews or Gentiles to Christians, but indifferent for those that wear that profes∣sion, by being born and brought up under Christian parents; And of some Enthusiasts among us, who think it a meer mistake to baptize with water in∣to Christianity, the Baptism of John being the Baptism of water, but the Bap∣tism of the Holy Ghost, the Baptism of Christ, (of which Opinions you shall hear more by and by) I say, to these opinions, it shall serve my turn to say: That, the necessity of the Baptism of Water stands evidenced by the same means, that convince the World of the truth of Christianity; To wit, by the Scriptures hitherto alledged, and by the consent of all Christians. For it will be impossible to alledge, not only any Writer that hath been allowed and credited by the Church, but any man that hath pass'd for a Christian in the Church, that ever undertook to perswade himselfe, or any man else, to pre∣sume, that he should be saved neglecting Baptism. For what reason and upon what ground, I leave to those that shall neglect S. Peters distinction hitherto pleaded, to alledge. As for the next point, which is the manner of baptizing, from the circum∣stances and ceremonies of it, I shall but relate here what I alledged out of S. Peter in the beginning, of the solemn questions propounded of course to those that demanded Baptism, whether they did believe the truth of Christianity, whether they would undertake to profess it, and to fight against the flesh, the World and the Divel, for the observing of it, whether he desired to be baptized upon these terms? Neither shall I need to alledge the testimonies of Church-Writers, for the use of the same ceremony, which, at this day is in force in the Church of England. And, though there be those that are liberall enough in censuring it as impertinent, now that all are baptized Infants, and though this be not the place to consider such exceptions, yet I will here take notice, how the contract thus executed concerns he salvation of Christians, that so it may be judged, how it concerns the Office of Baptism, that, what so concerns the salvation of Christians be expressed in it. To the same purpose I will here alledge the putting on of white robes after Baptisin: Whereupon the Sunday after Easter-day is still called Dominica in Albis, The Lords day in Whites, (which first they had put on at Easter when they were baptized) which custome seemeth to have been in use in the Church, when S. Paul said Rom. XIII. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill it in the lusts thereof. And Gal. III. 27. As many as are bapti∣zed into Christ, have put on Christ. And Joh. IV. 22. 24. To put off the old man, and put on the new man, which, after God, is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse. And Col. 3. 10. Having put off the old man, with his actions, and put on the new man that is renewed unto knowledge, according to the image of him that made him. For all these expressions seem to be allusions, to that which they saw done and practised before their eyes. But, those that yield not so much, cannot refuse to grant, that the custome was taken up by the Church, to signifie the profession of that which the Apostle injoyneth all Christians, in those that were baptized. The same thing signified, by signing those that were baptized with the sign of the Crosse: Which S. Augustine expounds very well, by the custome of the Roman Empire, to set a mark on the bodies of those that were listed Souldiers, and upon slaves, by which they might be known and brought back, if they should run away, or depart from their co∣lours. For, though the sign of the Crosse, made upon him that is baptized, remain not visible upon him, yet being done publickly and solemnly, and, as S. Paul saith of Timothy, under many witnesses, he is notwithstanding to be challenged by it of what he undertooke. And he that observes this mark to be called by the ancient Church sigillum, the signe or seal, must think of S. Pauls
words, 2 Cor. I. 21, 22. But he that establisheth us with you into Christ, and anointeth us, is God, who hath also signed us, and put the earnest of his Spirit into our hearts. And Ephes. I. 13. In whom also having believed, ye were signed with the Holy Spirit of Promise. And IV. 30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are signed to the day of Redemption; I say, he must think of these words of S. Paul, as I said of those, concerning the white robes of them them that were baptized; That they are either allusions to that which men saw done by the appointment of the Apostles, or occasions of taking up these cere∣monies by the primitive Church. I might here argue from the custom of Ʋnder∣takers (which now are called, Godfathers and Godmothers) to the same purpose. For, if it were requisite, that the Church should be secured, by some of theit own body, that they who demanded Baptism were no counterfeits, but would stand to what they undertook, it ought to be an Argument, that they were to under∣take that, which they give the Church security to perform. And indeed, this cu∣stom being nothing else but an appertenance, or consequence of the Interroga∣tories of Baptism, I need say no more, but, that it appears thereby, what those that were admitted to Baptism undertook, when they were to have Sureties to undertake for them, that they dissembled not in that which they undertook. But, in the next place, I will alledge the constitution of the Church, and all the authority of it; Grounded, (as by the means which I have imployed to make evidence of it appeareth) upon supposition and presumption, that, by being baptized into the visible communion thereof, we attain invisible com∣munion in the promises which the Gospel tendreth. There are some that take upon them to censure the ancient Church, for the abuse which I spoke of even now, in delaying of Baptism. These men, if they will go alwaies by the same weights and measures, must call S. Paul to account, why he makes this demand, 1 Cor. V. 12, 13. What have I to do to judge those, that are without? do not ye judge those that are within? But those that are without God shall judge. For, those who professed only to believe Christianity, though obliged to learn how to behave themselves like Christians, (for with what face could they demand Baptism otherwise?) yet, to speak properly, were not Christians, were not of the Church. Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus in the end of his Paedagogus, bringeth in the Word, that is, our Lord Christ, or his Gospel, (which he cal∣leth the Paedagogue, for governing these Children and Novices in Christianity in their way to the Church) giving up this Office to himselfe, (as being to be∣come for the future their Doctor, and Master, and Bishop) at their entrance into the Churcch. The passage is remarkable. . But it is not for me to teach these things further, saith the Paedagogue. We have need of a Doctor to expound these holy Oracles, and to him we must go. And truly it is time for me to give over my Office of Paeda∣gogue, and for you to become the Doctors Hearers. He, receiving you bread with good government (having behaved themselves well during the time of their trial) shall teach you these Oracles. And in good time here is the Church, and the onely Doctor the Bridegroom, the good mind of a good Father. Christ, or the Gospel of Christ, is the Paedagogue that guides and governs Children in Christianity, to the School, that is, to the Church, to demand baptism, having behaved them∣selves well by the way, during the time of their triall. When that is done, he teaches them no more as children are taught by a Paedagogue; But, as a Master teaches his Scholars, so Christ those that are become his Disciples by being baptized. Therefore afterwards; . The Pae∣dagogue, having set us in the Church, hoth recommended us to himselfe the Word, the Doctor and Bishop of all. And this is our Lords Commission to his Apostles to make them Disciples, that should take up his Crosse, by
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Then to teach them to observe all that he had given them in Charge. The same is the ground of Cassanders observation, which is much to my purpose. That the Church putteth no man to penance, whatsoever his life may have been, for any thing done before Baptism. Zosimus thinks he layes a great imputation upon Christianity, in pretending that Constantine, finding no means to come clear of the bloud of his Wife Fausta, or his Son Crispus, gave ear to Christia∣nity, because it pretended to wash away all sin. That Constantine should seek those meanes which Heathenism pretendeth to purge sin with, may well be thought to proceed from the malignity of the Gentiles, against the first Chri∣stian Prince. For the rest, not disputing of his doings before Baptism, because the Church judgeth not that those are without, (though he professed Chri∣stianity when they were done) it would be a disparagement to that Fountain which God hath opened for Juda and Jerusalem, that there should be any sin which it cannot cleanse, supposing the change sincere, which the undertaking of Christianity professeth; If not, God is his Judge. But, though the Church refuse no man Baptism, because, professing Christianity, he had delayed his Baptism; yet, as it appeared sufficiently, by the scruple that was made of the sal∣vation of those that died in that estate, that the Church disallowed it; so, when they were come into the Church, a mark of the authority of the Church was fastened upon them, in that, those that were baptized in their beds were made uncapable (by one of those Canons which I spoke of in the first Book, that were in force before the Church had any Canons in writing) of being promo∣ted to the Clergy. For this you shall find objected to Noratianus, by Cornelius in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VII. 43. That, by the Canons, he ought not to have been promoted to any rank in the Clergy, because he had been baptized in his bed of sickness, having delayed his Baptism for fear of persecution, till he found himselfe in danger of death. And, though the Church put no man to penance for his life before Baptism, (because Christianity it selfe pretendeth a totall change in him that imbraceth it, and that the Church judgeth not, but pre∣sumeth of the truth of that change, which is pretended by him that is without, yet it fasteneth a mark of the authority which it purchaseth upon Christianity) by providing that no man, who had been ever put to penance, should be pro∣moted to any rank of the Clergy. The reason is expressed in those words of Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians, pag. 54. speaking of the Apostles; . Preaching over Countreys and Cities, they made the First∣fruits of them (whom they had converted) Bishops and Ministers of them that should believe. The learned Bloudell will have these First-fruits to signifie those that were first converted to Christianity. A mistake more sutable to the prejudice which he had undertook to maintain, then to the rest of his learning. For, who knoweth not that First-fruits are the best, the floure, the cream of the whole? And, if no man that dared not to professe Christianity, no man that had been put to penance for failing, having profest it, is to be of the Clergy, you see why they are called the First-fruits of Christians. In the mean time, if the Church judge not those that are without, doth it not judge those that are within, according to S. Paul? Show me any thing that ever was called a Church; that is, shew me the time when, and the place where Christianity was ever settled, and exercised according to order and rule, where, those that had received Baptism were not under a discipline of penance, failing of that which they had undertaken by it. What is reformation in the Church, and what is not, is the subject of this present dispute; therefore I cannot here grant, that which some of the reformation may have done, to be well done. Otherwise, I am secure; no man will choke me with naming a Church, that had no disci∣pline of penance. But that so it was, I refer my self to that which I have said in the first book. I demand here, what is the ground and reason, that so it must be? For, supposing the Keys of Gods Kingdom exercised in the first place, in limi∣ting the terms upon which baptisme is granted, not in ministring of it;
Of necessity it followeth, that, in the second place, it be seen and exercised, in limiting the terms, upon which, those that have failed of that which they undertook at their Baptism, may be restored to the visible communion of the Church, upon presumption, that they are restored to the invisible commu∣nion of those promises which the Gospel tendreth. Not supposing this, there is no reason why it should signifie any more than a scene acted upon a stage, as it is taken to signifie by those who understand not this. Lastly, I will mention here the expresse Doctrine of the Church of England, in the beginning of the Catechism, declaring three things to have been under∣taken, in behalfe of him that is baptized: That he shall forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomp and vanities of this world, and the evil desires of the flesh, and not to be seduced by him, either from believing the faith of Christ, or from keeping Gods Commandements. And again, in the admonition to the Sureties after Baptism, you must remember, that it is your parts and duties, to see that these Infants be taught, so soon as they shall be able to learn, what a solemn vow, promise and profession they have made by you. For, all that come to Christianity believing, what promises they get right to by it, and being admitted to it up∣pon those terms, there can remain no question, upon what terms they attain the said promises: Nor can or ought any Doctrine of that Church, to what purpose soever cautioned, be interpreted to the prejudice of that, wherein the salvation of all consisteth. But further, in the Introduction to the Office of Baptism: For asmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin, and, that our Saviour Christ saith; None can enter into the Kingdome of God, except he be regenerate and born anew of water and of the Holy Ghost, I beseech you to call upon God, that these children may be baptized with water and the Holy Ghost, and received into Christs holy Church, and be made lively members of the same. Proceeding to pray; That they comming to thy holy baptisme, may receive re∣mission of their sins by their spirituall regeneration. In the exhortation after the Gospel; Doubt ye not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will likewise favourably receive these present Infants, that he will imbrace them with the arms of his mercie, that he will give unto them the blessing of eternall life, and make them partakers of his everlasting Kingdome. Again; Ye have heard also, that our L. Jesus Christ hath promised in his Gospel, to grant all these things that ye have praied for. And after the Sacrament; Seeing now, that these children be regenerate and graffed in the bodie of Christs congregation. And a∣gain; We yield thee heartie thanks, that it hath pleased thee to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit, to receive him for thine own child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy Congregation. All this can leave no doubt of the communion of the Church of England with the whole Church, in this point, so nearly concerning the salvation of all Christians. CHAP. V. The Preaching of our Lord and his Apostles evidenceth, that some act of Mans free choice is the condition which it requireth. The correspondence betwen the Old and New Testament inferreth the same. So do the errors of Soci∣nians and Antinomians concerning the necessity of Baptism. Objections deferred. THe whole tenor of the Scripture would afford matter of Argument to in∣force this consequence; But it shall be enough, to have thus far pointed out the ground, upon which the meaning of the rest is to proceed. The reasons of this position, from the principles of Christianity, can be no other, than those which have been touched, upon occasion of treating the passages of Scripture hitherto alledged. Yet to make the consequence still more evident, I will here repeat, first, the consideration of Gods sending our Lord Christ, to show the world sufficient motives, why they should imbrace his Gospel, as
well as to teach them what it is, and wherein it consisteth. I will not here in∣sist upon any supposition, of the clear sufficience of the Scriptures, or the ne∣cessity of Tradition besides the Scriptures. But I will appeal to the com∣mon sense of all men, to judge, whether it be within the compass of reason, that our Lord Christ should come to preach, and to exhort men to acknow∣ledge him to be come from God, and to take up his Cross; should show them reasons to believe, that all which he preached is true, that so they might be perswaded willingly to follow him; Should give certain proofs of his rising again from death, to inforce the same; If men have no will, no choice, no freedom to do what he requires them, or not to do it; whether, in other things, they, have it or not. The same to be said of his Apostles and Disciples, who were strange Creatures, to expose their lives, for a Warrant of the truth of what they said, if they had not willingly and freely imbraced that profession themselves, which they pretended to induce the world, with the like freedome of choice to imbrace. Thus far then we are assured by common sense, that the condition required by the Covenant of Grace, on our part, must be some act of mans free choice, the doing whereof, at Gods demand, must qualifie us for those promises which it tenders. But this is not all that may appeare to common reason, by the proceeding of our Lord and his Apostles. The prea∣ching of the Gospel-premises, for a supposition, upon which it proceedeth; That mankind are become enemies unto God through sin, and subjects of his wrath: Proposing therepon the termes, upon which they may be reconciled to God, and intitled presently to, and in due time possessed of everlasting happiness. Suppose these terms purchased by the satisfaction of Christ, though not granting it, (because all that call themselves Christians in the West do not) is it possible to imagine, that they who declare all mankind to be Gods enemies for sinne, should have commission to declare them heires of his King∣dome, not supposing them turned from sin to that righteousnesse, which shall be as universally according to Gods will, as their sin is against it? As on the contrary supposing this, do you not suppose them qualified for Gods promises, as fitly as men overtaken in sin can be? And is not this that which Baptism supposeth, when S. Peter saith, Acts II. 38. Repent and be baptixed every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, unto remissin of sins? The Baptism of John indeed was the Baptism of Repentance unto remission of sins, Mat, III. 11. Mark I. 4. Luke III. 3. But our Saviours theame as well as John Baptists, when they began to preach, was; Repent and believe the Gospel: Or, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at hand. Mark I. 15. Mat. III. 2. IV. 17. Therefore the Baptism of Christ, as well as the Baptism of John, presupposeth repentance, only the promise of the Holy Ghost is proper to the Baptism of Christ; because that remission of sins which Johns Baptism gave, presupposed not the Covenant of Grace inacted and published. And therefore it is no mar∣vell, that the Baptism of John is called The Baptism of water, when our Lord saith, Acts I. 5. John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost before many dayes. For, it will not follow any more, that therefore the Baptism of water is not Christs Baptism; then it will follow, the Baptism of John was not the Baptism of repentance to remission of sinnes, because Christs Baptism was so; And, because it had the promise of the Holy Ghost, which Johns had not. It is then to be considered, that the repentance of him that hath been qualified for the Gospel promises, may be only conver∣sion from some particular sin, supposing one sin of that weight as to void that title. But, the repentance of him that is wholly enemy to God, such as the Gospel declareth Jews and Gentiles to be, (as you find by S. Paul in the begin∣ning of his Epistle to the Romans) necessarily signifieth conversion from all sin to all righteousnesse. The repentance therefore of him, who, finding him∣selfe overtaken in sin, hath recourse to Christianity for the cure of it, being necessarily a motion from all sin, the term wherein it resteth, being Christia∣nity, is necessarily a resolution of all righteousnesse for the future. Which is all that my position demandeth; only this, that whereas the profession of
this resolution is also required, therefore it be not thought sufficient, to pro∣fesse for Christianity, that which every man that readeth and believeth the Scriptures may take to be Christianity, but that which the Church, (being trust∣ed with the maintenance of that Rule, the profession whereof is required to salvation by the Gospel) hath alwayes required to be professed of them, who are baptized into the Church. And that the condition, without this particular is not complete, may further appear by assuming for granted that which hath here been proved by the pre∣mises, wherein I have demonstrated, that the first Covenant which God by Moses made with the Children of Israel, was, and was intended by God to be the figure of the second Covenant, which, by our Lord Christ he hath established, for all that will embrace it by undertaking Christianity: The correspondence between them consisting in this; That, as God, by the first, tendered them the happinesse of the Land of Promise, upon condition, of go∣verning themselves according to the Law, which he gave them by Moses; So, by the second, he tenders everlasting happinesse in the world to come, to all those, that shall undertake to professe the faith of Christ, and live according to that which he hath taught. Which being no more questionable, then it can be questioned by those who professe themselves Christians, whether or no, the New Testament was intended and designed by the Old; Whether Moses writ of Christ or not; Whether Judaisme was to make way, or to give place to Christi∣anity or not; And, seeing it can no more be questioned, whether or no the Jews were to take upon them the Law of God as their King, for the condition upon which they were to expect the Land of Promise; It is plaine, there wants nothing that can be required, duly to inferre, that the condition, the underta∣king whereof intitles Christians to life everlasting, is the profession of Christi∣anity: And the performance thereof, that which is rewarded, by the performance of all the promises which the Gospel tenders, as the performance of the Law was that, which secured the Israelites in the possession of the Land of Promise against their enemies round about. Now we know, that, when the Covenant of God with Abraham for the Land of Promise came to be limited, as to the condi∣tion required by God, to the law of Moses, that Circumcision which God had required of all Abrahams seed became a condition limiting the same to Isra∣raelites; the want whereof, at eight dayes old, was a forfeiture of that promise. For, The waters of the Red Sea, which saved them, and drowned the Aegyp∣tians, the Cloud that overshadowed them, the Manna which they eate, and the Waters of the Rock which they drank, though (according to S. Paul) Sa∣craments answerable to the Sacraments of the Church, were so but for the time of their travel through the Wildernesse. If therefore, by virtue of these, the Israelites were intitled to the Land of Promise, (which of Circumcision is evident) then must the Sacrament of Baptisme be necessarily requisite, to the right of a Christian in the heavenly Inheritance. This is the first reason, drawn from that which seemes most evident in Christianity, and that which I have been able to inferre, and to premise from the same. But I will adde another reason, though it seems to be of the same nature with these that goe afore, which comes from the necessity of Baptisme. How much soever the licentiousnesse of this time may have debauched this wretch∣ed people from the Christianity which they were dedicated to, by the Church of England, no pretense of Socinians, or Antinomians, hath yet prevailed, to make them believe, that it is not necessary for men to be Christned, that in∣tend to be Christians. There hath been indeed, among the fruits of this blessed reformation, a Pamphlet seen under the title of The doctrine of Baptismes, the intent whereof, is, by a studied discourse to prove, that it was never the intent of our Lord and his Apostles, that the Baptisme of water should be used to make men Christians with, Being a legal rite used by John the Baptist, to continue, so long as the use of Moses law was tolerated after the publishing of the Gospel, but to cease therewithall, when the Baptisme of the Spirit, which is the Bap∣tisme of Christ, had succeeded the same. This Pamphlet, attributed to the
Master of a Colledge in one of the Universities. How that University will wash their hands of acknowledging, as master of a Coledge, one who cannot passe for a Christian among Christians, supposing him the Author of this Book, is not for this place to enquire. This is visible, that this opinion proceeds up∣on the common presumption of Antinomians, Enthusiasts, Quakers, and the like, that they have the holy Ghost, though they presuppose not in them∣selves the profession of that true Christianity which the Catholike Church teacheth, and whether baptized or not; Whether supposing themselves praede∣stinate to life from everlasting upon the dictate of the same Spirit, or justified by that faith, which consisteth in revealing to them their praedestination from everlasting; Alwayes supposing they have the Spirit in consideration of the me∣rits and satisfaction of Christ, without supposing the truth of that Christianity which they professe, as a condition required by God in them whom he gives his Spirit. But the opinion of the Socinians, (having in detestation this unchristian as well as unreasonable Principle) acknowledgeth the gift of the holy Ghost to be granted by God to those, who, believing our Lord Jesus to be the Christ, resolve to live according to all that he hath taught, but denieth any considera∣tion of the merits and satisfaction of Christ, either in his sending the Gospel, or in his giving the holy Ghost to enable a man to perform that which it re∣quireth. Onely acknowledging the free grace of God, in sending those terms of reconcilement which the Gospel importeth, and the free choice of man in accepting or refusing the same; But upon the accepting or refusing of them, concluding the promises of the Gospel to be necessarily due. And therefore presuming, that it is altogether unreasonable, to make them still to depend up∣on an outward ceremony of Baptisme by water, the consideration upon which they are tendered being already performed. And therefore, construing the proceeding of the Apostles, and the Scriptures wherein they are mentioned, upon such presumptions as these, they conclude, the reason and intent of the Baptisme which they gave, according to the Commission of our Lord, to be particular, to the condition of those, who being Jews or Gentiles before, were thereby to acknowledge their uncleannesse in that estate, and to professe a con∣trary course for the future. So that, the reason ceasing, why they did Baptize, the obligation also of their Baptisme must necessarily cease. But in this great distance between the grounds upon which these extream opinions inferre the indifference of Baptisme, it is easie to observe something common to both; Namely, that neither of them acknowledgeth any Catholike Church, or any presumption of the visible unity thereof, limiting that part of the Doctrine taught by the Scriptures, which it is necessary to the salvation of all Christians that they professe, as received from hand to hand by the Churches of the Apo∣stles founding, to be exacted of them whom they Baptize into themselves. For, this being set aside why should not Enthusiasts perswade themselves, that they have the Spirit of God, and a title to all the promises of the Gospel de∣pending upon it, by Christ, if the Socinians can perswade themselves, that they may have it by the meer act of their free will, accepting the tender of the Gos∣pel, by believing that our Lord is the Christ, and resolving to live as he hath taught, without any consideration of his merits and sufferings; Both being perswaded, that for their salvation, they are to make what they can of the Scriptures, without any regard to the Church, for securing the intent and mean∣ing of it. What shall hinder them indeed, supposing the way plained to them both, by admitting the necessity of Baptisme to be such, that all the effects and consequences thereof may be thought to be had and obtained before and with∣out it? Certainly the waving of those grounds, upon which the necessity of Baptisme may appear to be consistent with the undoubted efficacy of that Chri∣stianity which the heart onely feeleth, is the breach that hath made a gap for these Heresies to enter into Gods Church. For, if no man can be thought to have right to be baptized, that hath not true and living Faith, which true and living faith alone qualifies any man for Remission of sins and salvation, (whe∣ther it consist in believing, that our Lord Jesus is the Christ, (because he who
believes that is obliged to live as he teacheth) & the Scriptures, according to the Socinians; Or, in believing, that we are praedestinate to life in regard of our Lord Christ, dying for us, according to the Enthusiasts) what remaineth for Baptisme to procure, that is not assured already, before a man be Baptized? And therefore, I conceive, I demand nothing but reason. For, all the gaine that I demand from all this is no more, but that it be freely acknowledged, that, justification by faith alone, and that faith which alone justifieth be not so understood, as to make the promises of the Gospel due before Baptisme; to which the Scripture, interpreted by the consent and practice of the whole Church, testifieth, that Baptisme concurreth. A thing which can by no means be obtained, but by placing that faith which alone justifieth, aswell in the out∣ward act of professing, as in the inward act of believing; This profession containing an expresse promise, or vow to God, whereby we undertake to live as those who believe the Gospel of Christ are by Gods Law to live; And, that promise or vow to be celebrated and solemnized by the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme, appointed by our Lord Christ to that purpose. For, seeing the profes∣sing of Christianity, and not the believing of it, is that which brings upon the Church that persecution, which the Crosse of Christ, the mark of a disciple signifies; neither can it be reasonable, that God should allow the promises of the Gospel, to any quality that includeth it not, nor unreasonable that he should make them depend upon it. And, seing it is not the profession of any thing that a man may call Christianity, (though perhaps, grounded upon an imagination that he hath learned it from the Scriptures) which God accept∣eth, (whatsoever a man may suffer for the maintenance and affirmation of it) but of that which himself sent our Lord Christ to preach; It is no marvel, if God who esteemeth nothing but for that affection of the heart wherewith it is done, should notwithstanding, accept no disposition of the heart towards the profession of Christianity, but that which is executed and solemnized by such an outward ceremony, as himself hath limited his disciples & their succes∣sors to celebrate it with. For, supposing that God hath founded the unity of his Church, upon supposition of professing that Christianity which he gave his Apostles Commission to preach, consisting in the visible communion of those offices which God is served with by Christians, it will be evident, why God, who esteemeth the heart alone, hath not allowed the promises of his Gospel to any but those who professe Christianity, by being admitted to Baptisme by the Church; Because, as it is not any beliefe or resolution that may be called Christi∣anity, but that which the Church hath received from the Lord and his Apo∣stles, that qualifies a man for those promises which God tenders by the Cove∣nant of Grace: So it is not the profession of any beliefe or resolution, that qualifies a man for Communion with the Church by Baptisme, but of that which the Church professeth to have received from our Lord and his Apostles: And this is the true ground of the foundation of the Church, and the Society thereof, whereof so much hath been said: To wit, that God, giving his Gos∣pel for the salvation of mankind, did think fit to trust the guard and exercise of it to men once instructed by those, to whom, at the first he had given immedi∣ate Commission to publish and establish Christianity; Rather then leave them to expect at his hands, every day new revelations and miracles, for in∣troducing that, which had once been sufficiently declared. And also, rather then leave every man to his own head, to make what he can of the Scriptures, and think he hath salvation by living according to it. For, supposing that Christi∣anity which is delivered by the Scriptures, once subject to be misunderstood and corrupted, (of which we have but too much experience) an effectual course to preserve it will be, to found a Corporation or Society of the Church, the members whereof, each in his owne ranck, should remaine intrusted by God (but, by the meanes of their predecessors from whom they received Christi∣anity) to preserve, both the profession of Christian truth, and the exercise of Gods service inviolable.
Nor is it effectuall to say, that the unity of the Church may fail, being di∣vided by Heresies and Schismes, insomuch that, that Baptisme which is visibly valide and good, shall be void of that invisible effect which it pretendeth. For, it is not requisite that God should provide such meanes of salvation as may be undefeisible; It is enough that they are reasonable. He that is Baptized into a profession destructive to that which all Christians are bound, upon their salva∣tion, to believe, perishes for want of Faith, setting aside the unity of the Church which his Herisie violates over and above. But, if the unity of the Church be of such advantage to the maintenance of our common Christianity, as it was before the dissolving of it, it is no marvaile, if the Baptisme of Schisma∣ticks, though valide and good for the visible forme, become voide of effect to them, who, by receiving it, make themselves parties to the breach of the uni∣ty of the Church. We agree that the Power of the Church of Rome is the oc∣casion of many abuses in the Church. What they are, it is my present busi∣nesse to enquire. He that bounds the interpretation of the Scriptures, within the sense of the Catholike Church, shall not transgresse the Law of Gods truth in that inquiry. He that accepts the bounds of his own fansy in stead of them, is it not just with God, if he die? If once common Christianity, and the main∣tenance thereof depend so much upon the unity of the Church, is it not rea∣son that the benefit of it should depend upon the same? he who, having at∣tained the true Faith, and according to the same seeking the unity of the Church, faileth of it without any fault of his owne, (if he who so seeketh it can be supposed to faile of it) hath the difficulty of overcoming his own ig∣norance to pleade for his excuse. But, for them who have the consent of all Christians from the beginning, to oblige them to undertake the profession of Christianity by Baptisme, but, out of hatred to the present Church & the abuses of it, neglect baptisme, upon presumption, that they have the holy Ghost with∣out it, or that the reason why the Apostles Baptized is now ceased; I say, that for them, I suppose, there remaines no just plea, seeing that, by the unity of the Catholike Church, they ought to have been guided in judging what is of the abuse of the present Church and what is not. And thus that con∣sideration which some seeme to be, not without cause, scandalized at, (when these effects of Christianity, the power whereof must necessarily consist in an unfained heart, are made to depend upon an outward ceremony of Baptisme which the Church gives) is utterly voided, by that reason which the Apostle insinuates when he sayes, that Baptisme saves us, not the laying down of the filth of the flesh, but that profession to God, which is made with a good and a sincere consci∣ence. Whereas those, that distinguish that faith which alone justifieth, from the profession thereof which baptisme executeth, oblige themselves to make Baptisme a ceremony, not whereon the promises of the Gospel depend, but to signifie that they are had and obtained without it. But to whom signifie? not to God, who giveth them. Not to him that has them, and by his faith knows he has them; Not to the Church, which can never be certified that he hath them indeed, and demands onely to be certified that he wants nothing requisite, to presume him to be such. So that, Baptisme being required, onely to presume that a man is a Christian, and that presumption being legally had, by any act, the Church or any that call themselves the Church can require, as well as by be∣ing Baptized; If that be all, there is no reason to be given the Sociniant, why Baptisme should be necessary to the salvation of Christians, and therefore why it should not be in their power to use it or not to use it. And truly I do much marvel to see the Socinians, that have very well seen the truth concern∣ing the twofold meaning of the Law, literall and spirituall, (and the promise of the land of Canaan tied to the carnall observation thereof as that of everlasting life to the spirituall obedience of it) I say, I do marvel to see, that in conse∣quence hereunto, they should not inferre, that God hath appointed a spirituall people of the Christian Church, answerable to Israel according to the flesh, and that his spirituall promises should depend upon the visible imtiation of eve∣▪ Christian into the body of that people (as the right of his temporal promises
depended upon their initiation into the body of carnall Israelites) not accord∣ing to birth but according to promise. Onely, when I consider on the other side, that, without regard to the Article of the Catholick Church, which Christians make a part of their Creed, they rest in such a communion, as their private perswasion of the sense of the Scriptures shall be of force to produce; I do not marvail to see them not owne the consequence of their own princi∣ples, when they see it not stand with other prejudices, which they have im∣braced. I know there are two things will be objected here, the one is a meer preju∣dice, that, by maintaining of free will, (by maintaining the Covenant of Grace to consist in an act of it) we shall incurre the Heresie of Pelagius: The other, that, if the condition of the Covenant of Grace be an expresse profession, vow and promise, to live, as well as to believe, according to what Christ hath taught, and that, without the use of reason, no such promise can be of force or take place, then infants cannot be baptized, who cannot make, or are tied to any such promise. To these I say no more but this, that, it is one thing to answer arguments, and to give grounds of a contrary truth, another thing to ob∣ject difficulties, which, even the truth is not clear of, especially that which comes by revelation from without, as Christianity doth: Because, to the verifying of revealed truth it is not necessary, that all things should be alike clearly re∣vealed, that are necessary to the clearing of objections; The obligation of sticking to that which is revealed taking place no lesse, though something be∣longing to the clearing of it be not so clearly expressed. And generally, that which is evident, is never the lesse evident, because there is something else evi∣dent, the evidence whereof I cannot reconcile with it. But, this I say not, as though I meant to dismiss these difficulties, without that which I conceive ought to satisfie; But, because I have learned of Aristotle, that it is the fashion of the unlearned, to demand at once, both the grounds of the truth, and the clear∣ing of difficulties. A thing which might be done here, but so, that another place would require it to be done againe, and not without balking the order which I intend. My designe will bring me in due time to speak with the Pela∣gians first; and afterwards with the Anabaptists: To those points, I will, remit the answer to these objections. Onely, for the present, to the former of these doubts I would say this; That all that hath been said hitherto concerns onely that disposition, which, he that will come to salvation by Christianity must be firmly qualified with, as the condition which the Covenant of Grace requir∣eth. All which being supposed, it may and doth still remaine questionable, how and by what meanes, in the nature of an effective cause, a man becomes qualified with the disposition so required; To wit, whether by the meer force of free will, or by the help of Gods Grace: And that being resolved, upon what consideration, in the nature of a meritorious cause, those helps of Gods grace are furnished; To wit, whether by the free Grace of God, or in consideration of the merits and satisfaction of Christ, provided by Gods free Grace, as the reason for which, and the measure by which, the helps of his Grace are dis∣pensed. To the latter of them I would onely say here; That I conceive, I have here maintained that reason for the necessity of Baptisme to the salva∣tion of all Christians, upon which the necessity of the Baptisme of Infants is to be tied. Which is to say, in plain English; That I have by the premises, re-established that ground for the necessity of Baptisme in generall, the un∣setling whereof, was the onely occasion to make the necessity of Baptizing Infants become questionable.
CHAP. VI. Justifying Faith sometimes consists in believing the truth. Sometimes, in trust in God grounded upon the truth. Somtimes in Christianity, that is in imbracing and professing it. And that in the Fathers as well as in the Scriptures. Of the informed and formed Faith of the Schools. NOW; for those Scriptures wherein the nature of justifying faith is de∣scribed, by those effects, which the promises of the Gospel tender, I must here observe that which all observe, that faith is many times made by the Scriptures, to consist in believing the truth of Christs Message which he came to preach; Otherwhiles, neverthelesse, in a grounded trust and confidence in the goodnesse of God declared through Christ. For what is more mani∣fest then that of S. Paul, Rom. X. 9. If thou shalt confesse with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart that God raised him from the deád, thou shalt be saved. Where first, that which the heart believeth is the rising of Christ from the dead, (signifying by one Article the rest of the Faith) then, that which the mouth professeth is nothing but the same truth. Therefore, neither the inward nor the outward act of faith reacheth any further, then the acknowledgment of the said truth. So the Apostle 1 John V. 15. 10. Every one that believeth that Jesus is the Messi as is begotten of God. Who is he that overcomes the World, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? He that believeth in the Son of God hath the witnesse in himself. He that believeth not God hath made him a liar, be∣cause he believeth not the witnesse which God beareth of his Son. Where, it is plain that no difference is made, between believing God, and believing in the Son of God; and , is no more then to believe Gods witnesse. Mat. IX. 28. Jesus faith to the blind; Believe you that I am able to do this? They say unto him; yea Lord. Then touched he their eyes saying; ac∣cording to your faith be it unto you. That faith which consisted in believing that he was able to do it. So of John the Baptist, our Lord Mat. XXI. 32. John came to you in the way of righteousnesse, and ye believed him not, but the pub∣licans and harlots believed him; Which you seeing, repeated not afterwards that ye might believe him. And sure, they obtained the grace of Christ, that belie∣ved John the Baptish. Our Lord to the father of the Lunatick, Mat. IX. 23. 24. If thou caust believe, all things are possible to him that believeth. And straight the father of the childe crying out said; Lord I believe, help my unbeliefe. If thou canst believe that I am able to do this, as afore. Mat. XI. 23. 24. He that shall say to this mountaine, be thou removed, and cast into the sea, and doubt not in his heart, but believe, that, what he sayeth cometh to passe, is shall come to passe to him as he sayeth. Therefore I say unto you, all things that ye ask by prayer be∣lieve that ye shall receive, and they shall come to passe to you. John V. 24. He that heareth me and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. XX. 31. These things are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believeing ye may have life through his Name. Acts VIII. 37. Philip said to the Eunuch; If thou believest with all thy heart thou mayest be baptized. He an∣swered and said; I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Upon which faith he is baptized. Rom. IV. 3. Abraham believed God, (saying to him, Thy seed shall be as the stars of heaven. Gen. XV. 5.) and it was imped to him for righteousnesse. On the other side, it is no rare thing to finde faith described by trust and confidence in God, and the effects of saving faith ascribed to it, as in the descri∣ption of the Apostle. Heb. XI. 2. Now faith is the substance of thing hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. That which he calls , is that which the Hebrew expresseth by  or,  both which are some∣times translated in the Greek of the Old Testament, , signifying con∣fidence,
s the resolution of Horatius Cocles, not giving way to the enemy, is called by Polibius, , and in Livy, subsistere oste, is to stand the enemy. So Heb. III. 14.  is the first confidence of Christians. and 2 Cor. VIII. 4.  confidence in bosting. So Rom. III. 25. Whom God hath proposed as a Propitiatory through faith in his blood. The pro∣pitiatory was set before the Israelites to assure them of Gods help, according to the Law: So is Christ, faith the Apostle, to them that have recourse to him with confidence, alledging for themselves his blood shed for us. So, Jam. 1. 6. 7. But let him ask in faith nothing doubting; For he that doubteth, is like the sea waves tossed, and stirred with the windes. Let not such a man think that he shall obtaine any thing of God. Where, the efficacy of prayer is ascribed to an as∣sured confidence of obtaining that which is desired, and therefore that beliefe which, according to the words of our Lord Mar. XI. 23. 24. seemeth properly to consist in this assurance, obtaines all prayers. And, not suppo∣sing S. Paul to speak of the common faith of all Christians, when he faith; 1 Cor. XIII. 2. If I have all faith, so as to remove mountaines; yet, as he insinu∣ates, that this is done by that particular assurance and confidence, which that grace giveth him that hath it; So must the conquest of the World by the common faith of Christians be ascribed to that assurance and confidence, with which all Christians expect Gods promises. And truly, through the manifold indifference of signification, which words will afford them that will use them to their purpose, it cannot be denied, that, to believe God, and to believe in God, is sometimes all a thing. Yet it is very hard to believe that they are intended, by the Scripture, to signifie alwayes the same thing, be∣ing so frequently and ordinarily used with a difference. For if we consider, that, in very many texts of the Old Testament, the nature of Faith is expressed by  and  with the particle  by which speeches, trusting and confi∣dence in some body, or some thing, (particularly in God, when the speech is of re∣ligion) is signified as well by , which signifies believing in God, it will be impossible to imagine that all such expressions import no more, then bare∣ly believing those things to be true, which God or man sayes, though some∣times believing God, and believing in God may signifie all one. The Apostle Hebr. XI. 33, 34, 35. thus reckoneth the marveilous things, which through faith came to passe to the Fathers of the Old Testament: Who by faith sub∣dued kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained promises, stopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, recovered of in∣firmities, prevailed in warr, put to flight armies of strangers, women received their dead raised againe, others were beaten to death, not expecting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. And can it be reasonable to im∣pute these effects to the bare belief of Gods power or goodnesse, or whatso∣ever else can be thought requisite for them then to believe, when as, that trust and confidence in God which supposeth that beliefe, is, both by the nature thereof nearer to these effects, and, apt to dispose them to undergoe those trials, under which they found such deliverances? For, of them all we may say as the Apostle of Elias, James V. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions with us, and he earnestly prayed that it might not raine, and it rained not upon the land for three years and six moneths: And againe he prayed, and the heavens gave raine, and the earth put forth her fruit. The confidence which Elias had ground∣ed upon Gods presence with him, made him first pray for drought, and then for raine, which came to passe according to his saying, 1 Kings XVII. 1. that there should be neither dew not rain for those yeares but according to his word; And so, the trust which the rest there mentioned had in God, to ob∣taine so great things as the Apostle sayes befell them; that, rather then the beliefe of Gods power and goodnesse, or whatsoever else they were to be∣lieve, chalenges so great effects to be ascribed to it. I must now observe a third notion, which this word faith signifies, especi∣ally in the writings of the Apostles, from whence this difficulty is in the first place to be derived, which you shall find Hebr. X. 39. We are not of apostasy to
destruction, but of faith to the saving of the soul. What is opposite to falling from faith, but perseverance in it? or what doth all this Epistle, but learn the Jews that were Christians, not to forsake Christianity, for the persecutions raised against them by those of their kindred? So here, Faith is Christianity, as apostasy the renouncing of it. Then S. Paul, when he saith that his Apostle∣ship was for the obedience of faith in all nations, Rom. I. 55. and Rom. XVI. 26. that the Gospel is made known to all nations for the obedience of faith; must needs signifie that submission, which those that render themselves Christians do undertake, for the performing of that condition, whereupon the Gospel tenders everlasting life; Of which he saith againe Rom. III. 27. that boasting is not excluded by the law of works, but by the law of faith. For every law being a condition upon which a man enjoys some benefit, in some society whereof he is a part, the law of faith must needs be that condition, the undergoing where∣of intitles all men to the common claime of all Christians, which is their Christianity. So, when S. Paul exliorteth them, Rom. XII. 3. 6. to think of themselves unto sobriety, according as God hath divided to every one a measure of Faith; As againe; If any man had the gift of Prophesie, according to the pro∣portion of faith; It is manifest that his meaning in the latter text is; If any man had profited so farre in Christianity, that God thereupon, had bestowed on him the grace of prophesying. For, though it is well known that God some∣times gave that grace to those, whom he loved not to life, as Saul, and Bala∣am, and Caiaphas, and those who shall say once, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, Mat. VII. 22? (which notwithstanding, under Christianity, is li∣mited to the profession thereof, as I shewed you in the beginning) yet it is as certaine, that those whom God imployeth to his People and Church, upon those commissions that require such graces, those he useth to chuse for their proficiency in true Godlinesse; The prophets of the Old Testament being so ordinarily assumed out of those, that had lived in the study of godlinesse under the discipline of the Prophets their masters, that Amos VII. 22. alledges it as a strange thing, that God had made him a Prophet of an heardsman, and that therefore he could not but do his message: And is Saul among the Pro∣phets? became a riddle rather then a Proverb, not to be resolved but by ano∣ther question, And who is the father of them? that is, that God, the Father of all Prophets, could give his Graces where he pleased, without meanes 1 Sam. X. 11. 12. And therefore at the election, of S. Matthias to the office of an Apostle, to which this grace belonged, the disciples pray; Acts I. 24. Thou Lord that knowest the hearts of all, shew whether of these thou hast chosen: shew∣ing, the Christianity of the heart to be the foundation of that choice. And when S. Paul exhorteth to think soberly of themselves, according to that mea∣sure of Faith which God had divided to every one; it is manifest, that, this measure of faith extends to all graces, the thought whereof may carry a man beyond the bounds of sobriety; That is, a'l wherein Christianity consisteth. So that, the measure or proportion of Faith, is the measure and proportion of Christianity, which being given by God, though seconded with graces which all had not, he forbids them to be puffed up with. Againe, when the same Apostle hopeth that the faith of the Corinthians, being increased, should be magnified abundantly through them, by his preaching the Gospel to the parts beyond them according to his own rule 2. Cor. X 15 16. What is that in∣crease of faith, but the setling of them in their Christianity, which when it were done, he hoped by their meanes, to find accesse to preach to their neigh∣bours. I do confidently chalenge to this signification, that text of S. Paul. Gal. V. 6. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncir∣cumcision, but faith that is acted by love; Because I know, that no man that un∣derstands Greek can deny, that  is in this place passive, and because it cannot be understood without violence, how faith should be acted by love, but when that profession, which we make at our Baptisme, is performed for no other motive but that of God and his love. What is then that work of the Thessalonians faith which S. Paul commendeth, 1 Thes. I. 3. which he
prayeth God powerfully to fulfill, 2 Thes. II. 11. but the doing of that which they undertook to do when they were made Christians? And what is the mi∣nistry of the Philipians faith, Philip. II. 17. but the service which S. Paul did God, in labouring to make them good Christians? And what is the faith in which he would have the Corinthians to stand 1 Cor. XVI. 13? Wherein He and Barnabas exhort the Churches to continue, Acts. XIV. 22? The bare profession of Christianity, or the liabituated resolution of living ac∣cording to it? By which reason, whensoever the profession of Chri∣stianity is signified by the name of Faith, in the writings of the Apostles, (in which sense it stands as frequently there as in any other) this habituated resolution is presupposed, because, upon presumption thereof men are made Christians to the Church, as well as to God. For, that no man is really and naturally a Christian to God, untill he be so legally to the Church; unlesse it be, when the effectuall purpose of being so is prevented by that ne∣cessity, which reasonably cannot be prevented. And hereupon it is, that, though men believe the truth of Christianity, before they are made Christi∣ans by being baptized, yet, even in the Scriptures themselves, believers and Christians are many times all one. 1 Tim. V. 8. 16. If any man provide not for his owne, and especially those of his houshold, he hath denyed the faith, and is worse then an infidell. If any believer, he or she, have widows, let them support them, and let not the Church be charged. VI. 2. Those servants that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren, but serve them the ra∣the because they are faithfull and beloved Titus, I. 6. If any man be blameless the husband of one wife, having children that believe, not blamed for riotousnesse, or disobedience. Apoc. XVII. 14. They that are with the Lamb, are such as are called, and choice, and believers. And hereupon, when the Apostle faith, John III. 5. ; His meaning of, necessity, is this; Beloved, thou shalt do like a Christian what thou shalt do for the brethren and strangers: Because no private trust, but the common tye of Christianity, obligeth to do good to Christian travelers, of whom he speakes there. And therefore Acts II. 38, 44. S. Peter having said to those that were pricked in heart, upon conviction of the resurrection of our Lord; Repent ye and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, unto remission of sins; And this being done, it followeth; But all the believers were together, and had all things common, Here I must not forget the stile and language of the most ancient Fathers of the Church, who, deriving from and referring all their studies to the Scriptures, must needs speak in the same stile with them in matters of Christianity. I do not intend therefore to say, that they do not use the word Faith, to signifie the belief of those things which the Gospel declareth to be true; and that trust and confidence in God, through Christ, which the truth thereof naturally tendeth to produce; Having shewed, that both these conceptions are frequently signi∣fied by the terme of faith in the writings of the Apostles, their masters: But I say further, that, it is oftentimes used by them in this third sense which I spake of last, to signifie Christianity, that is the profession thereof, presumed by the Church not to be counterseit. This is very visible in Tertullian, in whose language. Faith and Baptisme are many times the same thing; de exhorta∣tione castitatis, Cap. I. Nec secundas post sidem nuptias permittitur nosse. And is not permitted to know any second marriage after Baptisme. De Pudicitia. Cap. XVI. Quae amisso viro Fidem ingressa. She who entered into the faith having lost her husband; Is, that became a Christian. Ibid. Cap. XVIII. Ante fidem & post fidem; Signifies, before and after Baptisme. Therefore in his Scorpiace, Cap. VIII. Talia a primordio & prcepta & exempl debitricem Martyrii Fidem ostendunt. Such precepts, such examples from the beginning shew, that Faith is indebted in Martyrdome. For it is Baptisme that obliges a Christian to Martyrdome rather then renounce the Faith. So S. Cyprian, following his master, Epist. ad Antonianum. Si fidei calor praevalet. If the heat of faith prevail. And Deopere & Eleemosyna; Credentium fides novo adhuc fidei calore ferve∣bat.
The faith of believers was servent with the heat of faith being yet new. For so Tertullian had said of Morcion in the place alledged in the first book, Cont. Marc. IV. 4. In primo calore Fidei Catholicae; In the first zeal of the Catholike faith; That is of his professing it, being reconciled to the Church. for these things are properly attributed to the profession of Christianity: But to barely believing that it is true, afarre off, and at a great distance. Cornelius in his letter to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia concerning Novatianus in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VI. 43. Thus describeth Celerinus, having been persecuted for the Faith,  A man who, having most stontly, through the mercy of God, passed through all tortures, and confirmed the weaknesse of his flesh by the strength of his faith; which strength is not in the mind that judgeth Christianity to be true, but by the resolution of the will to stick to it. Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. II. alledges Plato; that in civil commotions the greatest virtue a man can meet with is Faith; To wit, in him whom a man trusts, though the greatest happinesse be Peace which makes it needlesse. Infer∣ring thus;  Whereby it appears, that the greatest of wishes is to have peace, the great∣est of virtues faith. Which he would not have alleged for the commendation of the Christian Faith, had he not understood it to consist in that trust which a man sincerely engageth, as well as in that credit which a man giveth. Where∣by we may understand, why, in another place, he will have the title of  or the faithfall, for Christians, to hold the same reason with that of Theog∣nis; (when he commends a faithfull friend;  That he is worth gold and silver, in a civil dissension.) Because, he places the faith of a Christian in the obligation of Christianity which he undertakes, when he expresseth that the honour, which it imports lies in the performing of it. As Lydia when she intreateth S. Paul in these terms Acts XVI. 15. If ye judge me faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there; presseth him, if he think her a true Christian, (as she had professed her self) That is, faithfull to God and his Church, which she must be oblieged to upon the trust that she had taken upon her, in becoming a Christian. Therefore disputing not long afore against Basilides and Valeu∣tinus the Hereticks, who made mens faith to depend necessarily upon the frame of their natures;  Therefore is faith no longer the achievement of choice, if it be the advantage of nature, nor shall he that believes not be justly recompensed being blamelesse, he that believeth being no cause: Nor shall the property, or otherwise, of faith or unbeliefe be subject to praise or dispraise. And by and by;  But where becomes the repentance of unbelievers, through which comes remission of sins? So that neither shall Baptisme be any more reasonable, nor the blessed seal (the gift of the holy Ghost by Baptisme) nor the Son, nor the Father. (from whom it is expected) Onely the distribution of natures according to them, will be found utterly without God, not having, for the foundation of salvation, voluntary Faith. So the volunta∣ry engagement which Baptisme expresly inacteth is that Faith whereby a Christian claimes the promises of the Gospel. I know the words of S. Au∣gustine may here be objected Enchirid. Cap. XXXI. De hac enim fide loqui∣mur quam adhibemus cum aliquid credimus, non quam damus cum aliquid polli∣cemur. Nam & ipsa dicitur fides; Sed aliter dicitur non mihi habuit fidem; Aliter non mihi servavit fidem. Nam illud est, non credit quod dixi: Hoc non fecit quod dixit. For, saith he, we speake here of the credit which we give, when we believe something, not of that which we engage when we professe something. For that also is called Faith. But a man meants one way when he sayes, he did
not give me Faith: Another way when he sayes, he kept not faith with me: For that is, he believed not that which I said: This, he did not what he said. As if the consideration of trust to be kept or not to be kept, were utterly imperti∣nent to the nature of justifying faith. For why were those that were not yet baptized never called Fideles, or Believers, in the primitive Church, though they professed never so much to believe the Christian faith, but onely Catechu∣meni, Hearers or Scholars, or at the most, Competentes or Pretenders, when they put themselves forth actually to demand their Baptisme? Why? but to signifie that the Church had not yet conceived confidence of their Christianity, be∣cause they had not yet engaged themselves in the profession of it. Which having solemnized by Baptisme they were thenceforth called Faithfull, the Name signifying as well trusty as Believers, having proceeded so farre as to engage themselves to live as Christians, because they believed believed Christianity to come from God as it pretendeth. There would be no end if I should go about to produce the Fathers for this name of Christians. one place or two shall serve for example. Tertullian De Exhort, castitatis, Cap. IV. Spiritum quidem Dei etiam fideles habent, sed non omnes fideles Apo∣stoli. Ergo, qui se fidelem dixerat, adjicit postea; Spiritum Dei se habere, quod nemo dubitares etiam de fideli. And truly even Christians have the Spirit of God, yet are not all Christians Apostles. Therefore (S. Paul.) having called him∣selfe faithful, (or a Christian) he adds afterwards, that he hath the Spirit of God, which no man would question in a Christian. Whereupon in his Book, De Jejuniis, Cap. XI. you find an Antithesis, or opposition between Spiritualis and Fidilis; or a meere Christian, and one that had extraordinary indowments of Gods Spirit. As on the other side, de praescript. Cap. XII. Quis Catechu∣menus; quis Fidelis incertum est. Speaking of the hereticks, among them, It is uncertain who is a Professor, who a Scholar. And truly he who considers all virtue to consist in the affection of the will, not in the perfection of the understanding; Considering withall, that faith is according to Clemens Alexandrinus where afore,  a voluntary assent of the soul; Or,  a voluntary presumption and assent unto piety; Shall find great reason to consider what affection of the will it is wherein he places the virtue of faith in a good Christian. Especially experience on the one side shewing, that hereticks, schismaticks, and badde Christians, (who cannot be thought to be endowed with that faith which recommends good ones) do really and truly believe all that truth, which their Sect or their lust is consistent with; And reason on the other side shewing, how the believing of it becomes reconcileable with the interest of their sect, or of their lust. I suppose, here, that the rea∣son which makes the motives of saith, though sufficient, to become defeisible, is the Crosse of Christ, attending the profession of Christianity in time of perse∣cution, but the performance of it alwayes, because alwayes difficult and labo∣rious, alwayes the following of Christ with his Crosse on our shoulders. When the powers of the World professe Christianity, then is the scandall of professi∣on taken away, because they must cherish, (so farre must they needs be from persecuting) that which they professe; But the scandall of the Crosse in performing of it remaines so much the more difficult to be avoided, by how much a man is more subject to be tempted by evill example, to hope for salvation without performing it. Therefore, as I shewed you asore, those who professe to believe the truth of Christianity many times delayed their Baptisme in the Primitive Church, whe∣ther as loth to retire to that strictnesse of life which it required, or as sensible of their own weaknesse, and desiring to finde confidence of themselves, that they might walk worthy of it, before they undertook it. Whereupon Tertul∣lian, as I shewed you, advises to deferre it, till a man were setled in a state of continence or wedlock. And because the reason of this delay was doubtfull, therefore there remained in the Church some doubt of the salvation of those that died in this estate. But to him that should resolve to wear the profession
for a quality rendring him capeable of the priviledges of a Christian, by the laws of Christian powers, but to fulfill it no further then the law should re∣quire, to him is the scandall of Christs Crosse quite voided, though by as great a scandal as that which diverts from Christianity, namely, that of Simon Ma∣gus, who became a Christian for gaine. He that expressely resolves not this within himselfe, but, in the effect of his life and conversation hath no more regard to the reason of his Christianity then if he had expressely resolved it, is necessarily of the same form, and all that care not to perform what they under∣take, according to the ranck and degree of their negligence, reducible to it. But besides it is manifest, that, during the heat of persecution, those that belie∣ved not the whole faith of a Christian, that is hereticks; those who, for mat∣ters not concerning the Faith, broke the unity of the Church, that is schisma∣ticks; were many times ready to suffer death for their sect, and for that part of Christianity which it allowed; So far were they from dis-believing it. Shall we say that any of these had in them the virtue of faith? Let us consider what might move them to believe, and it will appear, first, that they might be moved to believe that for their own sake; which a Christian believes for Gods sake, then, that it can be no part of the virtue of Faith, to believe the truth for a mans own sake and not for Gods. If sensuality can move a worldly man to believe the truth, so long as the advantages of the world attend it, well may it be said to be the grace of God that gives him sufficient reason to believe (sup∣posing for the present, not granting, that these reasons are the helps of Gods free grace to bring men to believe) but, that he sets himself in Gods stead, in believing that for his own advantage, which he should believe out of obedience to God, and for his service, is not grace but wickednesse, be it never so true, never so holy that he believes. He that dis-believes part of that which it is necessary to salvation to believe, he that breakes the unity of the Church, upon true grounds though not necessary (for who can make a sect without some pretense in our common Christianity?) he hath the fulfilling of his own will and singularity for his reward, and cannot claime that faith to be a grace of God, which God rewardeth not. Nor is this to say, that the least beginning of Faith is to be had without Gods Grace; (supposing for the pre∣sent, but not granting that the worke of Salvation, is the work of Gods prae∣venting Grace, from the very beginning of it) But, that there may be a reall beleefe of Christian truth in the understanding of him, that hath no part of good will to be a true Christian; The Varticle of the Councill of Orange providing only Initium fidei ipsumque credulitatis affectum; That the beginning of Faith, and the very inclination to beleeve be thought to come; Per inspiratio∣nem spiritus sancti, corrigentem voluntatem nostram ab infidelitate ad fidem, ab impietate ad pietatem; By inspiration of the Holy Ghost, correcting our Will from unbeleefe to faith, from ungodlinesse to godlinesse. For, though, when first a man is shewed reason to beleeve, both these reasons, and the least inclina∣tion to follow them be ascribed to Gods Grace, (because the scandall of the Crosse is to be overcome, to which all that inclination tendeth) yet when that scandall is voided by falling upon as great, the assent of the understanding re∣maines the effect of humane discourse upon the sufficience of reasons proposed, all the goodnesse that otherwise must have been ascribed to Gods Grace in the inclination of the will, being void and dead. And all this, though properly said of those that are converted to Christianity, at yeares of discretion, seeing the difference between the cases, is punctually true in them that are bred Chri∣stians, supposing them to have the Grace of the Holy Ghost, by being bapti∣zed infants, and to have destituted the same afterwards. The beleefe that re∣maines in them being meerly the effect of humane discourse, upon the motives of Faith (which are indeed helpes of Grace) without us, without any respect of submission to the will of God, for the effect of them within us; which who giveth, cannot be so wanting to the Grace of God, as we suppose these. But, this being said, I shall now leave it to the Reader to judge, whether
this may have been the occasion; or, upon what other occasion it may be thought to have come to passe, that, in the Doctrine of the Schoole, the in∣ward act of beleeving, without the inward resolution of outwardly professing, hath been taken for the whole virtue of Faith; I say, without including that in∣ward resolution of the heart, whence, that outward profession proceedeth when it is true, and is alwaies presumed by the Church to proceed, when the contrary appeares not: And that, from hence have proceeded the disputes concerning faith without forme, (which they will have to be that dead faith without works, which S. James II. 17, 19, 20. compareth with the faith of de∣vils, that believe and tremble) And faith informed by the love of God, which they will not have to adde any thing to the nature of it, so that it shall consist in any thing else then in believing the truth of the Gospel; but, to qua∣lifie it, to justifie him that before was a sinner to God, as containing in it all the righteousnesse of a Christian. But, though at the present, I determine not, what is true in this position, what not; I must determine as to the point in hand, that the nature of that faith, to which the Scriptures of the Apostles, and the most ancient Fathers of the Church ascribe remission of sins, and that righteousnesse which the Gospel holdeth forth;, together with other promises of the same, is no way declared by this resolution, but darkned. For, it is manifestly requisite, for a due account of the sense, as well of the most ancient Fathers as of the Scriptures, that the nature of faith be understood to consist in that, to which the said promises may duely be ascribed; which in both are so oft, so plainly, and so properly ascribed to faith, not to any thing which may stand with it, or necessarily follow it. Now, though no man can resolve to professe Christianity, without true love to God above all things, yet the Scriptures of the New Testament plentifully shew, that the holy Ghost, the Spirit of love is not given to reside habitually with any but those that are baptized and so become Christians, however necessary the actu∣all assistance of the same holy Ghost is, to go before and to induce them to be∣come Christians, by undertaking what that profession requires. Therefore, it will be necessary to distinguish not onely the faith, but the love, but the hope, the fear, the trust in God, and all other graces begun in him, that beginneth to believe the Gospel to be true, but is yet not resolved to undergo the profession of it, and the condition which it supposes; From the same as they are in him, who, upon such resolution, is become a Christian. And, if any man, upon this distinction, will say, that the faith which he believed with afore is faith without forme, but formed afterwards, he shall easily have me to concurre with him in it; Alwayes provided, that, whatsoever it is the Scripture attri∣butes the procuring of the promises of the Gospel to, that be understood to belong to the nature of that faith which alone justifies, according to the Scri∣ptures. CHAP. VII. The last signification of Faith is properly justifying Faith. The first by a Metonymy of the cause: The second of the effect. Those that are not justified doe truly believe. The trust of a Christian presupposeth him to be justified. All the promises of the Gospel become due at once by the Covenant of Grace. That, to believe that we are Elect or Justified, is not Justifying Faith. FOR, now it is time, to draw the argument which I purposed at first from these premises, and to say; That the name of faith, by the effects which by virtue of the Gospel promises it produceth, being attributed, first, to the bare belief of the Gospel, secondly, to that trust, which a Christian enters into by being Baptized, and lastly to that trust in God through Christ which Chri∣stianity warranteth; And the second of these naturally presupposing the first,
as the third both of them, the reason can be no other then this; Because the middle is that which entitleth Christians to the promise of the Gospel, in re∣spect whereof, both the name of Faith, and the effects of these promises, are duly and reasonably ascribed both to that which it supposeth, and to that which it produceth, both to the cause, and to the effect of it. For, in all manner of language, it is as necessary to use that change of words, and the sense of them, which is called Metonymy by Humanists, and, by some Philosophers and Di∣vines of the Schooles denominatio ab extrinseco, as it is impossible for any man, to expresse his minde without that change of speech, which they call a Trope, in any manner of Language. It is not to be imagined, that those fashions of speech are onely used, for ornament and elegance of language; The Human∣ists themselves having taught us, that they are as our clothes, as well to cover nakednesse, as for comelynesse. For, as long as the conceits of the minde may be infinitely more then the words that have ben used, it will be absolutely necessary to straine the use of customary speech, as the conceit is not customa∣ry which we desire to expresse. It will not, therefore, be strange, that the name of faith should be used to signifie three conceptions distinct, but depend∣ing one on the other, so long as there are more conceptions then words; It will not be strange, that the effects of that trust which a man entreth into, by undertaking the profession of a Christian, should be attributed, both to that Faith which believeth the Gospel to be true, (being a thing necessarily pre∣supposed to induce a man to undertake that ingagement) and to that confidence which a Christian hath in God through Christ, being a thing necessa∣rily insuing upon the undertaking of it, with a sincere and effectuall pur∣pose. But this would be strange, and no just reason to be given for it, were it not granted that the second, to wit, that sincere undertaking the trust of a Christi∣an, is that, which really intitleth him to the promises of the Gospel. For, is it not manifest to all Christians, that there are too many in the world, whom we cannot imagine to have any due title to those promises, and yet do really and verily believe the faith of Christ to be true, and Him and His Apostles sent from God to preach it? If therefore we will have these Scriptures which ascribe the promises of the Gospel to believing the truth of it to be true, we must understand them by way of Metonymy, to be attributed to it, as of right belonging to the consequence, which it is naturally apt to produce. Nor is there any reason, that convinceth me in this point more, then that which Socinus giveth, why justification should be attributed to that act of faith alone whereby a man believes the Gospel to be true. His reason is because, he that throughly believes the true God and his providence, which will bring all mens doings to judgement, and render them their due reward of life or death; that believes, our Lord Christ truly tendereth everlasting happinesse to all that take his yoke upon them, and draw in it, as long as they live; must needs stand convict, that he is to proceed accordingly. I say no lesse; And I say, that the preaching of the Gospel tenders motives, sufficient to convict all the world of so much. But I say further, that, so long as, notwithstanding sufficient con∣viction tendered notwithstanding a mans faith engaged, and his own sentence past against himself if he faile, we see men, either not embrace Christianity, or not performe it having imbraced it; So long, right to Gods Promises can∣not be ascribed to this belief, though, in reason, whosoever is convict of the truth cannot deny, but he ought to engage in Christianity and hold it. The reason is, because we see men not alwayes do that which resonably they ought to do; And therefore, it is not enough to have submitted to conviction what we ought to do: And the promises of the Gospel are not properly ascribed to the belief of those truths, which convince men what they ought to do, but to the consequence thereof, which, naturally and reasonably they are apt to produce, but do not necessarily produce. Againe, on the other side; Trust and confidence in God, through Christ, obtaines the promises of the Gospel, who denyes it? But is this trust alwaies
well grounded and true? Is it not possible for a man to imagine, his title to the promises of the Gospel to be good when it is not? I would we had no cause to believe how oft it comes to passe; I grant, that, at the first hearing and believing the Gospel, all the world have ground enough for that confi∣dence, that may save them from despairing to attaine the promises of it: But, hath he, that hath ground not to despaire of being justified by faith, ground to conside, as justified by faith? Or, is that all one, as to have ground enough for that confidence, that they have right to the said promises? I sup∣pose there is a great gulfe between both. For, when the preaching of the Gospel convinceth a man that he is lost unlesse he accept it, upon whatsoever condition it tendereth; it is enough to keep any man that is in his wits, from dispairing, to know, that there is a condition tendered by God, the accepting whereof will intitle us to his promises: Because being sincerely tendred in Gods name, there can be no barre, but on our part to the accepting of it. But, to have a well grounded confidence of our own right and just title to the pro∣mises, it behoveth, that the Spirit of a man, which is in him, know, that there is in him a sincere resolution of accepting the conditions; Which, how much the better it is grounded and setled, so much more shall his confidence be se∣cure. And, to this confidence to bring a man from this former confidence, is as great a work, as to induce a man that believes the world to come to preferre it before this. For, I demand. Is he that sins against God, for love of this world, enemy to God, as the Apostle saith, James IV. 4. or not? Are not all men enemies to God, when the Gospel calls them to become his friends? If not, why may they not be saved without it? If so, can they have confidence in their enemy, by being discovered to be his enemies? Indeed, the Gospel ten∣dring conditions of peace, they have confidence, that they may become friends with God, by imbracing the same. But, the confidence of friends, till they have imbraced them, they cannot have. It is therefore a dangerous a im∣posture, to invite an unregenerate man, so soon as he is descovered so to be, to the confidence of a Christian in God through Christ; As, not to invite him to that confidence, who may be a Christian, is, to drive him to despaire. For not presupposing his conversion from sinne to God, it is necessarily carnal presumption, not the confidence of a Christian. And, if the Spirit of God should seal to any heart the promises of the Gospel, not presupposing this ground, it were not possible for any man, to discern the illusions of the evil Spirit from the dictates of Gods; The conscience of our submission to those terms, being the onely test, by which the difference is discernable. For, all they that trust in thee shall not be ashamed, but such as transgresse without a cause shall be put to confusion. Psal. XXV. 2. To transgresse without a cause, and, to put trust in God, are terms incompetible. So that, wheresoever we are bid trust in God, (being implicitely forbid trust in the world, or our selves, which, all that love the world, or themselves, not in order to God, necessarily do) there is supposed the ground of this trust, inconsistent with the conscience of sinne. And though this ungrounded confidence importeth carnal presum∣ption, yet may it occasion dispaire. For, when the guilt of sinne in the con∣science, stronger then all prejudicate opinion, and imposture of false doctrine, discovers that there is no ground for the confidence of a Christian; and pre∣judice on the other side, admits no recourse to that condition which is the ground of it; no marvaile if it seem impossible to attain peace of conscience, which appearance is the very horror of despair. Seeing then, that, trust in God as reconcileable, and, for the attaining of remission of sinnes, is the imme∣diate fruit of the Gospel believed, but, trust in God as reconciled, which is confidence of remission of sinnes obtained, is necessarily the consequence of that faith which justifieth, (the justification of a Christian, being a sinner be∣fore a Christian, necessarily implying remission of sins) what remaineth, but that the professing of faith to God, for the undergoing of Christianity, be the condition upon which the promises of the Gospel become due, that is to say, that faith which alone justifieth.
For, it is true, the Gospel tendereth severall promises, remission of sinnes in the first place, because the first thing, a man convict and sentenced to death seeks, is his discharge; But, no man can have this discharge, but, upon the same terms, he must become the sonne of God, (whether as regenerate by grace, or as adopted to glory, that is, to the right and title of it) and, upon the same terms be sanctified by the holy Ghost, which, as I shewed before is promised as a gift, that is, (habitually to be possessed) onely to Christians and to all Christians; And therefore, it is impossible to imagine a man discharged of his sinnes, that is not, for the very same reason, and therefore at the same instant, of nature as well as of time, regenerate, adopted, and san∣ctified. It is indeed to be granted, that justification signifies something dif∣ferent from all these promises, in as much as it is manifest, that in the language of the Scriptures, it importeth, not making of a man righteous, but declaring him and accounting him righteous, treating him, and dealing with him as righ∣teous: All this is true; And yet I shall not grant, that it is so properly un∣derstood to be the act of God, as sitting upon his throne of judgement (whe∣ther according to mercy or justice) as, the act of God contracting with mn for everlasting life, upon condition, of submitting to the Covenant of Grace and the terms of it. Indeed, the preaching of the Gospel premises the gene∣rall judgement to come, as tendering the way to come clear of it, to wit by Christ, whom it declareth judge of quick and dead. For S. Paul thus proposeth it to the Athenians, Acts, XVII. 30, 31. God, who eversaw the times of igno∣rance, now chargeth all men every where to repent: Because he hath appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world righteously, by the man whom he hath ap∣pointed, making faith hereof to all, by raising him from the dead. And, of the overture thereof which he made to Felix, S. Luke saith, Acts XXIV. 25. As he discoursed of righteousnesse, and temperance, and judgement to come. And S. Paul speaking of the Gospel Rom. 1. 18. The wrath of God is reveal∣ed from heaven, upon all ungodlinesse, and unrighteousnesse of men, that hold the truth in unrighteousnesse. For, the preaching of the Gospel is that revelation which here he meanes. And by S. Augustine, de Catechizandi Rudibus, we understand, that, by the order of the Church, there was no instruction in Chri∣stianity without conviction of the judgement to come; as that which obligeth to have recourse to Baptisme for the avoiding of it. But when God conde∣scends to tender to those, whom he holds liable to his justice, terms of recon∣cilement, plainly he comes down from his Throne of judgement, to deale with his obnoxious creatures upon equall terms, or rather terms of disadvan∣tage, supposing what no Christian can deny, that the Gospel tenders terms of our advantage. Nay he is content to go before, and to declare himself tied before hand, if we accept; expecting our choice, whether we will be bound, by accepting, or not, which is a difference, between the Law and the Gospel, not unworthy to be observed. For, the Covenant of the Law was struck once for all, with all those whome it concerned, to wit, the whole people of Israel at once, their posterity, being by birth, subject to it. But when the Gospel is preached, the Covenant of Grace is tendered indeed, but not inacted till some man consent to become a Christian; and therefore, God first binds him∣self to stand to the termes which he tenders, expecting whether man will ac∣cept them or not. And though it be called the Covenant of Grace while it is but tendered, yet it is not a Covenant, till it be inacted, between God and every one that is baptized. Seeing then, that no justification of sinners takes effect, but by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, and that the act of Gods meer Grace inacts and gives force to that Covenant, manifest it must needs be, that justification imports the act of God, admitting him for righteous, who, setting aside that Covenant, could not challenge, so to be held and dealt with. But if justification import this act of God, shall it not therefore imply, shall it not suppose some con∣dition qualifying him for it? For, what challenge can he, whom the Gospel overtaketh in sinne, pretend, for reward by it, being engaged by Gods law, to
the utmost of his power otherwise? shall a mans conversion, from sinne past, to righteousnesse to come, challenge both the cancelling of his debts, and a reward beyond all proportion of that which he is able to do, being obliged to do it? But, shall that Gospel, which pretends to retrive righteousnesse into the world, allow the reward of righteousnesse, without any consideration of it? How then shall it oblige man to righteousnesse, being a law, that derogates from any law of God that went afore it, allowing all the promises it tenders without any consideration of righteousnesse? For, I will not here stand to dispute, whether the Covenant of Grace be a law or not; because, every contract is a law to the parties, and this being between God and man, and supposing the transgression of Gods Originall law, necessarily abates the extent and force of it. But, I will demand, what is, or what can be the righteousnesse of a sinner, but repentance? Which, as it is part of righ∣teousnesse, so farre as it is understood to be conversion from all sinne; so, as it is understood to be the conversion of sinners to Christianity, is all righteous∣ness, because all sinners are called to Christianity. Only with this difference, that, repentance is the way to that end, which is righteousnesse; Repentance in fieri, righteousnesse, in facto esse, according to the terms of the Schoole And, is it not righteousnesse for a sinner, to desire, to purpose, to resolve to be righteous, for the time to come? Or can he, that is truly qualified a sinner, be any other way truly qualified righteous? Therefore that resolution of righteous∣nesse, which, he that sincerely undetakes Christianity must needs put on; (the first part whereof is the profession of God, by Christ, the author and rewarder of it) This, I say, is that which qualifies a Christian for the promises of the Gospel, but alwayes, by virtue of Gods free act in tendring the Covenant of Grace, not by any obligation, which his creature can prevent him with. And this is manifestly S. Pauls sense in Rom. IV. 3, 11, 22, 23, 24. where he alleges Moses, that Abrahams faith was imputed to him for righteousnesse, and David, pronouncing him blessed unto whom God imputeth no sinne; To shew, that the Gospel declareth Christians to be justified by faith no other∣wise, then the Fathers understood men to become Righteous, by Gods grace, accepting that, which nothing could oblige him to accept, for righteousnesse. For no man is so wilfully blinde as to imagine, that the Apostle speakes here of our Lord Christ the object, not of the act of faith; whose words are; That Faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousnesse, and, blessed is he to whom the Lord imputeth not sinne: And sinne, as I take it, stands not in opposition to the object of faith. And, when the Scripture saith, Psal. CVI. 30, 31. Then stood up Phineas, and exercised judgement, and so the Plague ceased: And this was imputed to him for righteousnesse, among all posterities for evermore; It is manifest, that doing vengeance upon malefactors is accounted a righteous thing for Phineas to do, though by Gods command, yet without processe of law. And, 1 Mac. 11. 52. Was not Abraham found faithfull in temptation, and it was counted to him for righteousnesse? And, shall not faith be said to be imputed to him for righteousnesse, in the same sense, as we see evidently, in∣during temptation is imputed to him, and doing vengeance to Phineas, for righteousnesse? That is to say, that the act of faith, not the object of it (which act, what it is, and wherein it consists, I suppose is decided by the premises) is imputed to Abraham, and his Spirituall seed for righte∣ousnesse. I have said nothing all this while concerning that opinion, which makes that faith which alone justifieth, to consist in believing, that a man is justified, or predestinate to life, in consideration only of Christs obedience imputed to him. And truely, having said so much, why it cannot consist in having trust and confidence in God through Christ; I do not think I need say much more to it. First, whether or no a Christian can have the assurance of faith, that he is for the present justified, or, that he is from everlasting predestinate to life, is a thing that I intend not here, either to grant, or to deny; Nothing hindring me, supposing for the present, but not granting, that such assurance may be
had, upon that supposition to dispute, that he is not justified by having that assurance, but, that, by being justified he obtaines it. For, were it not the strangest thing in the world, that any knowledge should produce the object of it, which it supposeth? Can any reason allow the effect to produce the cause, or any thing to depend upon the consequence of it? No more can Christianity allow; the assnrance of this truth; I am justified (supposing it to be true) to be the ground why it is true? And if any man say that justifying faith is not the assurance of this truth, I am justified, but of this truth, I am redestinate to life, (the reason being; Because the obedience of Christ, appointed for the salvati∣on of the elect alone, is imputed to him once for all to life, not onely for the pre∣sent to righteousnesse) can any reason be given, why this reason should not take effect from everlasting, but depend upon the knowledge of it, wherein justi∣fying faith is said to consist? For, if the onely consideration that intitles him to the promises of the Gospel be the obedience of Christ, why shall not that right take place from the same date, from which the consideration tendered for it takes place? Why should not the opinion of the Antinomians, at least, that which I make to be ground of that Heresie take place, rather then this of Presbyterians? For, both of them being equally destructive to the Gospel of Christ, that which agrees best with it self, (the several assumptions whereof, are most consistent with, and consequent to one another) is doubtlesse the more receivable. Now, whether we make justification, (granted from everlasting to the elect for whom alone Christ was sent) to go before faith, as the object goes before the knowledge and assurance of it; Or, whether we make it to depend upon faith, (though passed meerely in consideration of the obedience of Christ, de∣puted for the salvation of the elect alone) there will remaine no obligation upon the elect to performe any obedience to God, being intitled to, and assu∣red of salvation, afore it, and without it. For, the Gospel is the last Law of God, derogatory to any declaration of his will antecedent to it, and not suf∣fering any other to take place, further then is provided by it; So that, sup∣posing that God hath published salvation to the elect meerly in consideration of Christ, without requiring any terms at their hands; Well may it be said, that notwithstanding, he may determine them to do those things, which he would have them do that shall be saved; But it cannot be said, that he can ob∣lige them to any condition, to be performed of their free choice; Or, conse∣quently, that there can remaine any difference between good and bad in the doings of them, who are free from all obligation to the meanes, because in∣titled to the end without them. And truly it is more modesty to say, that the actions of the elect, to which God determines them upon these terms, are not good, then to say, (as, by consequence it must be said) that the actions of the reprobates are bad, which upon these terms, are not their actions but Gods, nor imputable to any will of theirs, but to his. But, this inconvenience being unavoidable, whether we make justification to depend upon that faith, which consists in assureing us of the same, (and that is to make an object to depend upon the act which it produceth) or that faith to depend upon it, as included in predestination to lie; both of them being destructive to Christianity, it is but a poor plaister, by contradicting a mans self, to seem to salve so great an inconvenience. And truly tis much to be wondered at, how those that pro∣fesse nothing but Scripture could ever perswade themselves of an imagination, for which there is nothing to be alledged out of the whole tenor of the Scri∣ptures. Whatsoever can be produced out of the Old Testament, for that trust, which the people of God might, or ought to have in God, for the ob∣taining of his promises; whatsoever out of the New, for that peace and securi∣ty with which Christians may and ought to expect the world to come, (suppo∣sing but not granting, all that can be pretended thereby) do but demand where it is said that, a man hath this trust, this peace, this security by having it, and all will be mute. And therefore, having shewed, that the trust and peace of a Christian supposeth that ground upon which he is justified, I will spend no
more words to shew, that the knowledge and assurance of justification or predestination supposes the being of it, and that, the ground whereupon it takes place. CHAP. VIII. The objection from S. Paul; We are not justified by the Law nor by Workes, but by Grace and by Faith. Not meant of the Gospel, and the workes that sup∣pose it. The question that S. Paul speakes to, is of the Law of Moses and the Workes of it. He sets those workes in the same rank with the workes of the Gentils by the light of nature. The civil and outward workes of the Law may be done by Gentiles. How the Law is a Pedagogue to Christ. THE last reason, whereby I prove my intent, consists in the assoiling of that Objection, which is alledged from the disputes of S. Pauls Epistles, ar∣guing, that a Christian is not justified by the Law, or, by the works of the Law, and therefore, by Grace, and by Faith: For, he that is justified by in∣gaging himself to professe Christianity, and to live according to the same, must needs be justified by performing his ingagement; Unlesse a man would say, that he is justified by making a promise which he never observeth, and which it con∣cerns him not to keep, being once justified by making of it. And truly, ha∣ving said, that God admits a man into the state of his Grace, in consideration of the act of undertaking this profession; I do not onely grant, but challenge for my privilege to maintaine, that he hold him in the same state, in considera∣tion of the act or acts whereby he performes the same. And therefore to the Objection, I returne this in generall: That I do not grant any man to be justified by any thing that supposes not of the Gospel of Christ, since the pub∣lishing of it; That is, not by such works as can be done by him, that hath not yet admitted and imbraced the Gospel of Christ, and that by virtue of that Grace of God, which sets on foot the Covenant of Grace. For, the Law go∣ing before the Gospel, and being unable to produce that obedience which God would accept in lieu of the World to come, further then, as containing in it self the Gospel, and the effects of it; It is manifest, that righteousnesse cannot be attributed to the Law, nor the works of the Law. And yet, if we consider, that the Gospel it self is a law of God, whereby he ties, at least himself, to certain rerms, upon which he declares, that he will be reconciled with his enemies; There is no reason to understand when S. Paul sayes, that a man is not justified by the Law, or the works of the Law, that he meanes to deny, a Christian to be justified by doing according to the Gospel, which is the law that God pretends to introduce, in stead of that law, by which the Apostle denies any man to be justified. For, all Christianity acknowledges, that the Gospel is implied in the Law, neither could the justification of the Fathers before and under the Law, by Faith, be maintained otherwise: And therefore it is no strange thing to say, that, under the Law, there were those that obtained that righteousnesse which the Gospel tendereth, though not by the Law, but by the Gospel; which under the Law, though not published, was yet in force to such, as by meanes of the Law, were brought to embrace the secret of it. But it cannot there∣therefore be said, that they were justified by the Law, or by the works of it, but by Grace, and by Faith, though the Law was a meanes that God used, to bring them to the Grace of Faith. And therefore, when the Apostles inferences are imployed, to fortifie this argument; To wit, that, if a Christian be justified by works depending upon the Covenant of Grace, then he hath whereof he may glory, which Abraham, that was justified by Faith, had not; Then hath he no meanes to attain that peace and security which the Gospel tendereth, all having the conscience of such works as do interrupt it; I do utterly deny both consequences. For, I say, that the works that depend upon the Gospel are neither done without the
Grace of God, from whence the Gospel comes; neither are they available, to justify him, whom the Gospel overtakes in sinne, of themselves, but by virtue of that Grace of God from whence the Gospel comes. Now, I challenge the most wilfull unreasonable man in the world, to say, how, he that sayes this challenges any thing, whereo he may glory without God, who acknowledges, to have received that which he tenders from Gods gift, and the promise which God tenders in lieu of it, from his bounty and goodnesse: To say, how a man can be more assured, that he is in the state of Gods grace, then he can be as∣sured of what himself thinks and does. For not to decide at present how, and how farre a man may be assured of Gods grace, whatsoever assurance can be attained, must be attained, upon the assurance which a man may have of his own heart and actions, and that as S, Paul saies, 1 Cor. 11. 10. No man knows what is in a man but the Spirit of a man that is in him. For, if it be said; hat this assurance is from the Spirit of God, and therefore supposes not so much as the knowledge of our selves; I must except peremptorily, that which I premi∣sed as a supposition in due place, that no man hath the Spirit of God but upon supposition of Christianity; And therefore no man can know, that he hath the Spirit of God, but upon supposition, that he knows himself to be a good Christi∣an, otherwise, it would be impossible for any man, to discern in himself between the dictates of a good and bad Spirit, seeing it is manifest, that, among those that professe Christianity, many things are imputed to the Spirit of God which are contrary to Christianity. Now, of the sincerity of that intention where∣with a man ingages to live like a Christian, a man may stand as much assured, as he can stand assured of his own confidence in God, or that he doth indeed believe himself to be predestinate to life. And therfore, it is no prejudice to that security and peace of conscience which the Gospel tendereth, that it presup∣poseth this ingagement, and the performance of it. This answer, then, pro∣ceedeth upon these two presumptions; That the grace of Christ, which is the grace of God through Christ, is necessary to the having of that faith which alone justifieth; Which the heresy of Socinus denies with Pelagius And, that it justifieth not of it self, but by virtue of that grace of Christ, that is, the grace which God declares in consideration of his obedience. These pre∣sumptions, it is not my purpose to suppose gratis, without debating the grounds upon which they are to be received, having once purposed to resolve wherein the Covenant of Grace stands. But I must have leave to take them in hand in their respective places, and, for the present, to dispatch that which presses here, which is to shew, that the intent of S. Paul, and the rest of the Scriptures, which he expounds most at large is this; That a Christian is not justified by the Law of Moses, and those works that are done precisely by vir∣tue thereof, not including in it the Gospel of Christ; but by undertaking the profession of Christianity and performing the same, (which is in his language, by faith without the workes of the Law) and therefore, consequently, by those workes, which are done by virtue of this faith, in perfor∣mance of it. And first, I appeale to the state of the question in S. Pauls Epistles, what it is the Apostle intends to evict, by all that he disputes; And demand, who can or dare undertake, that he had any occasion to decide that which here is questioned, upon supposition that a Christian is justified by the Covenant of Grace alone, which the Gospel tendereth; Whether by Faith alone, which is the assurance of salvation, or trust in God through Christ; Or by Faith alone which is the undertaking of Christianity, and living according to the same? For, it is evident in the Scriptures of the Apostles, how much adoe they had to perswade the Jewes, who had received Christ, that the Gentiles which had done the like were not bound to keep the Law, which they, it is evident, did keep; These had no ground, had they understood, from the beginning of their Christianity, that their righteousnesse and salvation depended not upon the keeping of it, under the Gospel of Christ. It is evident, that the trouble which Jewish Christians raised, in the Churches to whom those Epistles are
directed, which dispute this point fullest, upon occasion of this difficulty, was the subject and cause of directing the same. What cause then can there be, why these Epistles should prove, that a Christian is not justified by such works as suppose the Covenant of Grace, when as the disease they pretend to cure, consists, in believing to be justified by the works of Moses Law, which sup∣poseth it not? For, it is evident, that had it been received as now, that Mo∣ses Law is void, the occasion of this dispute in these Epistles had ceased, what ever benefit besides might have been procured by them, for succeeding ages of the Church. Is it not plain that the pretense of S. Paul, in the Epistle to the Romanes, is this, that neither the Gentiles by the Law of Nature, nor the Jewes by the Law of Moses, can obtaine righteousnesse, or avoid the judge∣ment of God, and therefore, that it is necessary for both to imbrace Christi∣anity? He that reades the two first chapters, cannot question this. In the fourteenth chapter, together with the beginning of the fifteenth, you shall find him resolving, upon what terms, these two sorts of Christians were to converse with one another; And through the body of it, upon what grounds the Gentiles are invited to the Covenant of grace, which the Jewes began then to refuse. This being the businesse of the Epistle, the drift of it is manifest, whether righteousnesse and salvation come by the Law or the Gospel, by Judaisme or by Christianity. The subject of the Epistle to the Hebrews is this. The Jews being priviledged by the laws of the Empire in the exercise of their Religion, disclaiming those of their nation that had professed Christianity, found means by the power of the Romanes, to constrain them, by persecution, to return to Judaisme. The question is, whether they can obtaine salvation turning Jews againe, which, they perswade themselves they might obtaine being such, be∣fore they imbrace Christianity: That this is the question, let him that will take the paines to compare the proposition of it, in the the beginning of the II. Chapter, and the reasons which it is pursued with untill the sixth, with the conclusion of the dispute in the thirteenth; (Considering also that discourse which followes, of the intent and effect of the Law;) Let him, I say, give sen∣tence. If he refuse me, I will be bold to say of him; That no man is so blind as he that will not see. With the Churches of Galatia, when S. Paul writ to them, the case was somewhat otherwise. It is manifest that they consisted partly of Gentiles partly of Jews. The words of the Apostle require it; Gal. IV. 8, 9. But then truly, not knowing God, ye served those, which indeed are no Gods; But now having known God, or rather being known of God, how turn ye back to those weak and beggerly elements, to which ye desire to be in bondage againe. For, neither could they serve those that were not Gods indeed, unlesse Gentiles, nor unlesse Jewes, returne to those elements. It is manifest, that, to avoid persecution for the profession of Christianity, those whom S. Paul writes against would have them be circumcised; and so, conforme themselves so farre to the Law, that, those who raised that persecution might be satisfied at their hands. Those that would make a fair shew in the flesh, constraine you to be circumcised, onely that they may not be persecuted with the Crosse of Christ. For, neither themselves that are persecuted do keep the Law; But would have you circumcised that they may glory in your flesh: Saith S. Paul, Gal. VI. 12, 13. And againe, Gal. V. 11. But I brethren, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still per∣secuted? For then the scandall of the Crosse is void. And is not the question then between the Law and the Gospel, between Judaisme and Christianity, whether of them intitles to salvation and righteousnesse? And shall the excluding of the Law exclude those works which suppose Christianity, or rather include what ever the Gospel includes or inferres? Consider what opinion the Jews had then entertained, to alienate them from Christianity then, and to divide them from it ever since. So long as the nation stood, it is manifest, how much adoe there was to hold them to the worship of the true God, which was the ground of that Law by which they held the Land of promise. Being carried to Babylon, and seeing the menaces of the Law come to passe, and revolving within themselves those things, which Isaiah and other
Prophets had preached against the worship of Idols (upon that occasion it seems, but certaine it is (they never departed from the worship of one true God after∣ward. But then, with the study of his law, after their returne from captivity came in a curioity of learning and keeping all punctillos, which the observa∣tion of it could require; As supposing the wisdom of the Nation, which the Law it self magnifieth, Deut. IV. 6, 8. together with their righteousnesse and holynesse to consist in these niceties; Whereas this was, indeed, but the civile and outward observation of those precepts, of the externall worship of one God, and civil conversation among themselves, to which the civil happiness of the land of promise was tied, as I shewed in the first book. Hereupon our Lord to his disciples, Mat. V. 10. Ʋnlesse your righteousnesse exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdome of heaven. And again, to shew, that the disease began long afore, though then it was come to the height, he reproves his hearers with these words which the Prophet Esay had charged upon his time, Es. XXIX. 13. In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines the Traditions of men. Mat. XV. 9. Mar. VII. 7. Where he in∣stanceth, in the washing of cups and pots according to the Law, of brasse ves∣sels, and beds, of the hands before meat, and after they came from market, according to the tradition of the Elders, which the Apostle 1 Pet. I. 18. calls, their vain conversation delivered from their fathers. This is manifestly that righteousnesse whereof S. Paul sayes, Rom. X. 3. That the Jewes, not knowing the righteousnesse of God, and willing to establish their own righteousnesse, were not subject to Gods righteousnesse. For, as it is evident, that, not to be subject to the righteousnesse of God, is neither more nor lesse, then, to refuse the Gospel of Christ; So their own righteousnesse, which they would establish, in oppo∣sition to the same, must needs be that righteousnesse which they might be pos∣sest of by virtue of the Law. And indeed, it is not possible to imagine that the Jewes should so punctually and superstitiously reverence all these nice obser∣vations, traditions, and customes, which the Scribes and Pharisees brought in, to limit the generality of Moses Law, and to determine every clause, circumstance, and tittle, according to which it should be observed, (which now that vast bulk of their Talmud containes) if they did not thinke, that true wisdome and righteousnesse before God, is placed in the nice keeping of these curiosities. Nor can it be doubted, that the undervaluing of them by reason of Christianity, is that which first occasioned them to take offence at the Gospel, and to this day maintaines them in contradiction to it. It can therefore by no meanes be doubted, that this is the Law, and there∣fore the workes which S. Paul means, when he argues, that we are not justified by the Law, nor the workes of the Law, but by grace and by Faith. For, it is most manifest, that he instances diverse times in those precepts which are not of the law of nature, nor can the workes of them be counted to belong to the inward obedience of God, and his worship in Spirit and truth; But meerely formes, which God had tied them up to his service with, that they might have no occasion to seek after strange Gods; And customes, whereby he had so li∣mited their civil conversation to one another, that, being divided thereby from other nations, they might have no occasion to learn their Gods. So S. Paul, Gal. IV. 9. 10. But now having known God, or rather being known of God, how turn ye back againe to those weake and beggarly rudiments to which ye desire to be in bondage againe. Ye observe dayes, and monthes, and seasons, and yeares. For, the observation of legall Festivals, according to the moneths and seasons of the yeares, is indeed obedience to that God, by whose Law the differ∣ence is made. But, when their conceits of themselves transports them to imagine, that God esteems them for these things, whereby he hath differenced them from other nations, and, that it cannot stand with that esteem, that he should receive the Gentiles into favour upon undertaking that spirituall obe∣dience which Christ publisheth, not tying that to the same; Worthily are they called by the Apostle, weak and beggerly rudiments, that did onely pre∣pare
them to this obedience, by tying them to the true God and his outward service. And is not the precept of circumcision, in the first place, which ob∣liges to all the precepts, and intitles to all the promises, of this nature? Hear S. Paul to the Philipians, III. 3. 6. among whom this leaven began to spread We are the circumcision, saith he, that serve God in the Spirit, and glory in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Though I have confidence in the flesh also; If any other man seem to have confidence in the flesh, I more. Circumcised the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of He∣brews, also concerning the Law a Pharisee, as concerning zeal, one that perse∣cuted the Church, as concerning righteousnesse that is by the law, blamelesse. Are not all these priviledges of that nation by virtue of Moses Law, and of circumcision, which obliges to it? And is not that confidence of righteous∣nesse which is by the Law, which S. Paul disclaimes, (though he claime as good a title to it as any Jew beside) I say, is not that it which moved the Jews, out of zeal to the Law, to persecute the Church? And, can that righteousnesse which moveth to persecute Christianity be thought to presuppose it? There∣fore, what S. Paul meanes by confidence in the flesh we must learn from the Epistle to the Hebrews IX. 9. 10. Where the tabernacle is called a Parable, or figure for the then present time, in which gifts and sacrifices were offered, which could not profit him that ministred as to conscience, being onely imposed upon meates and drinkes, and severall Baptismes, and righteousnesses of the flesh, un∣till the time of reformation came. Where, , are those carnall and bodily rites, which obtaine that carnall righteousnesse, which answereth the carnall and earthly promises of the Law; and were mistaken by them, for meanes of obtaining resurrection unto life, and the world to come, which, under the Law so given, they had neverthelesse just cause to expect, though not in con∣sideration of such observations. Another argument hereof we have from S. Paul, which to me seems per∣emptory, in that he opposeth that grace and faith, whereby Christians are ju∣stified, to those works, which Gentiles, by the Law and light of nature were able to do; Which works, certainly, do not suppose Christianity. Ephes. II. 8, 9. For, by grace are ye saved through the Faith, and that not of your selves, it is Gods gift. Not of workes, least any man should glory. There is nothing moremanifest, then, that the Church of the Ephesians, when S. Paul wrote this Epistle, was gather∣ed of those that had been Gentiles, as you may see by Ephes. II. 11, 12. III. 1, 6. Wherefore, when S. Paul sayes to them, being presently Christians, that they were not saved by works, least they should glory; it is manifest, that his meaning is, that their conversation before the Gospel came, could not move and oblige God to provide them the meanes of Salvation which it tendereth. Againe, S. Paul exhorting Timothy to suffer hardship for the Gospel, accord∣ing to the power of God, who, saith he, hath saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and the grace that is given us in Christ Jesus before everlasting ages; 2 Tim. I. 9. speaketh of the same Ephesians whose Pastor Timothy was at that time. But most fully Titus III. 4, 7. But when the goodnesse and love to men of God our Saviour ap∣peared, not of workes which we had done in righteousnesse saved he us, but, accord∣ing to his own mercy, by the laver of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed upon us richly, through our Saviour Jesus Christ, that being justi∣ed by his grace, we might become heirs of everlasting life, according to hope. For, that those whom Titus had in charge were Christians converted for the most part of Gentiles, appeares by the Apostles words, Titus I. 10. For there be ma∣ny and those rebellious, vaine talkers and cheaters, especially they of the circum∣cision, whose mouthes must be stopped. And in the words that goe next afore the passage alledged, there is a lively description of the conversation of the Gentiles; For, of Jewes he could not have said; We also were once foolish, dis∣obedient, wandring out of the way, in slaved to divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hatefull and hating one another. Titus, III. 3. Seeing then that it concerns the Gentiles as well as the Jews, which the Apostle argues, that
men are not justified by works, but by grace and by faith, it is manifest, that he meanes such works as the Gentiles might pretend to no lesse then the Jews, and that while they were Gentiles, because he speakes of that estate in which the Gospel overtook them; And therefore, when S. Paul denies that men are justified by works, he meanes those works which men are able to do before they are acquainted with the preaching of the Gospel, whe∣ther by the light and Law of nature, or by the meere instruction of Moses Law. For, though the law of Moses containe in it many morall precepts of true, and inward, and spirituall obedience, the observation whereof is indeed the worship of God in Spirit and in truth; Yet we must consider, that the same precepts are part of the law of nature, written in the hearts even of Gentiles. And we must consider further, that these precepts may be obeyed and done two severall wayes; First, as farre as the outward work, and the kinde and ob∣ject of it goes; and further, as farre as the reason of it, derived from the will and command of God, and the intention thereof directed to his honour and service. Which purpose of heart cannot be in any man, but him that loves God above this world, making him the utmost end of all his actions. I say then, that of those morall precepts of Moses law, which are parts of the law of nature, the outward and bodily observation goes no further then the ob∣servation of other rituall and civil precepts of the same law; And therefore, is to be comprised in the account of those works of the Law by which S. Paul denies, deservedly, that we are justified before God. But, the inward and Spirituall observation of them, (at least, the purpose and intention of it) as it depends upon the grace of Christ, which the Gospel publisheth, so must it necessarily be included in that faith, which, in opposition to the works of the Law, qualifies Christians for those promises which the Gospel ten∣dereth. But that which must remove all doubt, of the Apostles meaning, in this point, must be the removing that difficulty, which held the Jewes then, and still holds them in the opinion, of obtaining righteousnesse and salvation by the Law. For certainely, could S. Paul have perswaded them, that the ancient Fathers from the beginning, of whose salvation theyh could not doubt, though under the Law, yet obtained not salvation by the law, but by the Gospel, it had been an easie thing for him to have per∣swaded them to it. The Apostles intent therefore is, to perswade them to that, which, because it was hard to perswade them to, therefore they continued Jewes, and refused to become Christians. Now let us suppose that which I have premised, that the Law expressely covenanteth onely for the worldly happi∣nesse of that people in the land of promise, requiring, in lieu of it, onely the outward and civil observation of the law. But, the summe of that outward ob∣servation thereof, which is expressely covenanted for, consisting in the worship of one God (whose providence, in the particular actions of his creatures, it presupposeth, maintaining also a Tradition of the immortality of mans soul, and of bringing all mens actions to account) shall not all that are born under this Law, stand necessarily convict, that they owe this God that in∣ward and spirituall obedience, wherein his worship in Spirit and truth con∣sisteth? And seeing the same God tenders them terms of that reconcilement and friendship, which maintaines them in that state of this world, whereby they may be able and fit to render him such inward and spirituall obedience, punctually making good the same to them; Have they not reason enough to conclude, that they shall not faile of his favour and grace, so long as they pro∣ceed in a course of such obedience? How much more, having the examples of the ancient Fathers, the doctrine which they delivered by word of mouth, the instructions of the Prophets, (whom God raised up from time to time, to assure them, that this was that principall intent of Gods law, though it made the least noise in it) how much more, I say, must they needs stand con∣vict, both of their own obligation to tender God this obedience, and also.
that, tendring it, they could not faile of Gods favour toward them, even as to the life to come. Though this cannot be said, to be the Gospel of Christ because it containeth not the dispensation of his life in the flesh, nor the ex∣presse tender of the life to come, in consideration of the profession of his Name, and of living according to his doctrine; Yet, if it be truly said, that the Gospel is implied and vailed in the Law, either this signifies nothing, or this is the thing that it signifies. For upon this ground, it is manifest, that there was alwayes a twofold sense and effect of Moses Law, and, by conse∣quence, a twofold law; By virtue of which difference, whereas it is said, Heb. VII. 16. That the legall Priesthood stood by the law of a carnall precept; And the precepts thereof are called, , as I said afore; And the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of the red heifer, are said to san∣ctifie to the cleansing of the flesh. Heb. IX. 10. 13. On the other side, S. Paul saith, that the Law is spirituall, and that the commandment was given to life, and therefore discovers concupiscence to be sinne. Rom. VII. 7, 10, 14. And S. Steven saith to his people, of Moses, that he received living oracles to give unto us, Acts VII. 38. And S. Paul of himself and his fellow Apostles, deliver∣ing the doctrine of the Gospel; Which things we speak, saith he, not with words taught by mans wisdome, but taught by the holy Ghost, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things; 1 Cor. II. 13. that is the spiritual things which the Gospel expresseth, with the same spiritual things implied by the law; As I shew∣ed afore, that the same S. Pauls meaning is, that the man of God is perfectly fur∣nished to every good work, when he is able to make the Scriptures of the Old Testament usefull, to instruct, reprove, teach, and comfort Christians in Christianity. 2 Tim. III. 16, 17. And truly, whatsoever is said in the writings of the Apostles, or the sayings of our Lord Christ, (supposing the difference between that which is Spirituall, and that which is carnall or literall in the Scriptures) must be expounded upon this ground of the Apostle, that all the promises of God are yea in Christ, and in him amen, as S. Paul saith, 2 Cor. I. 20. That is to say, that the temporall promises of Moses law were intended for, and fulfilled in the eternall promises of Christs Gospel. For, upon this ground, there is a Jew according to the letter, and a Jew according to the Spirit, that is a Christian. Rom. II. 28, 29. There are sons according to the flesh, and sons according to promise. Rom. IX. 8. and he that was born of the bondmaide, was born according to the flesh, and persecuted him that was born of the free woman according to the Spirit; Gal. IV. 23. 29. For this reason it is said; That the Fathers all eat the same spirituall meat, and drank the same spirituall drink, as we Christians do; For they drank of the spirituall rock that followed them, which rock was Christ. 1 Cor. X. 3, 4. Because, as Christianity was intended by the law, so was Christ by the figures of the law; neither is there any other reason to be given, why the letter killeth, but the Spirit quick∣neth, as S. Paul affirmeth, 2 Cor. III. 6. but this; Because, as the law in the lite∣rall sense, provides no remedy for those that fall into Capitall crimes, but leaves them to the justice of the law; So the Spirituall sense of it was not avail∣able to bring men to life, though available to convict them of sinne; So that the Jews, (whom S. Paul pursueth as guilty of sinne, by the conviction of the law) stand noverthelesse convict, that they were never able, however convict of sin, to attain righteousnesse by the help of it alone; and therfore, that they are no lesse obliged to have recourse to the Gospel, and to imbrace Christianity, then the Gentiles themselves, who had no other pretense to avoid the judge∣ment of God which the Gospel publisheth. This is the intent of S. Paul in the first chapters of his Epistle to the Ro∣manes, which he recapitulates in this generall inference, Rom. III. 9. We have pleaded before, that Jewes and Gentiles, both are under sinne. And againe, Rom. XI. 32. God hath shut up all under disobedience, that he might have mer∣cy on all. And, out of the same consideration he argues, Gal. III. 10, 13. That as many as are of the workes of the Law are accursed. For it is written; Cursed is every one that continnueth not in all things that are written in the book
the Law to do them; And againe; Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. For it is written; Cursed is every one that hang∣eth on a tree. For, though the Law provided remedies for many transgressions, the use whereof might, and did restore men to the benefit of those temporall promises, which it tendered; Yet in as much as there was no remedy against capitall transgressions by the Law, (in as much as no remedy against death, which is the punishment allotted to the transgression of Gods originall Law) in so much it is justly said; That, by the law, there was sufficient conviction of that spirituall death, to which, those that retired not themselves under the Spirituall Law of God were necessarily liable; Though that Spirituall Law were never published, till Christ, by submitting to the literal curse of the law, had established the same. To this purpose truly saith S. Paul Gal. III. 18, 19. That the inheritance being allowed Abraham by promise, the Law was added because of transgressions; That is, because there was no relying upon the good nature of that people, (whose benefit, the promises made to Abraham did concerne) that, because they professed the true God and acknowledged his providence, and judgement to come, therefore, without constraint of tempo∣rall punishments, they would abstain, even from those sins whereby eivil society is violated. And therefore the Apostle addeth; That God hath concluded all under sinne, that the promise might be given those that believe, by the faith of Jesus Christ. But, before the faith came, saith he, we were guarded by the law, as shut up to the faith which was to be revealed. So that the law is our Pedagogue to bring us to Christ, that we may be justified by faith. The office of a Pedagogue in S. Pauls sense, according to the custome of those times, is not that which most men understand, as I said afore. A Pedagogue is not the master of a School, but a governour, such as Fathers then appointed their sonnes, (out of their slaves for the most part, in whose discretion they had some confidence, to trust their children with them) for the conducting of them to Schoole, and for the over-seeing of them when they were dismissed by their masters againe. So that, when he saith; the Law is our Pedagogue to bring us to Schoole to Christ; The sense is most fit and proper according to my intent; That, dis∣covering the conviction of sinne by the punishments, wherewith it guardeth and shutteth men up from offending, it leadeth us to the ingagement which Christ requireth of us, that we offend no more. And, upon this ground, and to this effect it is, that S. Paul inferrs, out of the passages of the old Testa∣ment which he had there premised, Rom. III. 19, 20, 21. What the Law saith it saith to those that are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty to God, thot no flesh should be justified before him by the works of the Law: For, by the Law is the knowledge of sinne. But now the righteousnesse of God is manifested without the Law: be∣ing testified by the Law and the prophets. For, how is the righteousnesse of God witnessed by the Law, (which ministreth conviction of sinne) and by the Prophets; but in regard the Law affords sufficient arguments of the truth of the Gospel, by which, that righteousnesse which God accepteth to everlasting life is tendered: And because the Prophets, succeeding the Law, do cleare and publish the same more and more. And againe, Rom. IV. 15, 16. For the law worketh wrath: Because, where there is no Law there is no trans∣gression. Therefore of saith, (is the promise) that it may be according to grace; that the promise may be firme to all the seed, not onely that which is of the Law, but that also which is of the faith of Abraham, which is the Father of us all. For, if there be a twofold seed of Abraham, one according to the Law onely, which worketh wrath, the other according to the promise; then is there also a twofold Law, because that promise inferres a Law of God, by virtue whereof, those that are of faith are justified by the promise. Now, if the restraining of that people from grosse offences, by those punishments, which the Law threatned them with, were a considerable meanes to prepare that people to submit themselves to the Gospel when i should come to be preached; It will necessarily follow, that, during the time
that the Law was to stand, it was appointed by God, to bring them to true spirituall righteousnesse, who, apprehending the secrets of their own hearts open to God, (whom the Laws ties them to acknowledge) and liable to his judgements, in confidence of the goodnesse which he prevented them with, should engage the resolution of their hearts, to worship him in spirit and in truth Seeing then, that all the arguments, whereby the Law and the Prophets do bear witnesse to the truth of Christianity, are grounded upon the correspon∣dence, between the temporall promises of the Law and the spirituall and ever∣lasting promises of the Gospel, (whereupon follows the correspondence between that carnall obedience which the Law, and that spirituall obedience which the Gospell requireth) it followeth necessarily; that though there was then no expresse publication of any will of God, to be engaged to give life everlasting, to those that should take upon them to yeeld him that inward and spirituall obedience, which the Gospel now co∣venanteth for; yet notwithstanding, this will of his, darkly intimated by the dispensation of the Law, was effectuall to make those that imbraced those intimations, to yeeld him such obedience: and yet the number of them so slen∣der, as made the coming of Christ, and his Gospel, no lesse necessary to the salvation of the Jews, then of the Gentiles. And this is that equivocation of the word Law, which Origen, in his exposition of the Epistle to the Romanes, and in his Philocalia, oftentimes complaines to be the occasion of the obscu∣rity of that and other of S. Pauls Epistles. The same in a word, which made the Jews stumble at the counsel of God, in voiding that Law, to which he had brought them up, and so well accepted their zeale for it. Onely this we must take along with us, that, whatsoever is here said to be intimated by the Law, and made good under it, concerning the reward of everlasting life to the inward obedience of Gods spirituall Law; is to be understood, by virtue of those promises, upon which the Gospel is established; Which the Fathers from the beginning were bred up in the expectation of, according to that of the Apostle Heb. XI. 13, 16. These all died according to faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afarre of, and being perswaded, and having saluted them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon earth: for they who say such things declare that they seek a country; And, had they been mindfull of that which they were come out from, they might have had time to turn back: But now they desire a better, that is an heavenly; Whereupon God is not ashamed to be called their God: For he had prepared them a City. And againe, 39, 40. These all being witnessed by faith, received not the promises, God having provided some better thing for us, that they might not be perfected without us. Where it is plaine, that they, according to the Apostle, expected the kingdom of heaven by virtue of that promise, which is now manifested, and tendered, and made good by the Gospell, whereof our Saviour saith, John VIII. 98. Your father Abraham leaped to see my day, and saw it and rejoyced: And againe, Mat. XIII. 17. Verily I say unto you that many Prophets, and righteous men have desired to see the things ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear the things ye hear, and have not hard them.
CHAP. IX. Of the Faith and Justification of Abraham and the Patriarkes, according to the Apostles. Of the Prophets and righteous men under the Law. Abra∣ham and Rahab the harlot justified by workes, if justified by Faith. The promises of the Gospel depend upon works which the Gospell injoyneth. The Tradition of the Church. HAving thus shewed, that the interest of Christianity, and the grounds whereupon it is to be maintained against the Jewes, require this answer to be returned to the objection; it remaines that I shew, how the apostles dis∣putations upon this point do signify the same. Of Abraham then, and of the Patriarches, thus we read, Heb. XI. 8, 10. By faith Abraham obeyed the calling, to go forth unto the place he was to receive for inheritance, and went forth not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as none of his own, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise: For he expected a City having foundations, the architect and builder whereof is God. Is it not manifest here, that, both parts of the comparison are wrapped up in the same words, which cannot be unfolded, but by saying; That, as Abraham, in confidence of Gods promise to give his posterity the land of Canaan, left his country to live a stranger in it; So, while he was so doing, he lived a pilgrim in this world, out of the faith that he had conceived out of Gods promises, that he should thereby obtaine the world to come? And is not this the profession of Christians, which the Apostle, in the words alledged even now, declareth to be signified by the pilgrimages of the Patriarchs? And is not this a just account, why they cannot be said to have attained the promises by the law but by faith? Therefore, that which followeth immediately, of Sarah, must needs be understood to the same purpose; By faith Sarah also her self received force to give seed, and bare beside the time of her age, because she thought him faithfull that had promised. Therefore of one, and him mortified, were born, as the stars of heaven for multitude, and as the sand that is by the sea shore innumerable. For S. Paul declareth, Gal. III. 16. IV. 22—Rom. IX. 7, 8, 9. that the seed promised Abraham, in which all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, is Christ, and the Church of true Spirituall Israelites, that should impart the promise of everlasting life to all nations. And this promise you saw even now, that Abraham, and the Patriarchs expected. Sarah there∣fore being imbarked in Abrahams pilgrimage, as, by the same faith with him, she brought forth all Israel according to the flesh, so must it needs be under∣stood, that she was accepted of God as righteous, in consideration of that faith, wherewith she traveled to the world to come. Neither can it be ima∣gined, that S. Pauls dispute, of the righteousnesse of Abraham by faith, can be understood upon any other ground, or to any other effect then this. What then shall we say that Abraham our father got according to the flesh? saith he; Rom. IV. 1-5. For, if Abraham was justified by works, he hath whereof to glory, but not towards God. For, what saith the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse. But, to him that worketh, the re∣ward is not reckoned according to grace but according to debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the wicked, his faith is imputed for righteousnesse. The question, what Abraham found according to the flesh? can signifie nothing, but, what got he by the Law? (which is called the flesh in opposition to the Gospel included in it, which is called the Spirit) Did he come by his righteousnesse through the Law or not? For, had Abraham been justified by works that should need none of that grace which the Gospel ten∣dreth for remission of sinnes, well might he glory of his own righteousnesse, and not otherwise; For, he that acknowledges, to stand in need of pardon
and grace, cannot stand upon his own righteousnesse. Now Abraham can∣not so glory towards God, because the Scripture saith, that his faith was imputed to him for righteousnesse, which signifies Gods grace in accepting of it to his account, not his claime as of debt. Whereupon the Apostle inferreth immediately the testimony of David, writing under the Law, in these words; As David also pronounceth the man blessed to whom God imputeth righteousnesse without works; Blessed are they whose iniquities are remitted, and whose sinnes are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not sinne. What can be more manifest, to shew that the Apostle intends no more, then that the Fa∣thers pretended not to be justified by those workes, which claimed no benefit of that Grace which the Gospel publisheth? Especially, the consequence of Davids words being this; Psal. XXXII. 2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not sinne, and in whose spirit there is no guile. For, the Prophet David including the spirituall righteousnesse of the heart in the quality of him, to whom the Lord imputeth righteousnesse without works; the Apostle must be thought to include it in the Faith of him, to whom the Lord imputeth it for righteousnesse. Now when S. Paul observeth in Moses, that Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse; Upon the promise of that posterity which he expected not. Gen. XV. 6. It cannot be said, that Ab∣raham had not this faith afore; Or that it was not imputed to him for righteousnesse till now: Because, the Apostle to the Hebrews hath said ex∣presly that he had the same faith, and to the like effect, ever since he left his country, to travail after Gods promises; And certainly, it was but an act of the same Faith, to walk after the rest of those promises, whereby it should please God, further to declare the purpose for which he brought him from home. That faith therefore which was imputed for righteousnesse to Abraham, (not as the Jewes challenge righteousnesse, by doing the Law, but as Christians expect it, by remission of sinnes) includes in it an ingagement, of travailing that way that God points out, to the land of promise, upon the account whereof, that faith, which was imputed to the Patriarchs for righte∣ousnesse proceedeth. Now, when S. Paul proceedeth further to argue, that, this imputation of Abrahams faith to righteousnesse came to passe, while he was yet uncircumcised, and no way subject to the law; and that by virtue of Gods promise, (which proceeded upon consideration of this righteousnesse) and not of the law, the title of his inheritance stood; (which promise, he argueth further Gal. IV. 18, 19. that the Law, coming four hundred and thir∣ty yeares after, could nothing derogate from) I challenge all the world to say, how all this inferrs any more; But, that the righteousnesse of Abraham comes not by virtue of the Law, (by doing whereof the Jewes pretend righte∣ousnesse) but by Gods free promise, whereby Christians expect remission of sinnes. To the same effect therefore, S. Paul concludes, Rom. IV. 23, 24. But it was not written because of him alone, that it was imputed to him, but be∣cause of us, who believe in him that raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead, to whom it is to be imputed. For, the example of Abrahams faith in the promise of God to give him such a posterity by Sarah, and that it was imputed to him for that righteousnesse, whereby he became qualified for the promises upon which he left his country, is written for the instruction of Christians, upon this account; Because, so sure as we believe, that the New Testament, was intended by the Old, so certaine we are, that the faith whereby we undertake to follow God, and the way to the world to come, which he by Christ points us out, qua∣lifies us for the same. But he that will have S. Paul upon these reasons to inferre, that Christians are justified by believing that they are predestinate, or by trusting in God, not supposing that trust grounded upon that obligation which our Baptisme professeth, in plain terms, he makes S. Paul use arguments that do not conclude. For, if Abraham cannot bragge of his righteousnesse before God, because of Gods account, not of debt; If David count happiness not to stand upon any title of purchase, but by remission of sins; If faith were reckoned to Abraham for righteousnesse before he was circumcised; If the in∣heritance
were due by virtue of Gods promise; Then that righteousness which intitles Christians to the world to come, stands by virtue of the Gospel, (which publisheth remission of sins to all whom it overtakes in unrighteousnesse) and, by Gods grace, (in acceping their undertaking of Christianity, and living ac∣cording to it, as qualifying them for everlasting life) not by doing the law, without having recourse to that meanes which the Gospel tendereth, for re∣mission of sinnes, and right to the world to come. But, it is in vaine to in∣ferre from any of those assumptions, Therefore Christians are justified by that faith, in which, no obligation of bearing Christs crosse, or any consideration thereof is included. With this, which hath been said of that faith whereby Abraham was justi∣fied, let us compare that which follows of the faith of Moses Heb. XI. 24, 25, 26. By faith Moses, growing great, refused to be called Pharaohs daugh∣ters sonne; chusing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time, counting the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt: Because he looked upon the reward to be rendred. The faith by which Moses was justified, consists in this, that he renounced his quali∣ty in the Court of Egypt that he might have a share in the promises made to Gods people. And this the Apostle justly calls, undertaking the reproach of Christ, because it was the same thing in effect to the people of God then, as now is the bearing of Christs crosse, which Christians at their Baptisme pro∣fesse; and because the promises which the Fathers looked after are fulfilled in Christ, as I shewed afore. And herewith let us compare the faith of Enoch, Heb. XI. 5, 6. By faith Enoch was translated not to see death, and was not found, because God had translated him, for before his translation, he is witnessed to have pleased God. But without faith it is impossible to please God. For, he that com∣eth to God, must believe that he is, and that he rewardeth those that seek him. Well may we conclude from hence, that Enoch was not justified by the Law, nor by the works of it, but by that perswation, upon which he sought God; as Christians, by obliging themselves so to do, not by that faith, which includeth not, nor supposeth any resolution and obligation so to do. Compare now herewith the conclusion of the whole dispute, concerning the righteous men and Prophets under the Law, Heb. XI. 32. 37. And what shall I say more? For, the time will saile me to tell of Gideon and Barak, and Sampson, and Jephtah, and Da∣vid, and Samuel, and the Prophets; Who by faith conquered kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained promises, stopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword. recovered of weaknesse, became strong in war, put to flight armies of strangers, women received their dead raised to life againe, others were tortured to death, not expecting deliverance, that they might obtaine a better resurrection, others had triall of mockings and scourgings, and besides, of bonds and imprisonment, were stoned, sawne asunder, tempted, died slain by the sword, went about in sheeps and goats skins, in want, afflicted, distressed, wan∣dring in deserts, and mountaines, and caves and holes of the earth. Will this conclude, that all these were justified by that faith, which neither includeth nor presupposeth a resolution and obligation to righteousnesse; who, out of the hope of Gods promises to his people, acted against the enemies thereof, or suffered for righteousnesse, the same things, in that state of Gods people, which Christians now suffer and do, for the profession of Christs Crosse, into which they are baptized? In fine, the whole dispute of the Apostle here, and of S. Paul, in so many of his Epistles, concerning faith, and the righteousnesse that Christians have by it, is the same with that which the Fathers of the Church maintained against the Jews, that Christianity is more ancient then Judaisme; That, as the Fathers before the Law obtained not that right, (which both Christians and Jews allow them) to the promises of the world to come, by the works of the Law; So the Prophets and righteous men under the Law had not that hope, by doing it, but by the assurance, which, under the dispen∣sation of the Law they had conceived, (as of reason they ought) that God would not faile them in the world to come, that should heartily and faithfully
serve him in this: Which, (adding to it the profession of the Name and warrant of Christ, as the Author of that contract, whereby we undertake so to do) is Christianity. I have yet said nothing of the passage of S. James II. 14—, where he disputes expresly, that faith alone justifieth not, but Faith with works, for it seemes to make a generall argument by it self, though in truth, the reason which he brings that Abraham was justified by works, necessarily depends upon the true reason why S. Paul saith; That Abraham was justified by faith; Which reason they that will not admit, deserve to crucifie themselves everlastingly, to find, how he can be truly said to be justified by workes, that is justified by faith alone with∣out works afore; were it not pitty, that the Scriptures should be set on the rack, to make them confesse a meaning, which the words in no language, by any custome of humane speech will bear. For, if the Faith of him that hath no good works will not save him, not justifie him, as the Apostle expresly affirmeth, can the workes that are said to do this be said to do it Metonymi∣caly because, they are signes or effects of Faith which doeth it, when it is said that faith without them doth it not? And though, by the way of Meto∣nymy, the property or effect of the cause may be attributed to the effect of that cause; Yet when that property or effect is denied the cause, and attri∣buted to the effect, will any language indure, that it should be thought proper∣ly to belong to the cause which is denied it, and attributed to the effect only by Metonymy, that is, in behalf of the cause that is denied it? Is there any need to come into these straits, when, by saying, that a man is justified by faith alone according to S. Paul, (meaning by undertaking Christianity) a man will be obliged to say, that he is justified by works also, according to S. James, (to wit, by performing that which he undertaketh) unlesse you will have him justified by undertaking that which he performes not? For, when it is said, that a man is justified by undertaking Christianity, it is supposed, that he un∣dertakes it sincerely and heartily; Which sincerity, containing a resolution of all righteousnesse for the future, justly qualifies him for those promises which overtake him in sinne, so that, for the present, he can have nothing to justi∣fie him but the righteousnesse of this faith alone, which the Gos∣pel tells us that God accepteth: But for the time to come, just ground is there to distinguish a second justification, (which proceeds upon the same con∣sideration, but supposes the condition undertaken to be performed) from that first, which, though done by faith alone, inferreth the necessity of making good what is undertaken, that it may be available. Is not this that the Apo∣stle saith James 11. 15, 16, 17. If a brother or sister be naked or want daily food, and one of you say to him; Go in peace, be warmed and fed, and yet give them not things fit for his body, what is he the better? So also faith, if it have not workes, is of it self dead. Where lies this comparison but in this, that he who professeth Christianity, but doth not according to it, is like him that professeth love to his brother, but relieves not his necessities. And so, when it followes; But a man may say; thou hast faith and I have workes, shew me thy workes by thy faith, and I will shew thee my faith by my workes; For he that liveth like a Christian, it is plaine he sheweth his Faith by his workes, which is evidence that he pro∣fesseth Christianity sincerely; but he that onely professeth, is: yet to make evi∣dence by his workes, that his profession is sincere. As for the example of Abraham, the Apostles words are these, Abraham our Father, was he not justi∣fied by works, when he offered Isaac upon the altar? Thou seest that faith wrought with his workes, and by works was his saith perfited. And the Scripture which saith; Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousnesse; was fulfilled, and he was called the sonne of God. What is this, but that which we read, 1 Mac. 11. 52. Was not Abraham found faithfull in triall, and it was counted to him for righteousnesse? For it was counted to him for righteous∣nesse, that, not being weak in saith, he considered not his own body already morti∣fied, as being a hundred years old, nor the mortification of Sarahs wombe, nor doubted through want of belief in Gods promise, but was strengthened in faith
giving glory to God, and being satisfied, that he is able to do what he hath pro∣mised; As S. Paul saith Rom. IV. 19, 20, 21. And therefore, much more must it needs be counted to him for righteousnesse, that, by faith he offer∣ed Isaac when he was tempted, and that he who had received the promises offered his onely begotten sonne of whom it had been said; In Isaac shall posterity be count∣ed to thee. Reckoning that God was able to raise him from the dead. Whence also he received him in a parable; As the Apostle saith, Heb. XI. 17, 18, 19. For here, as I shewed afore, it is the act of faith, and not the object of it that is imputed to righteousnesse: And, in that obedience whereby this temptation was overcome, though there was a good work, yet there was an act of that faith: And therefore the Apostle deservedly addeth, that his faith wrought with his workes; But the faith that moved him to travail after Gods promise, was perfected by this work, wherein that faith moved him to tender God obedi∣ence. And therefore the Scripture was fulfilled which saith; Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse; Because that which Moses had said, that God counted Abraham righteous for his faith, was made good, and proved not to have been said without cause, but that he was righte∣ous indeed, (as righteous he must be, whom God so accounts) that obeyed God in such a triall as this. So, that which S. James addeth of Rahab; Likewise Rahab also the harlot, was she not justified by works receiving the messengers and sending them out another way? How shall it agree with that of the other Apo∣stle, Heb. XI. 31. Through faith Rahab the harlot perished not with the unbe∣lievers, receiving the spies in peace; But by virtue of the same reason; that, ha∣ving conceived assurance of the promises of God to his people, that she might have her share in them, she resolved to become one of them upon such terms as the case required, wherein certainly, the preservation of their spies was required? So, if by Faith, then by Workes, if by Workes, then by Faith. I must not leave this point till I have produced another sort of Scriptures, in which the promises of the Gospel are made to depend upon workes which Christianity requireth; AS namely, when forgivenesse of sinners is promised upon condition that we forgive our brethren their offences against us; Mat. VI. 14. 15. Our Lord rendring a reason why he had taught his disciples to pray; Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespasse against us; For if it forgive men their sinnes, your heavenly Father will forgive you also: But if you forgive not men their Transgressions, neither will your Father forgive your Transgressions. And the Apostle, James II. 13. to the same purpose; Judgement shall be without mercy, to him that sheweth not mercy. And the foote of our Saviours Parable, Mat. XVIII. 35. So also shall your bravenly Father do to you, if from your hearts yee forgive not every one his Brother their transgressi∣ons. So Mar. XI. 25. 26. And Luc. VI. 37. 38. Judge not and yee shall not be judged, condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned, pardon and ye shall be pardo∣ned give, and there shall be given to you, good measure, crouded and shaken, and runing over, shall be given into your bosome, for, the measure that ye mete with, shall be measured to you againe, And againe Luk. XI. 41. But give Almes according to your power, and all things shall be cleane to you. So Solomen, Prov. XVI. 6. By mercy and truth shall inquity be expiated And Daniell to Nebuchodonosor, Dan. III. 5. Redeeme thy sins by righteousnesse, or, Almes deeds, and thy iniquity by shewing compassion upon the afflicted. For the verbe  can signifie nothing but, Redeem in the Caldee, though there is a figure of speech in the Prophets Language, intending, redeem thy self from thy sinnes as I shall have occasion to say in another place, and therefore tis in the Greek; . And from hence come those sayings, Tobit IV. 11. . And againe Tob. XII. 9. . Almes delivereth from death, and suffereth not to enter into darknesse. And; Almes delivereth from death, and purgeth away all sinne. And Ecclus. III. 33. Water quencheth flaming fire, and with almes shall he make prepitiation for sinnes. And XXIX.
15. Shut up almes in thy store houses, and they will deliver thee from all afflictions. And, the words of the Apostle are plainest in this sense, I Pet. IV. 8. Charity shall cover a many sinnes. The Prophet also to the same purpose, Isa. I. 17. For they that make that filth which alone justifieth not to include, or presup∣pose that condition, to which Baptisme tieth Christians, must needs crucifie themselves, and set the Scriptures upon the rack, to finde another meaning for them then the words bear; By which, that which God hath made due without and before any condition, may turely be said, to be given in consideration of it; Which, reason and the common sense of all men abhors. But supposing that faith which onely justifieth to include the profession of undertaking Christianity, as the condition upon which the promises of the Gospel are to be expected; So certaine as it is, that this will not be due if the condition be not fulfilled, so necessary and so proper it will be to say; That, whatsoever that condition includeth, is the consideration upon which the promise cometh, though, not by virtue of the thing done, but by virtue of Gods tender, and the Covenant of Grace, and the promise which it containeth, and the free good∣nesse of God which first moved him to tender that promise. And therefore you shall find those that suppose it not, alwayes tormenting themselves, to force upon the Scriptures such a meaning as the words of them doe not beare. And in the last place, concerning the consent of the Church, though the Fathers are free, in acknowledging with S. Paul, justification by faith alone; yet notwithstanding they are, on the other side, so copious in attributing the promises of the Gospel to the good workes of Christians, that it may truly be said, there is never a one of them, from whom sufficient authority is not to be had for evidence thereof; Which will amount to a tradition of the whole Church, in this point. In particular, S. Augustine (to whom appeal is wont to be made, in all parts of that dispute which relateth to the Heresie of Pelagius) hath so clearly and so copiously delivered the answer which I maintaine, to those texts of S. Paul, where he denieth that Christians are justified by the workes of the Law; that those that challenge him in other points of this dis∣pute, concerning the Covenant of Grace, doe not pretend to be of his mind in this. Though the ground of this answer, consisting in the twofold sense of the Law, deserved as I conceive, to be further cleared, even after S. Augustine and the rest of ancient Church-writers. I would therefore have the reader here to understand, that I account all the rest of this second book, to be nothing else, but the resolution of those difficul∣ties, the answer to those objections and demandes, which arise upon the de∣termination here advanced. The chief of them is that which followes in the next place; How the promises of the Gospel can be said to be the effects of Gods free grace, requiring our Christianity, as the condition, upon which they become due and not otherwise. But there are also others, concerning the possibility of fulfulling Gods Law, by the new obedience of Christians; concern∣ing the goodnesse and perfection of it; concerning the force and effect of good workes, either in making satisfaction for sinne, or in meriting life everlasting; Which I shall allow that consideration, in due time, which the model of this abridgement will bear. As for the sense of the Fathers, evidencing the Tradition of the Church, I am yet to learn, that there ever was any exception alledged to infringe the consent of the Church, in the necessity of good workes, to the obtaining of salvation for Christians: But onely the case of those, who, being taken away by death upon professing Christianity, have not time to bring forth the fruits of it. And how good workes can be the necessary meanes to pro∣cure the salvation of Christians, but by virtue of that Law, or condition for obtaining salvation which the Gospel now expresly enacteth, and alwaies did covertly effectuate, no sense of man comprehendeth. For, that the ancient Church agreeth, in allowing the force of satisfaction for sinne to workes of Penance, of Merit for the world to come, to workes done in the state of Grace, none of the Reformation, (which either disowneth
or excuseth it for so doing, according to the respect they have for it) can make questionable. And therefore, though this be not the place to justifie the ancient Church in these particulars, yet this is evident, that those, who main∣taine more then my position requires, do agree in that which it containes. I shall therefore content my selfe for the present with producing some speciall passages of the Fathers, expressing in my opinion, the markes of my position, and the reasons whereupon it proceeds; As limiting the position between faith and workes, in the matter of justifying, to those works which go before faith, (that is before baptisme) and are done without faith, not to those that issue upon it; and therfore, placing that faith which alone justifieth, in the pro∣fession of Christianity by Baptisme: and that justification which insueth upon it, not in effecting that faith, but in those rightes which God alloweth him that hath it, upon the account of it. S. Jerome upon that of Zach. VIII. 10. There was no reward for man or beast. Priusquam fidem Christi quis recipiat, & in eo Spiritus Sancti fundamenta radicantur, nullus audire poterit; Est merces ope∣ri tuo; Sive ille Judaeus sit, sive Haereticus, sive Gentilis, quiequid boni operis fe∣cerit, nisi in Christi nomine fecerit, mercedem sui operis non habebit. Videmus Haereticorum virgines, Philosophorum rigorem, Judaeorum in escarum varietate observantiam, & tamen dicimus, juxta Aggaeum, quod comedant & non sa∣tientur, bibant & non inebrientur, operiantur, & non calescant, & qui mercedes congregat, mittat eas in sacculum pertusum. Before a man receive the faith of Christ, and the foundations of the Holy Ghost be laid in him, no man shall be able to hear; There is a reward for thy work. Be he Jew, or Heretick, or Gentile, whatsoever good work he shall do, not doing it in the Name of Christ, he shall have no reward for his worke. We see the Virgines of Hereticks, the rigor of Philo∣sophers, the scrupulosity of Jews in diversities of meates, and yet we say according to Aggai; They eat and are not filled, they drink and are not merry, they are clothed, and not warmed, and he that gathers wages puts them into a purse with a hole in it. Upon Galat. III. 2. Consideremus autem diligenter, quid non dixerit; Ʋtrum ex operibus Spiritum accepistis; Sed adjecerit ex operibus Legis. Sciebat enim & Cornelium Centurionom, Spiritum ex operibus accepis∣se, sed non ex operibus Legis, quam nesciebat. Si enime contrario dicatur; ergo & sine eruditione fidei accipi Spiritus Sanctus potest, nos respondebimus; acce∣pisse quidem eum Spiritum, sed ex auditu fidei, & naturali lege, quae loquitur in cordibus nostris bona quaeque facienda, & vitanda mala, per quam dudum quoque Abraham, Mosen, & caeteris Sanctos justificatos retulimus, quam augere de∣inceps potest operum observatio, legis quoque notitia, non tamen carnalis legis quae praeterit, sed spiritualis, quia lex spiritualis est. Neque vero quia sidem prae∣ferimus, legis opera destruimus, aut dicimus, secundum quosdam; Faciamus mala donec eveniant bona, quorum damnatio justa est; Sed servituti gratiam anteponimus, dicimusque, quod Judaei propter metum faciunt, id nos facere pro∣pter charitatem: Illos cogi ad bonum, nos bonum sponte suscipere. Non igitur ex fide Christi licentia nascitur delinquendi, sed ex dilectione fidei voluntas boni operis augetur, dum bona ideo facimus, non quia judicem formidamus, sed quia sci∣mus ei placere in quem credimus. Now let us diligently consider, that he saith not; Whether have ye received the spirit by works, but addeth, by the workes of the Law. For he knew that even Cornelius the Centurion received the spirit by workes, but not by the workes of the Law which he knew not. For if it be said on the other side; That then the holy Spirit may also be received without the hearing of faith; We will answer; That he received the Spirit, but by the hearing of faith, and the Law of nature, which sayes in our hearts that all good is to be done, and evil avoid∣ed, whereby we told you afore that Abraham, & Moses, and the rest of the Saints were justified; which the observation of workes succeeding may increase, and knowledge of the Law, but not the carnal law which is past, but the Spirituall, be∣cause the law is spirituall. Nor do we destroy the workes of the Law, because we preferre faith, or say, according to some, let us do evil till good come, whose damna∣tion is just: But we preferre Grace before bondage, and say, that we do for love that which Jewes do for feare; That they are constrained to that good which we do
of our own accord. Therefore there rises no license to sinne from the faith of Christ, but from the Law of Faith the lust of well doing increaseth, while we do good, not because we are afraide of the Judge, but because we know it pleases him in whom we believe. Here, the difference which I make betweene workes, and workes of the Law, is S. Jeromes. Here, the righteousnesse of the Fathers under the Law of nature is ascribed to Faith, out of which they submitted themselves to it; as also Cornelius his title to that grace of the holy Ghost which the Gospel promiseth. Here the reason is set forth, why the workes of the Law justifie not, because the preaching of the Gospel supposeth that the Law can effect no more then an outward and carnal obedience to the precepts thereof, for fear of punishment; Whereby it appeareth, that those workes which justifie not, are not onely those of the ceremonial Law, but all that goes before the preach∣ing of Faith, whether as under Christianity, or as before it, according to S. Jerome. The Gospel, both requiring and effecting that inward and spiritu∣all obedience, which love constraineth. I am not afraid, after this to name the short commentary upon S. Pauls Epistles, which usually goeth with S. Jeromes workes, though I will suppose it to be Pelagius his, upon Gal. III. 10. Quae∣ritur sant hoc loco, si fides sola sufficiat Christiano, & utrum non sit maledictus qui praecepta Evangelica contemnit. Sed fides ad hoc proficit, ut in promitiis credulitatis accedentes ad Deum justificet, si deinceps in justificatione permaneat; (lege permaneant) caeterum sine operibus fidei non Legis mortua est fides. Qui enim non credunt mandatis, & qui precepta Evangelica contemnunt, maledictos esse & servator edocuit, dicens; Dis∣cedite a me maledicte in ignem aeternum. Et Jacobus Apostolus unius mandati transgressorem omnium reum esse ostendit. Here forsoeth, it is questionable, whe∣ther faith alone be enough for a Christian, and whether he be not accursed, that shall neglect the praecepts of the Gospel. But faith availeth so farre, as, in the be∣ginning of belief, to justifie those that come to God, if they abide in justification thenceforth. But without the workes of Faith, not of the Law, Faith is dead. For that those who believe not the commandments, and neglect the precepts of the Gospel are accursed, even our Saviour hath taught, saying; Go ye cursed from me into everlasting fire. And the Apostle James sheweth, that he who transgresseth one commandment is guilty of all. Againe, upon 1 Tim. II. 15. Notandum quod sola fides ei, qui post Baptismum supervixerit, non sufficiat, nisi sanctitatem mentis & corporis habeat, quae sine sobrietate difficile custoditur. It is to be noted, that faith alone is not enough for him that survives after Baptisme, unlesse he have the holinesse both of mind and body, which without sobriety is hardly preserved. Here you have S. Jeromes distinction between the works of Faith and of the Law, and Baptisme the boundary of righteousnesse by Faith alone, without the works of Faith. And if any man be so impertinent as to suspect S. Jerome for a Pela∣lagian, wherein he agrees with Pelagius, S. Austine may perswade him, that Pelagius is no Pelagian in this, but speakes the sense of the Church. Serm. LXXI. De Tempore. Quomodo fides per dilectionem operatur? Et quomodo justi∣ficatur homo per fidem absque operibus legis? Quomodo, intendite fratres. Cre∣dit aliquis, percepit fidei Sacramenta in lecto, & mortuus est: Defuit illi operan∣di tempus. Quid dicimus? Quia non est justificatus? Plane dicimus justifica∣tum, credentem in eum qui justificat impium. Ergo rite justificatus est & ope∣ratus non est. Impletur sententia Apostoli dicentis; Arbitramur, justificari ho∣minem per fidem sine operibus Legis. Latro qui cum Domino crucifixus est, corde credidit ad justitiam, ore confessus est ad salutem. Nam fides quae per dilectionem operatur, etsi non sit in quo exterius operetur, in corde tamen illa fervens servatur. Nam erant quidam in lge qui de operibus Legis gloriabantur, quae fortasse non dilectione sed timore faciebant, & volebant se justos videri, & praeponi Gentibus quae opus legis non fecerant. Apostolus autem praedicans fidem Gentibus, cum eos qui accedebaut ad Dominum videret justificaetos ex fide (utram quia crediderant bene operarentur, non quia bene opetati sunt credere mererentur) exclamavit securus, & ait; Quia potest justificari homo ex fide sine operibus Legis; Ʋt illi magis non fuerint justi, qui quod facibant timort facibant. Cum fides per dilectionem ope∣retur
in corde, etiamsi foris non exit in opere. How workes Faith by Love? And how is a man justified by Faith without the workes of the Law? Brethren marke how. A man believes, receives the Sacraments of Faith in his bed, and dies, wants time of working. What shall we say? That he is not justified? Plain∣ly we say he is justified, believing in him that justifies the wicked. So he is justi∣fied but wrought not. The saying of the Apostle is fulfilled; I suppose a man is justified by Faith without the workes of the Law. The thiefe that was crucified with our Lord, believed with the heart to righteousnesse, and confessed to salvation with the mouth. For Faith that worketh by love, when there is nothing to work upon outwardly, remaines neverthelesse fervent in the heart. For there were those under the Law that boasted of the workes of the Law, which perhaps, they did not for love but for fear, and would seem righteous, and be preferred before Gen∣tiles, that had not done the work of the Law. But the Apostle, preaching the Faith to the Gentiles, and seeing those who come to the Lord justified by Faith, (so that they did well because they had believed, and not merited to believe by well doing) cries out securely and sayes, that a man may be justified by saith with∣out the workes of the Law: So that, they who did what they did for fear of the Law rather, were not righteous; Whereas faith may work by love in the heart, though it go not forth in any work. Againe, Libro quaestionum LXXXIII. quaest. LXXVI. Si quis cum crediderit mox de hac vita discesserit, justificatio fi∣dei manet cum illo; Non praesentibus bonis operibus, quia non merito ad illam sed gratia pervenit; Nec consequentibus, quia in hac vita esse non sinitur. If a man depart out of this life straight after he hath believed, the justification by faith remaineth with him, good workes neither accompanying, because he came not to it by merit but by grace, nor following, because he is not suffered to live. The rea∣son being the same, for which, those who depart without Baptisme, if not by their own fault, are held to be saved: In regard whereof S. Bernard Epist. LXXVII. thinkes, that the Gospel, Mark XVI. 16. Having said; He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; Doth not repeat, He that is not bap∣tized shall be demned; But onely, He that believeth not shall be demned. Here, the onely case in which a Christian can be saved without good workes is, when time obliges him not to bring them forth. And the onely reason why the workes of the Law justifie not, is; Because the Spirituall obedience of the Law presupposeth faith, the knowledge of the Law according to the letter, reaching onely to produce the outward work, without that inward dis∣position, which onely Christianity effecteth, as well as requireth; A thing which S. Austine, in the dispute with Pelagius, so often repeateth. De Spiritu & Litera, Cap. VIII. & XXIX. Contra duas Epistolas Plagianorum, III. 2, 7. De Gratia Christi & peccato Originali, I. 13. II. 24. De Gratia & lib. arbitrio Cap. XII. Origen in Rom. III. Libro III. Indulgentia namque non futurorum sed preteritorum criminum datur. Igitur, ut ad praepositum redeamus, justifica∣tur homo per fidem, cui ad justificationem nihil conferunt opera Legis. Ʋbi vero fides non est, quae credentem justificet, etiamsi quis opera habeat ex lege, tamen qui non sunt adificata supra fundamentum fidei, quamvis videantur esse bon, opera∣torem suum justificare non pessunt, si eis deest fides, quae est signaculum corum qui justificantur a Deo. For faith granteth indulgence of snnes past, not to come. He therefore is justified by Faith, to returne to our purpose, to whose justification workes of the Law contribute nothing. But where that faith which justifieth him that believeth is not, though a man have workes according to the Law, yet, because they are not built upon the foundation of Faith, though they seeme good, they cannot justifie their workers, wanting Faith, which is the make of those that are justified by God. The same Origen in the same book, bringeth in the example of the thiefe upon the Crosse, and of the woman that had been a sin∣ner but was saved by her Faith Luke VII. to the same purpose. And I will not omit the wordes of S. Jerome upon that of Isa. LXIV. 5. All our righteousnesse is like a menstruous ragge. Libro XVII. In quo considerandum, quod justitia quae in Lege est, ad comparationem Evangelic puritatis immunditia nominetur. Etenim non est glorificatum quod prius glorificatum suit, propter excellentem
gloriam. And by and by; Si quis igitur post Evangelum Christi, & adven∣tum filii Dei, Paedagogae Legis observat ceremonias, audiat populum consitentem quod omnis illa justitia panno sordidissimo comparetur, cui & Esther diadema su∣um, quod erat regiae potestatis insigne comparat. Where it is to be considered, that the righteousnesse which is in the Law, in comparison of the purity of the Gospel, is called uncleannesse. For that which was counted glorious, is not glorious, in re∣gard of that glory that excelleth. And, If any man then, after the Gospel of Christ, and the coming of the Sonne of God, observe the ceremonies of that Peda∣gogicall Law, let him hear the people confesse, that all that righteousnesse is com∣parable to a most filthy ragg; Wherewith also Ester compares her diadem, though the ensigne of Royall Power. The Prophet brings in the Synagogue confessing it self destitute of righteousnesse. The Apostles shew, that the Church onely furnisheth that righteousnesse through faith, which the Synagogue, by the Law, cannot have. And shall we say that S. Jerome abuses the Prophet in limitting that uncleannesse, which the Prophet acknowledgeth even in their righteousnes, to that which is to be had by the Law? For, though he name onely the workes of the Ceremoniall Law, yet is all the righteousnesse that is to be had by the learning of the Letter of the Law, of the same nature, not attaining to be done with that disposition of the heart, which onely the Gospel produceth. O Ecumenius upon James II. 14. speaking the sense of some Fathers, hath expressed all the points of my position in these tearmes; . But some of the Fathers have thus judged of this businesse. For they say, that, distinguishing Abraham by times, he is the patterne of both Faiths; Whereof one going before Baptisme, requires no Workes, but onely Faith, and the profession of salvation, and the word whereby we are justified, believing in Christ: The other is coupled with workes. So the Spi∣rit that spoke in the Apostles, shewes no contrariety; The one justifying him that approcheth by profession alone, in case he presently depart this life: (For such a one hath no workes, but the cleansing of Baptisme is to him a sufficient passe∣port to salvation) The other demanding of him that is already baptized, that he should shew good workes. He had proposed before another way of reconciling the Apostles, by distinguishing severall significations, in the terme of Faith, which in that effect and consequence, falls in with this. S. Gregory, In Evang. Hom. XIX. Quod cum it a sit, fidei nostre veritatem in vitae nostre consideration debemus agnoscere. Tunc enim veraciter fideles sumus, si quod verbis promitti∣mus operibus complemus. In die quippe baptismi, omnibus nos antiqui hostis ope∣ribus, atque omnibus pompis abrenunciare promisimus. Itaque unusquisque ad considerationem suam mentis oculos reducat, & si servat post baptismum, quod ante baptismum spopondit, certus jam quia fidelis est, gaudeat. Which see∣ing so it is, we are to acknowledge the truth of our faith in the consideration of our life. For then are we truly faithfull, (or believers) if we accomplish by workes what we promise by words. For at the day of our Baptisme, we promise to re∣nounce all the workes, and all the pompes of our ancient foe. Let every man there∣fore turne the eyes of his minde to the consideration of himself, and if he observe after baptisme, that which he promised before baptisme, being now assured that he is faithfull, (or a believer) let him rejoyce. He ascribeth that justification which requireth good workes, to the fulfil∣ling of that promise, which our Baptisme presupposeth. To the same pur∣pose, the commentary upon S. Pauls Epistles that goes under S. Ambrose his name, upon Rom. III. 8. Manifeste beati sunt, quibus, sine labore vel opere ali∣quo remittuntur iniquitates, & peccata teguntur, nulla ab his requisita poeniten∣tiae
opera, sed tantum ut credant. By and by; Quemadmodum autem ad paenitentium potest pertinere personam, cum dicit; Beati quorum tectasunt pec∣cata; Cum constet, paenitentes labore ac gemitu peccatorum remissionem acquirere? Aut quomode Martyrio congruit, quod dicit; Beatus vir cui non imputabit dominus peccatum; Cum sciamus gloriam martyrii passionibus & pressaris acquiri? Pro∣pheta autem tempus foelix in adventu servatoris praevidens, beatos nominat, quibus sine labore, vel aliquo opere, per lavacrum remittuntur, & teguntur, & non im∣putantur peccata: Manifestly they are happy, whose iniquities are remitted, and whose sins are covered, without the labour of any work, not requiring of them any paines of Penance, but onely to belivee. And; But how can it belong to the person of Penitents, when he saith, Blessed are they whose sins are covered: See∣ing it is manifest, that Penitents attain remission of sins by labour and grones? Or, how agrees that which he saith with Martyrdome: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin; Seeing we know, that the glory of Martyrdome is at∣tained by sufferings and pressures? But the Prophet foreseeing a happy time at our Saviours coming, names them blessed whose sins are remitted and covered, and not imputed by the laver of Baptisme, without the labour of any work. Whether or no this opposition between remission of sins which Baptisme alone, and that which Penance and Martyrdome giveth: he pertinently here alledged, and like a Divine (for Baptisme is the undertaking of Martyrdome if God require it, and Penance is the voluntary undergoing of it, when sin requireth it) evident it is, that Baptisme is here the boundary of that justification which faith alone promiseth. And upon Heb. IV. 16. he saies that God gives requiem sempiter∣nam fidem habentibus, eam tamen quae per dilectionem operatur, non credentibus poenam perpetuam. Ne forte relicta pollicitatione quam dedimus Deo in bap∣tismo, iterum revertamur ad opera infidelitatis quae, abdicamus coram multis te∣stibus. Everlasting rest to those who have faith, but that which worketh by love, perpetuall paine to those who believe no. Least peradventure, abandoning the promise which we made to God at our Baptisme, we return againe to the works of infidelity, which we renounce before many witnesses. Where the damation of a Christian is imputed to the transgressing of that promise which he makes to God in Baptisme. And the true S. Ambrose when he saies, lib. 1. Epist. 1. Nec e∣nim fides sola ad perfectionem satis est, nisi etiam baptismatis adjiciatur gratia, & sanguinem Christi redemptus accipiat. For, neither sufficeth faith alone to persection, unlesse the grace of baptisme be added, and be that is redeemed receive the blood of Christ; Cleerly compriseth the Sacrament of Baptisme (after which, the baptized alwaies received the Eucharist in the ancient Church) whereupon S. Augustine afore mention Sacramenta fidei, in the plurall number, the Sacra∣ments of faith, within that faith which alone justifieth. But the same S. Am∣brose Offic. II. 2. Habet ergo vitm aternam fides, quia fundamentum bonum est, habent & bona facta, quia vir justus & dictis et rebus probatur. Therefore faith hath eternall life, because the foundation is good: And so have good works because a man is tried, to be righteous, by both saying and doing. That is, by do∣ing as he saies: By doing these works, which, by his Baptisme he undertakes to do. S. Basil, De spiritu sancto, cap. 12. . For faith is perfected by Baptisme, and Baptisme is founded upon faith, and both are fulfilled by the same names: For as we believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so are we baptised in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And profession goes afore, introducing to Salvation, but baptisme followes, sealing up our assent; Not onely to the demand; doest thou believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? but when it is further demanded, wilt thou be baptized upon these termes? And this profession so sealed is that which saveth him that departs upon it, not him that survives to falsifie it. S. Chrysostom in Rom. IV. 2. Hom. VIII. makes a long comparison to shew that man glorisies God more by believing,
then by keeping his commandments; Which certainly proceedeth, not not can hold in those workes, that presuppose faith, having in them all that where∣by faith glorifyeth God and more: And therefore is to be limitted to works done before faith. And therefore of those workes is S. Chrysostme to be understood, when he sayes, as oft times he doth, that a man is justified without workes, by Faith or by Grace, in Gal III. 12. In Rom. III. 27. Homil. VII. In Ephes. II. 10. Homil. IV. The reason being alwayes that of Theodoret upon Galat. III. 22. . The Seripture of God convinceth both those that were afore the Law, and under it, as transgressors, as well these of Moses Law, as those of the Law of Nature; Offer∣ing the salvation that is promised by faith, for an antidote, both for these and for those. If the Law of Moses were not of force to justify, much lesse the Law of Nature. Now the Gospel supposeth both Jewes and Gentiles under sinne, and liable to Gods wrath, till the Gospel come, as S. Paul, in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romanes, declareth. Not as if no man had been saved under the Law, or before it; But because they who then were saved belonged not to the Law of Moses, or that of Nature, but to the Gospel, as saved by the meanes of it. So said S. Jerome afore, that they were saved by the preaching of Faith, under the Law of Nature. And thinne was the number of them who thus were saved, that it was requisite the Gospel should come, least the meanes which God had used to restore man afore might seem to have been imployed to no purpose. So, to be saved by faith and not by workes, is the same with S. Paul, according to the Fathers, as to be justified by being a Christian, and not by being a Jew, by the Gospell and not by the Law. So Tertullian, cont▪ Marc. V. 3. Ejus ergo Dei erit fides, in qua vivit justus, cujus & Lex in qua non justificatur operarius. Pronde, si in Lege maledictio est, in Fide benedictio. Therefore, that faith whereby the just liveth, shall be the same Gods whose the Law is, whereby he that worketh is not justified. Accordingly, if the curse come by the Law, then the blessing by faith. For that Faith, which properly stands in oppostion to the Law, is Christianity. S. Hilary In Mat. Can. VIII. Mo∣vet Scribas, remissum ab hommine peccatum; Hominem enim tantum in Jesu Christo intuebantur, & remissum ab eo quod Lex laxare non poterat. Fides enim sola justificat. The Scribes are moved that sinne should be remitted by a man; For they looked upon Jesus Christ as a meere man, who remitted that which the Law could not loose: For Faith alone justifieth. Faith onely justifieth, in opposition to the Law which remitteth no sin; Therefore faith is Christiani∣ty. Clemens Alexandr. Strom. II. To learn is to obey the commandments, which is to believe God. Because, forsooth, to professe the Faith, is to undertake to live by Gods com∣mandments. Strom. IV.  He therefore playes false with God, that believes not God. But he that keepeth not the commandments, believes not. Againe; . All there∣fore, whatsoever ye do, do to the glory of God, whatsoever it is permitted to do, under the rule of Faith. Here, that part of Christianity, which prescribes a Christian, what he is to do, what not, is called the Rule of Faith; Because he believes that God requires it at his hands, though he undertake more then to believe it. Strom. VII. . He is a believer, (or faithful) that receives the com∣mandments upon due consideration, and keeps them. Pelagius upon Rom. X. 4. Talis est ille qui in Christum credidit, die qua credidit, qualis ille qui universam legem implevit. Such is he that believeth, the day that he believeth as is he that hath ful∣filled the whole Law. In the day of his Baptisme, that is, if he lives not to trans∣gresse it. His title to heaven is as good, as if he had done whatsoever the Law requireth. I shewed you before, that Pelag. in the matter of justification departs not from the Church. Clemens of Rome S. Pauls Scholar, whom I will end with,
in his Epistle to the Corinthians, p. 13. . Abraham who was called friend, was found faithful in that he became obedient to the word of God. p. 40. . Wherefore was our Father Abraham blessed? was it not because he did righte∣ousnesse and truth through Faith? p. 41. , They were all, therefore, glorified and magnified, not by themselves, or their owne workes, or just actions which they had done, but by his will. And therefore we who are called by his will through Christ Jesus, are not justified by our selves, or our owne wisdome, or understanding, or workes that we have done with holinesse of heart: But by faith, whereby Almighty God hath justified all from the begin∣ing of the world. The Fathers were not justified by their own workes, but be∣cause, being called by the will of God, as we to Christianity through Christ Jesus, they were found faithfull, in doing righteousnesse & truth through faith, as he said of Abraham before. For, the workes of Faith cannot be counted our own works, which we had never done, had not Gods call gone afore. That Faith then which alone justifieth importeth as great and as reall a change in the jugdement and resoution of him that attaineth it, from unrighteous to righteous, as the difference between the Law of all righteousnes and the Law of all unrigh∣teousnes signifieth For, upon other terms can no man professe himself a Christi∣an. And as great and as reall a change it is that succeeds, upon that change, be∣tween the relation, which he that is so changed did hold towards God afore, and now holds afterwards, as the difference between the heir of Gods wrath and of his kingdome importeth. But, supposing that change which justifying faith importeth, already in being, that change which the effect of it, in justify∣ing importeth, is of necessity, meerly morall, and consisteth onely in the dif∣ference, between that remission of sinnes and Gods kingdome, which the pro∣mise of his grace, and the debt of punishment, which the sentence of his justice declareth. Whether therefore justifying faith be Gods work or not, (which here I dispute not, because here I cannot resolve) for the cause of it. the effect of it in justifying, which here I debate, will signify no more then an at∣tribute due by right to him that hath it, upon Gods promise; importing no change in him, but that which it supposeth, how much soever it import his sal∣varion, that his relation to God be so changed. For, I may safely here suppose that, which the title of this dispute, and the very name of the Covenant of Grace attributed to the Gospel of Christ involveth; That Faith justifyeth not by virtue of the work naturally, but morally, by that will and appointment of God, by virtue whereof the Covenant of Grace standeth. And this necessari∣ly holds in the sense of the Church, when it ascribeth justification to faith alone, in opposition to the workes of the Law. A necessary consequence whereof is this; That the forgivenesse of our sinnes will presuppose and require of us, that we forgive others their offenses against us: Because we hold the forgivenesse of our sinnes by the title of our Christi∣anity; Whereof, seeing it is one point, that we forgive other men their offen∣ses against us, of necessity, failing of the condition required on our part, we faile of the promise tendered of Gods. Therefore the Fathers also, as the Scri∣ptures afore, attribute remission of sinnes to Charity, to almes deeds, and to forgiveing of offenses against us. Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians, p. 65. . Happy were we if we did do the commandments of God in the concord of Love. that our sinnes might be for∣given us through Love. The Apostolicall constitutions VII. 13. . If thou hast, give by thine own hands, that thou
mayest act to the redemption of thy sinnes: For by almes and truth sinnes are pur∣ged away. Lactantius, VI. 12. Magna est misericordiae merces, cui Deus pol∣licetur, peccata se omnia remissurum. Si audieris, inquit, preces supplicis tui, & ego audiam tuas: Si misertus laborantium fueris, ego & in tuo labore mise∣rebor. Si autem non respexeris, nec adjuveris, & ego animum contra te geram, tuisque te legibus judicabo Great are the wages of mercy, which God hath pro∣mised, that he will remit all sinnes. If thou hearest, saith he, the prayers of thy sup∣pliant, I also will hear thine. If thou takest pitty on them that are in paine, I also will take pitty upon thy paine. But if thou respect not, nor help them, I also will carry a mind against thee, and judge thee by thine owne Law. S. Chrysost. Tomo VI. Orat. LXVII. . But there is another way of cleansing sinne, not inferiour to this, not to remember the ma∣lice of enemies, to containe wrath, to remit the sinnes of fellow-servants. For so, those which we have done against our Lord shall be forgiven us. Behold also a se∣cond way to purge sinnes. For if ye forgive saith he— And by and by; . But if you will learn a fourth, I will name almes: For it hath great force and not to be expressed. For to Nabucodonosor, being arived at all kinde of wickednesse, and going over all goodnesse, Daniel saith; Redeem thy sinnes with almsdeeds, and thy transgressions with pittying the poor. To the same purpose the same S. Chrysost. makes forgiving of injuries, giving thanks in affiction, mercy in helping our neighbours, the cure for sinne, as well as humility, confession, and prayer. In 2 ad Corinth. Hom. II. Because thereby a Christian retires to his promise in Baptisme, expecting remission only from Gods promise in the same. So also, In Epist. ad Rom. Hom. XXV. S. Ambrose, De poenitentia II. 5. David beatum praedicavit & illum, cui pec∣cata per Baptismum remittuntur, & illum, cujus peccata operibus teguntur. David proclaimes for blessed, both him whose sinnes are remitted by Baptisme, and him whose sinnes are covered with workes. So charity covers many sinnes done after Baptisme. Caesarius of Arles, Homil. I. Quoties infirmos visitamus, in carcerem positos requirimus, discordes ad concordiam revocamus, indicto in Ec∣clesia jejunio jejunamus, hospitibus pedes abluimus, ad vigilis frequentius conve∣nimus, eleemosynam ante ostium praetereuntibus pauperibus damus, iniicis nostris quoties petierint indulgemus, istis operibus & his similibus minuta pecca∣ta quotidie redimuntur. As oft as we visit the sick, seek those that are put in prison, reduce those that fall out to agreement, fast when a fast is published in the Church, wash the feet of strangers, assemble more frequently to wakes, give almes to the poor that go by the doore, pardon our enemies as oft as they demand, by these works and like to these, small sinnes are every day redeemed. S. Austine. Libro L. Homil. Hom. L. Cap. VIII. Non enim ea dimitti precamur, quae jam in Bap∣tismo dimissa sunt, & nisi dimissa credimus, de ipsa fide dubitamus: sed utique de quotidianis peccatis hoc dicimus, pro quibus etiam sacrificia eleemosynarum, jejuni∣orum, & ipsarum orationum & supplicationum quisque pro suis viribus offerre non cessat. For we pray not for the pardon of those which are already pardoned in Baptisme, which, if we believe not that they are pardoned, we call the faith it self in doubt: But this forsooth, we speak of daily sinnes, for which also no man ceas∣eth to offer, according to his power, the sacrifices of almes, and fasting, and even of prayers, and supplications. S. Gregory, In Psalm. II. Poenitent. Habent enim sancti viri aliquid quod in hac vita operire debeant: Quia omnino est im∣possibile, ut in loquutione, aut etiam in cogitatione nunquam delinquant. Stu∣dent igitur viri Dei, oculorum & linguae culpas tegere meritis vita, student pon∣dere bonorum operum premere immoderata verborum. For holy men have some∣thing in this life which they ought to hide: Because it is altogether impossible that in speech, or at least in thought they should never faile. Therefore the
men of God study, to cover the faults of the eyes and tongue, with the merits of their lives: They study to presse down immoderate words, with the wait of good works. And by and by, Quia hoc quod tegitur, inferius ponitur, & aliud aliquid super∣ducitur, ut quod est subterpositum tegatur, tegere peccata ducimur, quae, quasi subterponentes, abdicamus. Quibus nimirum, quasi tegmen superdicimus, dum bonorum operum nos indumento vestimus. Peccata itaque tegimus, si bona facta malis actibus superponamus. Because that which is covered is laid beneath, and something drawn over it to cover that which lies beneath; we are said to cover those sinnes which we give over, as laying them beneath; Over which we draw a kind of covering, when we invest our selves with the covering of good workes. Therefore we cover sinnes if we lay good deeds over evil workes. CHAP. X. What Pelagius questioneth concerning the Grace of Christ, what Socinus further of the state of Christ before his birth. The opposition between the first and se∣cond Adam in S. Paul, evidenceth originall sinne. Coucupiscence in the unre∣generate, and the inability of the Law to subdue it, evict the same. The second birth by the holy Ghost evidenceth that the first birth propagateth sinne. NOW, though all agree, that we are justified, not by the Law, nor by Workes, but by the Gospel, and by Grace, (because it is the meer Grace of God that moved him to send our Lord Christ, by him to convince the World, that the Gospell is true, and ought to be imbraced) yet, that the Grace of Christ; that is, those helpes of grace which God gives in conside∣ration of his merits and sufferings, are requisite to inable those to whome this conviction is tendred, to imbrace it and to persevere in it, neither Pelagius of old, nor Socinus at present will yeild; Nor, that Abraham should have any thing to bragge of, if he should pretend to be justified by those workes, which the free will of him, whose understanding is convict that the Gospel is true, is, without other help able to produce; Or, that, in consideration of any such help, the Gospel is to be counted Grace, which if the helps it requi∣reth should be purchased by obeying, it were not to be counted of free Grace. The words of Pelagius are well enough known, remaining upon record in S. Austine, De Gratia Christi, 1. 7. Adjuvat enim nos per doctrinam & revelatio∣nem suam, dum cordis nostri oculos aperit, dum nobis, ne praesentibus occupemur, futura demonstrat, dum Diboli pandit insidias, dum nos multiformi & ineffabili dono gratiae coelest is illuminat. For he helps us by revealing his doctrine, while he opens the eyes of our heart, while he shewes us things to come, least we be busied about things present, while he layes open the ambushes of the Devil, while he in∣lightens us with the manifold gift of heavenly grace. And againe, Cap. X. Ope∣ratur in nobis Deus velle quod bonum est, velle quod sanctum est, dum nos terrenis cupiditatibus diligentes, & mutorum amantium more tantum praesentia diligentes, futurae gloriae magnitudine;  praemiorum pollicitatione succendit, dum, revelatione sapientiae in desiderium Dei stupentem suscitat voluntatem, dum nobis suadet omne quod bonum est. God works in us the willing of that which is good and holy, while he inflames us, being addicted to earthly lusts, and loving onely things present, like mute creatures, with the promise of great reward of glory to come, while by re∣vealing of wisdome, he raises the dull will to the desire of God, while he perswadeth us to all that is good. Where, besides the Grace of God in making us reason∣able creatures, he acknowledgeth also the grace of the Law, meaning thereby the doctrine and motives of Christianity, whereby saith he, the mind is in∣lightned to understand the difference between things transitory and everlasting, and the will is inclined and perswaded to preferre true good before that which is counterfeite; Which being said by a Christian, though, I see no expresse
mention that he makes of the Gospel of Christ, necessarily infers, that not∣withstanding, he supposed the same with Socinus; To wit, that, the convicti∣on which the motives of faith tender to all men that are made acquainted with it, as it is necessarily the production of Gods meer Grace, so is it enough to inable a reasonable man (being so convict, how much the world to come is to be preferred before this) to imbrace, and to persevere in that course by which a man stands convict that he may attaine it. And though Socinus hath more expresly maintained that, upon the imbracing of Christianity, the holy Ghost is given to inable Christians to preferre that which their profession im∣porteth; Yet, as I find the truth thereof so manifestly layd down in the Scrip∣tures of the New Testament, that I cannot see how he should pretend to be a Christian, that should deny it; So can I not remember that Pelagius ever went about to deny it. On the contrary, there is appearance enough, that Pelagius acknowledgeth the grace of the holy Ghost, whether in bringing a man to be, or to persevere unto the end a Christian. His own words are yet extant upon 1 Cor. 11. 10. To us who by believing have deserved to receive the Spirit of God, which shewes us his will; Nobis, qui fide meruimus Sp. Dei ac∣cipere, qui voluntatem suam nobis ostendit; Hath God revealed it. And by and by; Sensum Domini, qui est in viris Spiritualibus, sine Spiritu Dei nemo cogno∣vit. No man knowes the meaning of God which is in spirituall men, with∣out Gods Spirit. And upon Rom. IV. 17. Quare multa peccata donavit abun∣dantia donationis Sp. Sancti? Quia multa sunt dona. Ipsa enim justitia dona∣tur in baptismo, non ex merito datur. Why hath the abundant gift of the holy Ghost pardoned us many sinnes? Because Gods gifts are many. For righteousness it self is given in Baptisme, not rewarded as of merit. For why might not Pela∣gius as well as Socinus, make it the purchase of mans free will, upon the tender of Christianity, which is Gods Grace. For, the appearance is sufficient and evident, that Socinus was so disgusted with the opinion; That justifying faith consists in believing that a man is predestinate to everlasting life, in conside∣ration of the obedience of Christ imputed to his account, because given for him and the elect, in opposition to the rest of mankind; that, supposing the ten∣der of the Gospel, the accepting of it he placeth in the meer act of free will, upon which the gift of the holy Ghost, necessary to the performance of that which Christianity professeth depends, as due debt by Gods promise; Who, having prevented mankinde with that promise, hath suspended that which fol∣lows upon this compliance. It is further to be considered, that Socinus also acknowledgeth the Grace of the holy Ghost preventing the undertaking of Christianity on our part, under the title of the Spirit of patefaction, as you may see by Volkelius Instit. III. 14. Signifying hereby as it seemeth, that conviction which the Spirit of God ten∣dereth by the motives of Christianity, to manifest the truth of the Gospel, pre∣venting the will with help to inable it, but not effecting either the outward act or the inward resolution to do it, as you may see S. Augustine distinguish upon his own words, related out of his Bookes of free will. De Gratia Christi. I. 41. This I here lay forth on purpose to shew, that I cannot come cleare of that which I have undertaken to resolve, concerning the Covenant of Grace, nor any man be satisfied in the difficulties that concern it, without taking in hand the whole dispute concerning the free will of man, and the free Grace of God. For having, by the premises, shewed, that the condition which the Co∣venant of Grace requires on our part, is an act of free will: (Though such an act as compriseth the ingagement of a mans whole life to Gods service:) Un∣lesse it appeare, that the grace of the holy Ghost, which God found requisite for the performance of Christianity, can never be ascribed to the free will of man as due to the right useof it, it will not sufficiently appear, how the Gospel may be called the Covenant of Grace. But, before I go further, I must not omit to observe a great difference be∣tween Socinus and Pelagius, and how that difference seems to reflect upon the present dispute. For Socinus, first had conceived such disgust, as I said,
of that predestination, which appoints men to life, meerly in consideration of the obedience of Christ, as their own for whom it was appointed. Then considered well, that free will serves not, so long as the helps, whereby we are inabled to imbrace Christ, and to persevere in Christianity, may be attributed to the obedi∣ence of as assigned by God to the consideration and recognizance of it. And therefore found it the onely clear course of establishing that force of freewil, that he had imagined, without consulting the proceediugs of the Church against Pe∣lagius, to say; That the merits and sufferings of Christ were not valuable for such a purchase, as being a meer man, from his birth, onely, that he was conceived, not by the way of humane generation, but by the holy Ghost of the blessed Virgine: And that afterwards, being thirty yeares of age, or there∣abouts, according to the time that John the Baptist began to preach, he was ta∣ken up into heaven to God, and there made acquainted with his message of the Gospel to mankinde, which he undertaking, upon the perill of all the hardship which he was to indure at the Jewes hands for it, it pleased God to advance him for his obedience, (though due as to God from his creature) to be God, to the true power and worship of God, though, in dependance upon himself original∣ly God. For, the obedience of Christ being thus over rewarded in his own person, it remaineth, that the gift of the holy Ghost, howsoever requisite to the performance of Christianity, be ascribed to the meer goodnesse of God, which moved him to propose the promise thereof, to those who should im∣brace the Gospel, as a recompense for so doing, not as any grace of Christ, that is, any help of grace given in consideration of Christ, resolving a man to imbrace it. It cannot be said, that Pelagius had any hand in this part of Socinus his Heresie, who could not have been heard in the Church at that time, had he once advanced any such ground as this, though so pertinent to his position as you see by Socinus. But, as Pelagius thought of no such thing when he began first to dispute against the grace of Christ, so can it not be said that his followers never thought of having recourse to this plea, as the onely clear ground for their position to stand upon, could it be made good. But for the truth hereof, there being no cause why I should swell this Book with those things that have been said already; I will remit the reader to Jansenius his August, where he shall find what remaines in the records of the Church, how the Pelagians went about to joyne with the Nestorians, and to make our Lord Christ to have purchased his Godhead, by the actions and behavoiur of his humane nature, and how, in this regard they remaine involved in the condemnation of Nestorius at the council of Ephesus. Though, whereas the beginning of this error is there as∣cribed to Origen, it is easie to observe a vast difference between this pretense and that conceit which is found at present in his books , (but whether resolutely deliverd by him may be questioned) that the humane soul of Christ was chosen by God for the word to be incarnate in, in consideration of that which it had done in the other world. For, this supposes the Godhead of Christ before his incarnation, and the truth of it, which Socinus his opinion, (to which these relations make the Pelagians to have inclined) destroyeth. And so it is manifest, that, according to Socinus, there can be no such thing as the Grace of Christ, according to Pelagius there is not. But, that which is common to both, proceeds upon a supposition common to both; That man is presently, in the same state of free will in which he was created, that the fall of our first parents did no harme to their posterity, neither can their children, that are baptized, be baptized into the remission of sinne, when they have none of their own; Though for Socinus his part, he laughs at the baptizing of infants, who allowes the baptizing of men that have sinned themselves, but as a cere∣mony of indifference, which Pelagius, though he be content to allow and re∣quire, yet, not to the purpose of remission of sinne in infants. Now the Church of God, in which the Baptisme of infants hath been practised ever since the times of the Apostles, alwayes understood the Gentiles, (that had been left to themselves to fall away to the worship of Idols) to be wholy under the power of Satan, by virtue of that advantage which he had of our forefa∣thers:
And the Jewes who had retired themselves to the worship of one true God, so little able by that Law, to withdraw themselves from under sin, that few of them were vouchsafed Gods Spirit: acknowledging therefore all this to proceed from the leaven of the first sinne, they acknowledged the necessity of Christs coming for the cure of it, the sufficience of the cure in his Godhead, from everlasting, and the obedience of our flesh, wherein it was incarnate. This being the state of the dispute, it appeareth, that the intent which I propose obligeth me, not to dispatch, without maintaining the eternall Godhead of our Lord Christ; Though not so as to consider the whole controversie of the ho∣ly Trinity, but onely that of the person and natures of Christ, how farre it is declared to us by the Scriptures, and original Tradition of the Church. Know∣ing neverthelesse, that, this being resolved, the rest of the controversie con∣cerning the holy Trinity necessarily falls to the ground of it self, as having no∣thing whereupon to subsist, when the everlasting Godhead of Christ is once maintained afore. Now, the ready way that I can think of, to go through so great a dispute as briefly as is possible, is to take in hand first the point of origi∣nall sinne, in which, the dispute between Pelagius and Socinus on the one side and the Church on the other side is grounded. For, therefore, I hope, it will appear the shortest way to dispatch the whole dispute, because, that be∣ing decided, (together with that which dependeth upon it, as incident to it, concerning the state of our Lord Christ before his coming in the flesh) the rest will appear to consist, either in controversies of Divines, or in mistakes and disputes about words. I begin with S. Paul, because he it is, who, having laid forth the necessity of Christianity to the salvation as well of Jewes as of Gentiles, in the begin∣ning of his Epistle to the Romanes, and in the fourth chapter, by the Example of Abraham confirmed the same; Or, if you please, answered the objection concerning the salvation of the Fathers, before and under the Law; pro∣ceeds in the fifth Chapter to lay forth, both the ground upon which it is effectu∣all, which is the death of Christ, and the ground upon which it was necessary, which is the sinne of Adam. Thus then saith S. Paul Rom. V. 12, 13, 14. Therefore, as by one man sinne entered into the world, and death by sinne, and so death passed upon all, in whome all sinned. For, untill the Law sinne was in the world; Now sinne is not imputed where there is no Law; And yet death raigned from Adam until Moses, even upon them that had not sinned after the likenesse of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him that is to come. It is said, that the wordes, , are to be translated in asmuch as all had sinned; To signifie, that Spirituall death came, after Ad∣am, upon all that had sinned as Adam did, inasmuch as they had sinned: For, as for bodily death, they believe not, no more then Pelagius, that it was the punishment of Adams sinne, but the condition of mans birth; Onely the trou∣bles, the cares, the sorrowes by which men come to their graves, these, as they acknowledge to be consequences, as of Adams sinne, so, of all those sinnes whereby men follow and imitate Adam; so, they think to be meant by the sentence; In the day wherein thou eatest thereof shalt thou die the death. But this is no lesse then to deny the literall sense of the Scripture, which the Church hath received for one of Origens errors, in the interpretation of the beginning of Genesis. What is it else to say; That Adam was liable to bodily death by nature, but to spiritual death by sinne? For it is manifest by the premises, that through all the Old Testament, the second death is no otherwise preached, then under the figure of the first death; and that, by virtue of the ground laid from the beginning that the Covenant of Grace, which tendreth life and death everlasting, was onely intimated under the Covenant of nature, (which the Law only received, and limited to the happiness of the land of promise, as to the Is∣raelits) tendring expresly only blessings and mercies of this life, to the civil and outward obedience of Gods commandments. And can it be imagined, that, in the very first tender that God made to man, of life in consideration of obe∣dience, and death of disobedience, this life and this death must be understood
to be the second, when the obedience was onely in abstaining from the for∣bidden fruit? What was then that fruit of the tree of Life, by eating whereof they might have preserved themselves from death? I aske not what it signified, but what it was. For, all reason will require, admitting the premises, that it signified that, whereby the soul escapes spirituall death: But the same reason will inforce, that it must be the fruit of a tree, which, so long as they eat not of the tree of knowledge, they were licensed to eat, to preserve them from bodily death. Neither is there any difficulty in that they aske; How all the posteri∣ty of Adam should have come by the fruit of that tree, that grew no where but in the garden of Eden; For, I suppose it had been as easie, to have plant∣ed all parts of the world with the same tree, as with the posterity of Adam, had he continued in obedience: Who, being not driven out of Eden, as upon his disobedience, but sending his posterity, to do that, in the rest of the world, which he did there; had made all the world Eden, by placing the Paradise of God wheresoever innocence dwelt. In this case, I see not why any man should take care for the tree of Life, that no posterity of Adam might die. No more, then, what should become of that innocent posterity, which, when it had so planted the World, the counsel of God, concerning the propagation of man kind, may well be thought to have been come to ripenesse. The Socinians in∣deed do alledge Josephus, who, speaking of the tree of life, doth not say, that it should have made man immortall, but onely, that it should have made him live to very great yeares. But that is of no consequence; In regard that it is not ex∣pressed in the Scripture, that God would have had man live everlastingly upon the earth, had he lived in obedience. For, supposing that it was a question among the Pharisees, (to which sect it appeares Josephus inclined most) whe∣ther so, or, whether God would translate them to a heavenly life after a time of obedience here, (which, to the Pharisees that acknowledge the resurrection and the world to come, must needs seem credible enough) it is no marvaile, that Josephus should say; That, by virtue of the tree of life, they had lived to a very great age, though, in case not translated, they might as well have lived alwayes by virtue of it. But let us hear S. Paul. 1 Cor. XV. 21, 22. For, since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. For, as by Adam all died, so by Christ shall all be made alive. Is there any rising from bodily death but by Christ? I say not any rising, in the quality of those, in whom the Spirit of Christ dwel∣leth, of whom S. Paul saith, that He who raised Christ from the dead, shall al∣so quicken your mortall bodies, through his Spirit dwelling in you. Rom. VIII. 11. But, setting aside this quality, it is the coming of Christ, and his trump, that raiseth againe, even those that shall rise to judgement. And can it, for all this be doubted, whether that life was lost by Adams fall, which the rising of Christ shall restore? And supposing, that Christ raises onely those that are Christs, as S. Paul speaks, it is their bodies that he raises at last, and that from that death which came by Adam. Seeing then it cannot be doubted, that S. Paul, when he saies that by one man came death, meanes the death of the body, and seeing death passed upon all, it is manifest, that, Adams sin passed upon all, upon whom the death passed, which it brought after it. For, otherwise how can it be said, sinne came into the world by one man? Is it possible to imagine, that all men should propose to themselves to imitate the sinne of Adam? Not possible. Supposing all Adams posterity sinners to God, they may be understood all to have imitated their first Father Adam, two wayes: For, in as much as they sinne against God as he first did, they may be said to imitate him in doing the like of that which he did, though they had no knowledge of what he did, much lesse propose to themselves his example, to do that wherein they are said to imitate him, in sinning against God. This I confesse may truly be said, but not to S. Pauls purpose; Who intends not to say, wherein sinne consists, as to say, in doing what Adam did: But, from whence it proceeds, that from thence he may shew how it is taken away. Now if it be said, that all men in sinning do imitate Adam, as proposing his example to themselves in the nature of a motive,
so that, therefore, it might be said, that sinne came into the world by one man and death by sin, which the Apostles discourse requires; This would be evidently false: In as much as the greatest part of the sinnes of mankinde, are and have been committed, by them that never knew what Adam did, so farre from propo∣sing to themselves, to do the like. So that it cannot be avoided, that, by the sinne of Adam all sinne came into the world, as well as all death. And there∣fore, , seemeth to signifie in whom, that is, through whom, all have sinned, as Acts V. 16. , through the faith of his name. 1 Cor. VIII. 11. ; shall perish through thy knowledge. For, if it be said, that it is not a handsome manner of speech that  in whom, should relate to  by one man, which it stands in such a distance from; Let him be sure, that there is nothing more ordinary in S. Pauls language, then such transpositions. And seeing death, which I have shewed the Apostle speakes of, hath equally passed upon all mankind, it would be very impertinent to say; that it passed upon all men, in as much as every man had sinned, And truly though , may signifie in Greek, in as much as all had sinned, or, so farre as every man had sinned. or, be∣cause all had sinned, to wit in Adam; by the same reason as , or,  in the language of the Poets, signifies the same, (as in the beginning of Homer, ) yet it seems to me evident, that the sinne which S. Paul speakes of, when he saies; that, Through the disobedience of one man sin came into the world, and death by sinne; is the sinne that every man does in the world; And therefore when it followeth ; the meaning must be, through whom all men have sinned those sins which themselvs do. For, seeing there was mention of one man afore, by whom sinne came into the world, it is more reasonable, that  should be personall, relating to that one man through whom all have sinned, then reall, to signifie because all had sinned. And so it is not said by these wordes that all Adams posterity did commit the sinne of Adam, in his com∣mitting of it, But it is said, that all the sinne that Adams posterity commits comes by the meanes of Adams sinne, that is, originall sinne is not expresly, but metonymically, not formally, but fundamentally signified, in that all sinne is affirmed to come from that of Adam, and evicence also, in that death, is said to come by it. That which hath been said makes me stand astonished, to see a Doctor of the Church of England acknowledge no further signification of the Apostles words; As by one man sinne came into the world, and death by sinne, and so sinne passed upon all, in whom all have sinned; But this; That Adam sinned first, and so all his posterity after him: So that by one man sinne came into the world, because, coming upon all, it must needs come first upon the first; Not because his sinne had any influence upon others to cause their sinnes. For, seeing Pela∣gius, whom it concerned so much to maintaine, that Adams sinne did no harme to his posterity, having made it the ground of his Heresie, could not never∣the lesse put off the force of these words without a shift of imitation, though so pittifully ame, that it could not reach the farre greater part of his posteri∣ty; It may justly seem strange, that he who pretends not to go any thing so farre as Pelagius, should not allow that sense of them which Pelagius could not refuse. But if he oversee that which obliged Pelagius to grant, that they intend to set forth the meanes by which sinne came into the world, the obser∣ving of it will be enough to exclude his devise. For, to let passe that which is peremptory in them, the comparison between the first and second Adam, (by whom this Doctor will not deny the righteousnesse of Christians to come otherwise then as the first righteous, whatsoever Pelagius or Socinus doe) because I cannot void that issue in this place; The very processe of S. Pauls, dispute having first convicted both Jewes, and Gentiles of sin, then Chap. IV. shewed, how that faith which he preached promiseth righteousnesse, requireth us to understand, that he comes now to set forth, by what meanes this sinne on the one side, and this righteousnesse on the other comes into the world. Nei∣ther
will the words of the text be so satisfied, wherein we find the same sense repeated in divers expressions, which are not all capeable of that equivocation whereof these words, by one mans disobedience are. For S. Paul saith not one∣ly  by one man, but, (according to the reasons premised) , through whom all have sinned, and, , by, that is, through the transgression of that one, and, , judgement to condemnation out of one, besides on the otherside, , the gift through Grace, Rom. V. 12, 15, 16. And this shall serve for the pre∣sent to shew how unable this conceit is to stand against the evidence of the words; Reserving that which is most peremptory in the matter, and the con∣sequence of it, till I come to shew that our Lord Christ, the second Adam, is the meanes of our righteousnesse, and therefore by that likenesse of reason which S. Pauls discourse proceeds upon, the first Adam the meanes of our sinne. And to this purpose speaketh that which followeth; For, when the Apostle argueth, that, whereas sinne is not imputed when there is no Law, notwithstanding, death raigned upon all those that had not sinned as Adam did; That is, by transgressing such an ex∣presse law of God as Adam did transgresse; (Observing, that the Fa∣thers, who walked with God, whom Adam offended, tasted neverthelesse, of that death which Adam incurred) he inferreth to us, that the effect of Adams sinne, remaines in the whole kind of his posterity, to which death, the punish∣ment thereof belongeth. And, I beseech you, of whom speaketh S. Paul but of all mankind, when he writeth thus? Rom. VII. 5-13. For when we were in the flesh, the passions of sinne which were by the Law were exercised in our mem∣bers, to bear fruit unto death; But now are we voided to the Law, that being dead by which we were held, that we may live in the new Spirit, not in the old letter. What shall we say then? Is the Law sinfull? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sinne but by the Law. For, I had not known concupiscence, had not the Law said, Thou shalt not covet. But sinne taking advantage by the commandment, wrought in me all concupiscence. For, without the Law sinne was dead. Now I lived somtime without the Law. But the commandment coming, sinne revived and I died. And, that commandment which was for life, to me was found to death. For sinne taking advantage by the commandement, deceived me, and slew me by it. So the Law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just and good. Did then that which was good become death to me? God forbid. But sinne, that it might appear sinne, wrought me death by that which was good, that sinne by the commandment might become sinfull above measure. For, though S. Pauls speech here be concerning a Jew, in the person of one, that of a Jew was become a Christian, yet, seeing the proposition of the Apostle bears, that the Gentile is much more involved in that condemnation, to which the Jew is liable; that which belongs to every Jew that comes to Christianity, will be true much more a fortiori, of the Gentile, all mankinde being then compleatly divided into Jew and Gen∣tile. And therefore, let no man think, that my present purpose shall ingage me, before I can make use of this Scripture, to decide the question now on foot among Divines, whether S. Paul here speakes, in the person of an unre∣generate man or regenerate, which notwithstanding, in another place I may be ingaged to decide. For the present, it is enough for my turn, that an unre∣generate man, admitting S. Paul, cannot refuse his owne case to be that, which S. Paul here sets forth to be this; That, being in the flesh, the passions of sinne were exercised in his members, and so forth. For, I know it is said, that, to be in the flesh is to be in the custome of sinne; But what difference makes that in the case, when all to whom the Gospel first comes, are in the flesh, excepting those who, under the Law, though not by the meer Law, came to that state of Grace in which the Fathers stood? And therefore it is to me of no consequence, whatsoever the meaning of the Apostle may be, when he describes those sinfull passions, which he saith were exercised in their members, to be those that were through the Law. I see there are two opinions of his meaning, when he saith
afterwards; That sinne, getting advantage by the comandment, (without which it was dead, but, the man alive, and when it came, sinne revived and he died. So that the Law which tendred life, became to his death, because sin by advan∣tage of the Law slew him deceitfully) wrought in him all concupiscence. For, one opinion saies; That, when an unregenerate man becomes convict, that the Law of God takes hold of his inward inclinations, which he findes to be evil, the inbred corruption of nature, not submitting thereto upon this meer conviction, flies out into utter defiance of God and his Law, in all disobedience to it, whereby the concupiscence that is opposed may be satisfied. The other saith; That the Law of Moses, in the outward and literall sence thereof requiring onely civil obedience, answerable to that temporall happinesse which it tendereth; It is no marvaile, that Jewes, being tied to the letter of the Law, as their study and businesse, should think the outward and civile observation thereof to be the utmost intent of it, which we see, to this day, to be the error that detaines them from Christianity: And therefore it is properly said, ac∣cording to this opinion, that sinne, taking this advantage by the Law, slew me by deceit. But, to me this dispute is of no consequence; Or rather, both o∣pinions are to be admitted, in relation to the two severall senses of the Law, which I have advanced. For, as to the literall sense of the Law, (which the Gentile could have nothing to do with) it is manifest this might be. For it is manifest that it is become a scandale to the Jew, to make him think, that he stands right in Gods Court, without any Gospel of Christ, and thereupon, to induce him to defie it. But, as to the spiritual sense of the law (in which the Gen∣tile also hath his interest, as concerning things) written in the hearts of all men whatsoever the occasion is, by which it becomes revived in the heart, in which at any time it may have been dead, (because it neither gives rule to the acti∣ons thereof, nor bindes it over to judgement) most certaine it is, and most evident the meaning of S. Paul, that when it cometh to convict a man of his duty, and, by consequence what he is liable to upon the faileure, the Law that is for life will prove to death: That is, if Grace help not, sinne will over∣come. For, if the helpe of the Law, convicting of one true God, his pro∣vidence and judgement, even upon the secrets of the heart, were not able to reclaime those that were bred under it to spirituall righteousnesse; much lesse shal that conviction, whereby the light of nature evidences the same, be of force to the same purpose. And this is that which S. Paul intimates Rom. VIII. 3, 4. For, whereas the want of force in the Law was weake through the flesh; God, sending his sonne in the likenesse of sinfull flesh, and concerning sinne, condemned sinne in the flesh, that the righteousnesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us, that walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. For, if the doctrine of Moses Law, (which, as I have shewed, giveth so really eminent advantages towards the choice of true righteousnesse) was uneffectuall to the Jewes, by reason of the flesh; of necessity, the light of nature must needs become uneffectual to the Gentiles, in the same regard, of the flesh; Which is therefore the common principle, by meanes whereof true righteousnesse can take no place, without the Gospel of Christ, neither in Jews nor Gentiles. And therefore, that which follows in S. Pauls discourse Rom. VII. 14—, (leaving for the present the dispute, how farre it takes place in the regenerate) in all opinions must take place in the unregenerate, upon a principle common to all mankind; Which is this, that as the Law of God is spirituall, so, man is carnall, and by consequence sold under sinne. For, in whom there is a contradiction to the Law of God, and that righteousnesse which it requireth of man, from the inward motions of the heart, so soon as the understanding becoms convict, that, this it requireth, n him there is, unquestionably, a principle of rebellion against God, for some∣thing that he is inclined to desire for himselfe, without, and against all respect of God. Now, by the processe of S. Pauls discourse, all Christians that admit S. Paul must allow, that it supposeth such a principle, in all that come to Chri∣stianity, whether or no it inferre the like, in those that are already come to it;
To wit, not to do what they like, but what they hate, and, approving the Law to be good that forbids it, to do the evil which they would not do, not the good which they are willing to do: So that, though there be a Law of God which in their judgement they approve, yet there is another Law in their men∣bers, which prevailes against it, to captive them to the law of sinne. Which law, be it the custome of sinne as much as you will, provided that this custome have passed over all mankinde, all that the Gospel is tendred to; Seeing it is the choice of no man, no nation, but common to Adams poste∣rity, it must needs be derived by propagation from his sinne, whom his posterity not knowing, could not purpose to imitate. The words of S. Paul Gal. V. 16, 17. are to the same purpose. Now I say; Walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the desires of the flesh. For the flesh Iusteth against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, and these are opposite to one another, so that ye may not do that ye would. For, supposing the same dispute, whether they be meant of Christians, or of the unregenerate; at least, when Christiani∣ty is tendered, when men are exhorted to imbrace it, then is there in man a principle opposite to that, which the spirit of God, bringing the Gospel, and brought by the Gospel, requires: And that inferrs the same consequence as afore. But I must not forget the passage of S. Paul Ephes. I. 1, 2, 3. And you, being dead in trespasses and sins, in which once ye walked, according to the age of this world, according to the Ruler of the dominion of the aire, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience; among whom, all we also conversed once in the lusts of our flesh, doing the desires of our flesh, and thoughts, and were by na∣ture the children of wrath as the rest also. For I must observe, that Paul, writing to a Church of Gentiles converted to be Christians, himself of a Jew, first con∣cludeth the Gentiles to be under the power of Satan; And then, least it should be thought that the Jews, of whom himselfe was one, were invited to be Chri∣stians upon other termes; he inferreth of them, that, we also among them Gen∣tiles, were by nature children of wrath. Where it is plaine, that S. Paul, ha∣ving expressed the sinnes of the Gentiles, in which he saith they were dead, and having aequalled the Jewes to them, for walking according to their lusts, cannot possibly be understood to speake of the common birth of all men, when he saith we were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Whosoever shall peruse Epiphanius, a Christian Writer, but in such a stile, as those that were not bred to the learning and elegance of the Greeks language may be supposed to use, (and therefore much resembling the stile of the Apostles, and of very good use for them, who would inwardly be acquainted with their language) he shall find this word  very ordinarily used by him, not to signifie as com∣monly it doth, by nature, or, by birth, but truly and really. Which significa∣tion, how well it suits with the words of S. Paul, when he saith; We Jewes were , really the children of wrath, as also the rest that were Gentiles; Let any man that can judge of learning judge. So, I insist not upon this word , but upon S. Pauls discourse: and upon the ground hitherto perswaded, I argue; That, Jewes as well as Gentiles, being thus concluded under the ne∣cessity of the Gospel, which is the grace of Christ, the ground of it can be no other, then the corruption of all the posterity of the first Adam which onely the second Adam can cure. I come now to our Saviours instruction to Nicodemus, when, of a Doctor of the Jews, he became first a disciple of Christ, John III. 3, 5, 6. Verily, verily, I say unto thee; Ʋnlesse a man be born againe, that is, of water, and of the holy Ghost, he cannot see, or enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Marvaile not that I said to thee; We must be born again. And to the same effect S. John himself speaking in his own person of our Lord Christ, John I. 12, 13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the children of God, to wit, to those that believe in his name: Who were not born of blouds, or of the will of the flesh, but of God. In these words I acknowledge a very considerable difficulty, though, perhaps, it is not that which most men do forecast; But I, that do maintaine, that the
Baptisme of Christ was not instituted when these words were said; having said already, that the Baptisme of Christ is that, to which the promise of re∣mission of sinnes is allowed, must needs find it hard to answer, what our Lord meant when he said; Ʋnlesse a man be born of water and of the holy Ghost. For, if the Sacrament of Baptisme were not then instituted, when our Saviour spake these things to Nicodemus, how shall we say, that originall sinne is signi∣fied by these words, wherein there is no mention of the cure of it? Surely, upon the ground afore setled, that the second birth is by the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost given, in consideration of the profession of Christianity, by being baptized. For this being setled, it may remaine questionable, what Ni∣codemus could then understand by the name of water; but, it cannot be questi∣onable, that there is no regeneration without the holy Ghost, and no holy Ghost without that condition upon which the gift of the holy Ghost is due, that is, without Baptisme. To answer this question then, which, we are thus secured, that it cannot be answered to the prejudice of the Church, and the faith thereof; It will be worth the while to compare the discourse of our Lord, to the company that followed him to Capernaum, in the sixth of John, with this to Nicodemus. For, no man can be so unreasonable as to imagine, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist was instituted by our Lord, at the time of that discourse, or by virtue of it, of the institution whereof we have so due ac∣count in the Gospells, before the suffering of our Lord. And yet it would be a strange thing to imagine, that all that long discourse of our Lord should have no relation to that Sacrament: Especially, seeing it is so agreeable to all reason, that our Lord should deliver unto his disciples the effect of his Gospel, in such terms as suted best with the ceremony of that Sacrament, wherewith he intended to establish the same. For supposing, the eating of the flesh of Christ crucified, and the drinking of his blood, to be the consideration of his passion, tending to a resolution of taking up his Crosse; we have in it the summe of Christianity, consisting, in the bearing of Christs Crosse, that is, in conform∣ing our selves to his sufferings. Report we this to the discourse of our Lord with Nicodemus, and it will seem strange to me, that any man should marvaile, that, when the Sacrament of Baptisme was not yet instituted, our Lord should propose his Gospel to him, upon this ground, that no man born of the flesh could attain to the kingdome of God, without being born againe of water and the holy Ghost. Seeing that, whether he understood or not, what our Lord meant by water, it is enough, that the Spirit, which reneweth the old birth of the flesh, dependeth upon that which it signifies, whatsoever it is. Whether Nicodemus, for the understanding of our Lord, betake himselfe to the conside∣ration of the several Baptismes of the law, or to the Baptism of John the Baptist, or to the Baptisme by which proselytes were made Jews, which divers learned men have both declared and alleadged, to the clearing of this difficulty, to very good purpose; certaine it is by the premises, that the condition of salvation is the profession of Christianity, by baptisme; that the gift of the holy Ghost is not promised upon any other terms. Therefore, the Sacrament of Baptisme be∣ing instituted, there is no assurance of salvation without it, where the precept thereof takes place, therefore the first birth of the flesh is liable to originall sinne.
CHAP. X. The Old Testament chargeth all men as well as the wicked to be sinfull from the wombe. David complaineth of himselfe as born in sinne, no lesse then the Wise man of the children of the Gentiles. How Leviticall Lawes argue the same. And temporall death under the Old Testament. The book of Wisdome and the Greek Bible. BUt it is requisite that we look into the Old Testament, to see what argu∣ments of the same will discover themselves there, provided that we be ad∣vised, not to expect, the reasons upon which the necessity of the Gospel is grounded, clearly expressed there, where the Gospel it felf is but intimated. Those that will not admit the Faith of the Church, without such proofes as themselves require, may with the Jewes, disbelieve the Gospel, if our Lord will not prove it by such miracles as they would have, and when and where they would have them done. But, admitting the truth of Christianity upon such reasons as God hath made effectuall to subdue the world to it, it will be consequently necessary, that there should be arguments of originall sinne in the Old Testament, but darker then those which have been, and shall be pro∣pounded out of the New. Certainly it deserveth much consideration, that Moses saith, Gen. VI. 5. And the Lord saw that great was the evil of man up∣on earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart onely evil all the day long. And againe, Gen. VII. 8. Upon smelling Noahs sacrifice, God saith to himself; I will no more curse the earth for man, because the imagination of mans heart is evil from his youth. For, first God declares himselfe, as a severe judge, to take vengeance upon the sinnes of mankind by the deluge, because the world was overflowed with sinne: And afterwards, either for the same reason, (be∣cause sinne cannot be washed out, no not with the waters of a deluge, so long as mankind is in being upon the earth) or, notwithstanding it, he declares, that he will curse the earth no more for mans sake. Here it will be impossible, to render a reason of that deluge of sinne (which first, brought a deluge of wa∣ters, but could not overcome Gods goodnesse for mankind) without a prin∣ciple common to all mankind. Such variety there is in their fansies, such con∣trariety in the inclinations which they produce, that it is impossible that they should agree in mischief, were they meerly of Gods making. And therefore Solomon having premised a hard word for women; That, seeking account one by one, he had found a man of a thousand, but a woman of all these he had not found; inferreth, Eccl. VII. 29. Onely this, behold, I have found that God made man right, but they have found out many devises. Where, I suppose he summon∣eth all men to inferre, that between the uprightnesse in which God made man, and the many crooked devises which they have found out to themselves, there must something have fallen out to create a common principle, to which those many inventions may be imputed. But the act of Adam, which passed away so soon as it was done, had it left nothing behind it, could have born the blame of it self alone, and of nothing else. When God commandeth the Israelites to put a fringe upon the corners of their garments, he giveth this reason for it; Numb. XV. 39. And ye shall see it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord and do them: And not look after your hearts, and your eyes, after which ye commit whoredome. Surely, when he sets the lusts of their eyes and the imagi∣nation of their hearts in opposition to the commandment of God, he justifies the words of our Lord, Mat. X. 36. taken from the Prophet. Mich. VII. 6. to be fulfilled in every mans heart; A mans enemies are those of his own house. And Solomons taunt to the young man, Eccles. XI. 9 Walk in the wayes of thine heart, and in the light of thine eyes; But know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to, judgement. Gods complaint by the Prophet
Ezek. VI. 9. I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from me; and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their Idols: Leadeth us (for the reason and ground of both) to that of the Apostle, 1 John II. 16. For what∣soever is in the World, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but of the World. But what is there between God and the world, but the old serpent, and the leaven which he hath poisoned man with? And this is that venim which we read of, Psal. LVIII. 4 5, 6. The wicked are estranged from their mothers womb as soon as they are born they go astray and speak lies: They have venime like the venime of a serpent, like the deaf addar that stoppeth his eare; That will not hear the voice of the inchanters, that inchant with charmes cunningly. For, if it be said, that all this speakes onely of the wicked, which, of their own choice have addicted themselves to sinne, and that, by being bred to it by their Fathers, and predecessor, and so debauched from their own natural innocence; I shall presently appeale to David himself, and his confession, with which he pretends to grace, Psal. LI. 7. 8. Behold I was formed in wickednesse, and in sin did my mother conceive me. But behold, thou requirest truth in the intrailes, and shalt make me to understand wisdome secretly. I know it is said, that this is nothing but an hyperbolicall expression of the Prophet, whereby he chargeth himselfe with sinne even before he could understand what sinne was, and that, from the time of his conceiving in the womb, were that possible, he hath been liable to sinne, and so left, without mercy. And to this purpose is alledged that of the Pharisees to the blind man. John IX. 34. Thou wast wholly born in sinne, and dost thou teach us? To argue that among the Jews, it was an ordinary expression to aggravate a mans sinne, by saying; That he was borne in sinne. And truly, what the Jews of that time might conceive, of the coming in of sinne, is not alltogether so cleare, in regard of the Apostles words to our Lord, upon the occasion of the same man, when they askt our Lord; whe∣ther he was born blinde for his owne sinne, or for the sinne of his parents, John IX. 2. Which our Lord answering: for neither, but for a particular intent, of shewing a particular work of God upon him; Denies not the common taint of our nature, when he affirmes; That, particualr workes of providence upon particualr persons, have particular reasons and ends, for which God will have them come to passe: But shews, that there were severall opinions in vogue at that time through the nation, and, that there might be a conceit, of mens soules sinning in other bodies, or, before they came into these bodies, ac∣cording to the position of Pythagoras, or the conjecture of Origen; (Though, the opinion of Herod concerning John the Baptist, that he should be alive againe in our Lord, Mat. XIV. 2. doth not appeare to proceed from any such pre∣sumption as this, but from an imagination, that dead mens soules might come and live againe in the world, whether in the same or other bodies) From this opinion then, the reproach of the Pharisees to this man, that he was born in sinne may well seem to proceed. And their error will not prejudice the truth, that all men are indeed born in sinne. But I observe further, that the people of God, as they were totally divided from the worship of Idols, so from the consequences thereof, which Paul, in the first of the Romanes, sheweth to have been all sorts of uncleanness in the first place, and then, the rest of those evils, which, towards the end of the Chapter he quali∣fies the Gentiles with. For, it is manifest, that uncleannesse which contained no civil in justice was counted but an indifferent thing with all the Gentiles. Let him that would be satisfied of this peruse what the Wise man hath said of the seed of the Gentiles, which he compareth with the Jews whom they persecuted, all along his whole work, Wisdom III. 12-IV. 1-6. Where it is manifest, that he setteth forth the posterity of the Gentiles, as defiled with the unclean∣nesse wherein they were bred and born. And this is most certainely the reason why S. Paul saith of Christians married to Gentiles 1 Cor. VII. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; Else were your children uncleane, but now are they holy.
To wit, that a heathen husband or wife, consenting to dwell in wedlock with a Christan, is sanctified by a Christian husband or wife, by whose meanes he is brought to this ingagement. For, when S. Paul adviseth the Christian party to con∣tinue in wedlock contracted with an Idolater before Christianity, he presuppo∣seth, that the Gentile shall be willing to forbear the vulgar uncleannesses of the Gentiles, for the love of a Christian yokefellow. Otherwise it could not be honest, nor for the reputation of a Christian among the Gentiles, having power of di∣vorcing, (as both parties had in the Romane Empire) to continue in wedlock with him that acknowledged not Christian, but onely civil wedlock; That is, the wife to be tied in regard of the issue, but the man free to all uucleannesse, which the Romane Lawes no way restrained. And therefore their children so farre from being unclean, according to the manners of heathen parents, that they are holy, upon presumption, that they shall be bred in the instruction of Christianity, by the meanes of that party which was Christian. I observe againe that the Prophet David, speaking of his wicked enemies, (the figure of the Jewes, whom thereby he designeth aforehand to be the enemies of our Lord and his Church) applieth the same expression to them, (being of the carnall people of God, but farre from Jewes according to the spirit) which the people of God other whiles use concerning the Gentiles; when he saith, that they are estranged from the wombe, and, as soone as they are born, go astray and speak lies. For, it is manifest, that he calls them  Psal. LIX. 6, 9. which, by the title, appeares to be written of the Jewes his enemies. And so Psal. XLII. 2. Which word commonly stands in as ill a sense with the Jewes, as , Gentes, &, Na∣tiones to the Christians, not for people, , or,  but for Eth∣nicks or Gentiles, that is to say, Idolaters. And so to this day the Jewes call us Christians , that is to say Gentiles. And upon these observations I am induced to believe, that the Pharisees, and those of the Consistory, (out of the confidence they had of their own holinesse, which they presumed of upon the Curisity which they kept the Law with) did judge of those that pretended not to the same, as of people once removed from Gentiles, and so sinners from their birth, by the grossenesse of those manners in which they were bred. But when David comes to confesse of himself that he was altogether born in sinne, and conceived by his mother in wickednesse; It is not possible that any such reason should take place, but rather such a one as may make good whatsoever can be attributed to the spirit of God, speaking of Gods own people, in the mouth of David. And without doubt, as Idolatry was the originall of the most gross customes of sinne, as appeares by the premises; So can there be no greater argument of the corruption of mans nature, then the departure of all nations, from the worship of one true God, to the worship of they knew not what. That all nations coming of one blood, from one God, which at their first apo∣stasy was so well known to them, and not able to blot out of their own hearts the conscience of the service they ought him, should imagine themselves dis∣charged of that obligation, by tendring it to what they pleased, (saving a small part of mankinde, whom he reserved to himselfe, by making them acquainted with himself, through the familiarity which he used them with) if all other arguments, of a common principle of corruption, in our common nature, were lost, is enough to make the apostasy of our first forefathers credible, which the relation of Moses makes truth. Wherefore, when David attributes to himselfe by nature, that which the people of God attribute to the Gentiles, it must needs be understood in regard of a principle common to both, which the Grace of God suffereth not to come to effect, but preventeth in his people. And when he attributeth the same to his malicious enemies, Jewes onely by the first birth, he warranteth us to say the same of those that are Jewes by the second birth, so farre as the birth of both is the same. I will not forbear to alledge here the Law of Leviticus, that appoints a time of impurity for women that have brought forth, as no lesse fit to signifie, the
evil inclination, to which our nature by the fall of Adam, is become liable, then the ceremonies of the Law are fitly used by God, to shadow the truth of the Gospel. Not that I make any doubt, that this impurity, of it self, is but legall, as the impurity contracted by touching a dead man, or a living creature that was unclean, or that of the leprosie, or by the custome of women, or the like; Which, I am resolved, amounts to no more, then an incapacity of freely conversing with Gods people, or an obligation to a sacrifice, which is there called , or, , because it purged this incapacity, which in regard of that positive Law, may be called sinne. But this being granted, and these Legall incapacities being, by the correspondence of the Law with the Gospel, to signifie the cause for which men are uncapable of heaven; As the leprosie of the body, and the touching of a dead man, or a living creature that is unclean by the law, necessarily signifieth that incapacity, which cometh by the custome of sinne; So that uncleannesse which ariseth from those things which come from our own bodies seemeth, by necessary correspondence, to signifie that incapacity of coming to heaven, which ariseth from the inward in∣clination of our nature to wickednesse. Neither will I omit to allege the say∣ing of the Prophet David, alleging the reason of Gods compassion to his peo∣ple in their sinnes, to be their mortality, Psal. LXXVIII. 40. For he consider∣ed that they were but flesh, and even as a wind that passeth away and cometh not againe. And Psal. CIII. 14-17. For he knoweth our frame, he remembreth that we are dust. The dayes of man are as of grasse; as the bud of the field so springeth he. For a wind passeth upon it and it is not; And the place knoweth it no more. But the goodnesse of the Lord is from generation to generation upon them that fear him, and his righteousnesse upon childrens children. For, having shew∣ed, that the bodily death to which Adam was sentenced, implied in it spritituall death, and supposed the same according to S. Paul, I may well say, that he could not expresse that reason, which Christians alledge to God for his compassion upon their infirmities, more properly to the time and state of the Law, then by alleging the death which our bodies are subject to, as an argument of sinne which it is allotted to punish. And the antithesis which follows between our short life, and the continuance of Gods mercies to his servants of their poste∣rity, comes corespondently to set forth the grace of the Gospel, though sparing∣ly signified, as under the Law. And here I must not forget the Wise mans ex∣hortation Wisdome I. 12—. Affect not death, through the error of your life, nor purchase destruction through the workes of your hands. For God made not death, nor taketh pleasure in the destruction of the living. For he made all things to in∣dure: And the beginnings of the world were healthful, and no deadly poyson among them, nor any dominion of hell upon the earth. For righteousnesse is immortall. But the wicked with their words and works purchased it. And, thinking it their friend, decayed, and made a covenant with it, because they are worthy to be on the side of it. Here it is evident, that the speech is of temporall death, but so, that by it is intimated spirituall death, according to that which hath oft been obser∣ved, and will oft come to be observed, that the mystery of Christianity, inti∣mated in the old Testament, begins more plainly to be discovered in these books, then in the canonicall Scriptures. And therefore, though the purchase of death is attributed to the evil words and works of the wicked; yet, seeing it hath taken place over all the world, contrary to the first institution of God, thereby he leaves us to argue the corruption of nature, which moveth mankinde to take pleasure in those workes by which death takes place. Last of all, I will allege, not the authority of the Book of Job, which is not questionable, but the authori∣ty of the Greek Translation of it. Be the author thereof who may be, be the authority thereof what it may be, it is manifest how ancient it is, and that it came from the people of God, while they continued the people of God, and hath passed the approbation of the Apostles. When therefore it is said, that no man is clear of sin, no not the infant of one day old upon earth; It remaineth manifest, that this was the sense of the then people of God. As it appeares also by Philo;
. That to sinne, is a property born with all that are born, in as much as it is come to birth. And divers sayings of the Heathens might be alledged, as ob∣scure arguments of that truth which the Gospel is grounded upon: But that I conceive, the disorders of the world, the greatest whereof that can be named, is that which I named even now, of the worship of Idols, are greater and more evidences of the same, then any sayings of Writers; Which therefore, it will not be requisite to heap into this abridgement. CHAP. XII. The Haeresie of Simon Magus the beginning of the Gnosticks. That they were in being during the Apostles time. Where and when the Haeresie of Cerin∣thus prevailed, and, that they were Gnosticks. The beginning of the Encra∣tites under the Apostles. It is evident that one God in Trinity was then glorified among the Christians, by the Fullnesse of the Godhead which they intro∣duced in stead of it. I Should have propounded that evidence for originall sinne which is drawn from the necessity of the Grace of Christ, before that which is drawn from the Old Testament, had it not been for that exception which the Socinians make to it, by questioning the state of our Lord Christ, before his coming in the flesh; In regard whereof, I hold it the shortest course to void this issue first, and then see what witnesse, the necessity of the Grace of Christ renders to originall sinne. And because that Tradition of historicall truth, which remaines in the records of the Church, evidences that meaning of the Apostles writings, which I shall advance; I shall not make difficulty to propound in the first place, some things upon undeniable record, in the Fa∣thers, that may serve to argue the intent of the Apostles in this point. I say then, that it is a thing undeniable to common sense, that, what time the Apostles writ, there were divers Hereses in being, whether openly divided from the church, or lurking within it, under the common profession, to get opportunity to pervert the simple, and in fine, to withdraw them from the Church. The first whereof was that of Simon Magus, who, being discove∣red by the Apostles, to have onely counterseited himselfe a Christian, to get the power of doing those miracles which the Apostles did, that he might draw followers after himselfe; fell away from Christianity, to declare himselfe, among the Samaritanes, (who expected the Messias no lesse then the true Jewes) to be the Christ, whom the Apostles preached our Lord Jesus to be. But with∣all it is certaine, that he taught his disciples, that he alone could reveale unto them God, whom their Fathers knew not, for that the world had been at first made by Angels, in opposition to him, who also gave the Law, and brought in among men the difference between good and bad, which he, by that knowledge of God which he professed, undertook to teach how men should become free from, and by this freedome attaine the fellowship of God in the world to come. It cannot then be said, that the author of this heresie conti∣nued any longer in the Church, because when S. Peter saies to him; Acts VIII. 22. 23. Repent thee of this thy malice, and beseech God, if perhaps this devise of thy heart may be forgiven thee; For, I see thou art in the gall of bitternesse, and the bond of unrighteousnesse; Though he answer; Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of the things which you have said come upon me. For we find not, that his after behaviour deserved that he should be admitted to penance and recon∣cilement with the Church. And when he declared himself to be the Christ, (as did after him his disciple Menander (witnesse Irenus Epiphanius and Theodoret) when he being dead and gone, his pretense appeared vaine) then was he of necessity, at defiance with the Church and all Christians. But
this must be said, (which upon the faith of historicall truth is averred by the same witnesses) that of him, and the seeds of his doctrine, came afterwards many Sects, the authors whereof, not pretending themselves to be the Christ, pretended all to make known God, otherwise unknowne, to their disciples, and by that knowledge, to save them in the world to come, through abandon∣ing them to all licentiousnesse in this; Which sects, were therefore called by the common name of Gnosticks, or, knowers, though, there was one of those Sects, which had no other particular name besides. Among these one was set up by Nicolas one of the seven, Acts VI. 5. Or at least, under his name. For, though some, in Clemens Alexandrinus, seem to hold him an holy man, yet no man doubts that there was a sect of Gnosticks, which, either because raised by him, or by others upon mistake of some things that he had taught, bore his name. Which, though it be not requisite here to decide, yet it is evident by S. John Apoc. II. 6. that then the Sect was on foot. And though we dispute not the time when Baslides at Alexandria, Saturninus at Antiochia, Valentine at Rome, or in Cyprus and Aegypt, Carpocrates, Marke the Magi∣cian or others set up, (so as to affirme that they were in being when the Apo∣stles writ) yet it is evident, that under the Apostles there were such as coun∣terfeited themselves Christians, with an intent to withdraw the simple sort of Christians to this doctrine, which these Fathers of Hereticks in their severall times were the heads of, whosoever then set them on work. I will use but two arguments to evidence this. The first is, the common infection which they brought in every where, of eating things sacrificed to Idols, that is to say, of worshipping Idols. For, the feasts and entertainments of Idolaters consisting of those things, which had been sacrificed to their Idols, to feast with them was to communicate in their Idolatries. This cannot be more evident then it is evident by S. Paul, 1 Cor. X. 7. Nor be ye Idolaters as some of them were as it is written; The people sate down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. The Idolatry of the Israrlits consisting in the feast, as well as in their sacri∣fices: And by Moses, Exod. XXXIV. 15, 16. Least thou make a league with the in∣habitants of the Land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and sacrifice to their gods, and invite thee, and thou cat of their sacrifices: And thou take of their daugh∣ters, to thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods. Which you see how punctually it came to passe in the businesse of Baal Peor, Num. XXV. Now it is manifest, by the most ancient Writers of the Church, Justine the Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Irenus, Tertulliane. Origen, that the Gnosticks did generally communicate in the Idolatries of the Gentiles, whose testimonies have been produced by Doctor H. Hammond in divers of his writings. And the reason is plaine, by that old observation; That the gods of the heathens are good fellows, but the true God onely a jealous God: That is to say; That false gods never grutched one another the worship of God, because all set up by the devil, to whose service that worship redounded. For the Gnosticks being themselves Idolaters and Magicians, it is no marvaile, that they communicated as freely in the Idolatries of the Gentiles, as they in one anothers Idolatries. But it is no lesse manifest, that these Heresies, which the Apostles writ against, agreed all in teaching to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to communicate with Ido∣laters. For, the way of Balaam, in which they are by the Apostles charged to go astray, Jude 11. 2 Pet. II. 15. Is interpreted Apoc. II. 15. That then were in the Church of Pergamus, those that held the doctrine of Balaam that taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat of things offered to Idols, and to commit whordome. So hast thou, saith he, those that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes; Which by and by, is attributed to Jezabel the Prophetesse. The second argument is, that both S. Peter and S. Jude, in the places alledged, do manifestly shew, that the doctrines which they writ against, tended to re∣concile the licentiousnesse of the flesh with the hope of the world to come,
which, I have shewed, was the pretense of the Gnosticks; And makes it very probable, that the same Hereticks found accesse to those Christianes to whom S. James writes, and intimated to them hope of salvation through the bare profession of Christianity, without those workes whereby it is fulfilled; which is the occasion that he takes James II. 14.—to lay down those termes of the justification of Sinners which I have declared in due place. For, consider the terms in which S. Peter writes; Many shall follow their corruptions, for whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed. For what can this signifie, but that which is witnessed by so many of the Fathers, that the ill opi∣nion which the Gentiles had of Christianity, was unjustly occasioned by the vi∣lainies of the Gnosticks, who, though holding in secret a faith utterly destru∣ctive to Christianity, neverthelesse counterfeited themselves Christians, to withdraw Christians to themselves. Againe, Those that go after the flesh through the pollution of concupiscence. And; Thinking it pleasure to revel it by day, spots and staines, making good chere in their deceit, when they feast with you, having eyes full of adultery, not to be quieted from sinning. And, they beguil with the lusts of the flesh those who had truly escaped those that live in error, promising them liberty, but being slaves to corruption themselves: For by whom a man is subdued his slave he becoms. 2 Pet. II. 2, 10, 13, 14, 18, 19. And S. Jude, These dream∣ing defile the flesh. And, the things which they know by nature as bruit beasts, in them they corrupt themselves. Comparing them to Sodom and Gomorrah, who went a whoring in like manner as these, following after strange flsh. Jude 7, 8, 10. Which, he who compares with the vilainies of the Gnosticks related by Irenaeus, Epiphanius and others, either he hath lost his right senses, or (knowing by Iraeneus, that all the Gnosticks sprang from Simon Magus, and that Simon Magus pretended to shew how to attain the world to come by loo∣sing the raines to all vilainy) must needs allow, that they are of this traine whom these▪ Apostles writ against. Nor is the testimony of Hegesippus related by Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. III 32. to the contrary. He saith indeed that the Church had continued a pure Virgine under the Apostles and their hearers, he saith that it began to be defloured in the next age; Not by the com∣ing in of Anti-Christ, as some imagine, (unlesse they will have Simon Magus to have beene Anti-Christ, which though true, is not for their turne) but by the coming in of the Gnosticks. For, though it appeare by the writinges of the Apostles, that they were very busy during their time, in seducing Christians by counterfeiting themselves the like; yet may it well stand good that the Church continued a Virgine by casting them out, according to the precept of S. Jude, which I spoke of afore But, that aster the death of them and their hearers, they prevailed so farre, that they might be said to have de∣floured the maidenhead of Christianity, for the number of Christians whom they had seduced. Besides, it is easy to take notice, that the relation of Hege∣sippus concernes particularly the Church of Jerusalem, as following upon the martyrdome of Simeon, and the confession of our Lord Christ to Domitian made by his kindred according to the flesh; For so Eusebius expresly affirm∣eth. And truly, having related afore the Heresies of Simon Magus, and Me∣nander, of Ebion, of the Nazarites, and of Cerinthus, he must have given him∣self thely, had he intended to say, out of Hegesippus, that the Gnosticks, be∣gan under Adriane, though being the time when Saturninus, Basitides, Va∣lent ne, and probably others set up for themselves. But I will wish the ene∣mies of this light, which the knowledge of good learning (that will surely be revenged of them who neglect it) tenders to the obscure passages of the Apostles, no worse punishment, then to be bound to expound them without it: For, make use of it, and all is plain and smooth before you, unlesse it be a small circumstance, that they tremble not to blaspheme glories. 1 Pet. II. 10. Or as S. Jude 8. that they despise dominion and blaspheme glories; Whereas, if you put it out, you will necessarily reason of the Apostles discourse as blind men do of colours. And in truth there are two severall passages of Hegesippus related by Euseb the former whereof I have quoted, assigning this deflouring of the
Church to the time of Simeons martyrdome. But the other, though related by Eusebius, IV. 22. at the time of Hegesippus, assignes it unto his beginning, immediately insuing upon the martyrdome of S. James, and the choice of Si∣meon for Bishop of Jerusalem, and that by a very expresse mark of the author thereof, one Thebulis, (so R. Stevens copy reads it not Tebuthis) that missed the Bishoprick there, and upon that attempted to deflour the Church which they called then a Virgine, saith Hegesippus expresly there. Now it is manifest that the martyrdome of James was before the warre which the Ro∣manes, the same year that Festus left the Province, as you have it in Eusebius, II. 23. at which time it may be a question whither either the second Epistle of S. Peter, or that of S. Jude were written at all, or not. Wherefore it is manifest, that Hegesippus assigneth the deflouring of the Church to the time of Simeons martyrdome, when none of the Apostles remained alive: But so that Thebulis began to deflour it from the death of S. James, and the beginning of Simeon; That is, the Church of Jerusalem, because he was refused the Bishop∣rick of it. But I must not forget Epiphanius his relation of Cerinthus, that he was one of those that first contended with S. Peter, about admitting Cornelius and his company to baptisme, that afterward raised the contention about Circumci∣sion in the Church of Antiochia, (which we see decided by the Apostles Acts XV.) and, that afterwards, it was he, or his disciples, that troubled the Church of Corinth, and the doctrine which S. Paul had taught it. For the argument is undeniable, that, the things done under the Apostles have in them expresse markes, of that which the succeeding Hereticks, did and taught afterwards. , saith he, . For those men, stepping aside, and becoming false Apostles, and sending other false Apostles, as I said afore, in thebeginning to Antiochia, and other places, saying, that unless ye be circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved; there came no small trouble, as I said afore, and these are they, that in Paul, are called false Apostles, deceitfull wor∣kers transforming themselves into Apostles of Christ. For here Epiphanius, di∣stinguishing two kinds of false Apostles, one that pretended to be sent by our Lord Christ, another by his Apostles, applyes unto them the words of S. Paul, 2 Cor. XI. 23. by virtue of that, of the Synodicall Letter of the Apostles, Acts XV. 24. to whom we gave no such charge; and sayes, that, whatsoever they pretended, they were neither sent by our Lord Christ, nor yet by his Apostles, commission from Christ. Herewith agrees, all that which the Apostle writes, against eating things sacrificed to Idols in the VIII. and X. Chapters of this first Epistle. For there is no question to be made, that the Sect of Cerinthus was one of the Gnosticks, because it is expressed in Epiphanius, that they also taught the unknown God, whom they pretended to make known. And therefore, when S. Paul saith in the beginning of that eighth chapter; As concerning things offered to Idols, we know that we all have knowledge: knowledge indeed puffeth up, but charity edifieth; It is manifest that he civily reproveth that pretense of knowledge, which some weak Christians were then in danger to be carried away with, to believe; That those who knew the true God, (whom their masters pretended to teach) and, the Idols of the Gentiles to be nothing, might, without scru∣ple of conscience, communicate in the worship of those whom they scorned and thought to be nothing; Intending in the X. Chapter to protest, that they could not communicate in the same without renouncing their Christianity: And if any man say, that Cerinthus, according to Epiphanius, saith; That our Lord Christ is not to rise againe till the last day, and therefore, that the opini∣on of those that deny the resurrection which S. Paul disputes against, 1 Cor. XV. can neither be imputed to Cerinthus, nor the Crintians: It is answered,
that Epiphanius himself declares, that the Cerinthians were not all of a minde. Some of them denying the resurrection of Christ, and by consequence of Chri∣stians▪ against whom the maine of that Chapter argues; Others affirming, that Christ was not to rise again till all should rise againe at the worlds end. And truly I see not why S. Paul should argue that it is necessary that we should be∣lieve the resurrection of Christ, saying; If Christ be not risen againe, then is our preaching vaine, and we are found false witnesses, then is your faith vain, and y are yet in your sinnes, 1 Cor. XV. 14-17. Unlesse, among those whom he ar∣gues against, the resurrection of Christ had been questioned, which is Epiphani∣us his argument. And, I would faine hear, who can give a better account of that everlasting difficulty in S. Pauls words, that follow, 1 Cor. XV. 29. For, what shall those that are baptized for the dead do, if the dead rise not againe? why are they baptized for the dead? then Epiphanius gives according to this supposition, and that upon the credit of Historical truth, not of any conjecture of his owne; .. For, in this coun∣trey, I mean Asia and Galatia this Sect flourished much. Among whom a point of Tradition is come to us, how some of them dying before Baptisme, others are bapti∣zed for them in their name, that, rising at the resurrection, they may be liable to no sentence of punishment, as not having received Baptisme, and become obnoxious to the power of him that made the world. Where, by the way, you see the Cerin∣thians were Gnosticks, because, by baptisme, they pretended to free men from the bad principle which made the world; This being the doctrine of the Gno∣sticks. Now, if it be true, as Epiphanius understood, that the Cerinthians in Asia and Galatia baptized others for those that were dead without baptisme, shall we think it strange, that those false▪ Apostles, who transformed themselves into Apostles of Christ, as Satan into an Angel of light, should teach the Corin∣thians to do the same? And what need S. Paul stand to condemne this, condemning all their impostures, by the dispute of both Epistles. Neither is it more difficult, to discerne, those whom S. Paul disputes against in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Colossians, to be of the same stamp, if we observe two points of his reproofe; The one, the worship of Angels, the other abstinence from certaine meats, and from women, which S. Paul couches in these words, Colos. II. 21. Touch not, taste not, come not nigh those things, which all tend to perish in the using. This you may perceive by the warn∣ing he gives Timothy of the like men, who afterwards should depart from the faith, giving eed to deceiving spirits and doctrines of devils, who should forbid marriage, and injoyne abstinence from meats, which God hath made, to be re∣ceived of those that know him, with thanksgiving, 1. Tim. IV. 1, 2, 3. I know there is a plausible opinion abroad, that, these doctrines of devils, as I translate it, are the Traditions which have crept into the Church, for the worshiping of the souls of holy men departed; which some Christians have brought into the ranke of those secondary gods, which the Gentiles call daemones, or daemonia. But this opinion cannot be true. First, because it is plaine, that the second, , serves to interpret the first, . Now it is manifest, that by seducing spirits, S. Paul can mean nothing but those inspira∣tions, (true or pretended) which the devil and his ministers corrupted Chri∣stianity with. And therefore, when he declares himself further, by adding, and doctrines of devils; He meanes doctrines taught by devils. Secondly, be∣cause the word daemones, or daemonia, is never used in a good sense among Chri∣stians, as it is among Pagans. For those that knew not the difference between good spirits and bad, but in effect, as S, Paul saith, 1 Cor. X. 20, 21. worship∣ed devils, it is not to be expected, that they should expresse a meaning to
scorne or detest those whom they worshipped. And whatsoever opinions, those Philosophers which followed Plato and Pithagoras had, of the vulgar Ido∣latries of their countryes; seeing there is so much appearance, as I have shew∣ed in another place, that they were Magicians, it is no marvaile, that they make not the difference between good and evil spirits, which Christianity alone fully declareth; The Jewes themselves not having sufficiently discovered it, in and by the Scriptures of the Old Testament. But, as the word , an Idol, signifying, of it self indifferently any image or representation, to Christians and Jewes who understand the Gentiles to worship false gods, signifies the image of those Gods in an ill sense; So, to those that understand the devils to put themselves upon the world, to be worshipped for gods, the doctrines of devils must needs be those which, men guided by devils do advance. I must here suppose further, that which I reade in Epiphanius that Marcion and Ta∣tianus, with his Scholars the Encratites, (who enjoyned their disciples to abstain from women, and certain kindes of meats, as not of Gods making) had their beginning from Saturninus, he from Simon Magus, as Iraeneus, I. 30. af∣firmeth. Whereby it cannot seem strange, that their doctrine should be in vogue during the time of the Apostles. I demand then, what reason can be given why they, who taught the worshipping of angels, should also injoyne abstinence from women, and meates, were there not in the case an opinion, that marriage and those creatures come not from God, but, by some failleur of his, as Simon Magus said from the beginning, from the Angels? To which purpose we must observe, that S. Paul gives them warning of Philosophy. Col. II. 8. because it is certaine, that these sects took their rise from the writitings of Plato and Pythagoras, and their followers, whom Tertllian, therfore, stileth the Patriarchs of Hereticks. But the words of Irenaeus deserve here to be considered. Having promised to refute Marcion in due place; Nunc autem necessario meminimus ejus, ut scires quoniam omnes qui quoquo modo adulterant veritatem, & praeconium Eccle∣laedunt, Simonis Samaritani Magi discipuli & successores sunt. Quamvis non conieantur nomen magistri sui, ad seductionem reliquorum attamen illius sen∣tentiam docent; Christi quidem Jesu nomen tanquam irritamentum praeferentes, Simonis autem impetatem varie introducentes. But it was necessary that we should remember him now, that thou mightest know, that all those who any way adulterate the truth, and wrong that which the Church preacheth, are the Scho∣lars and successours of Simon the Magician of Samaria. Though to deceive others they professe not their masters name, yet they teach hs sense; Pretending indeed for a Stale the name of Christ Jesus, but divers wayes introducing Simons impious doctrines. And by and by; Ʋt exempli gratia dicamus, a Saturnino & Marci∣ne qui vocantur Continentes▪ abstinentiam a nuptii annuciaverunt, frustrantes antiquam plasmationem Dei▪ & oblique accusantes, eum qui & masculum & foeminam ad generationem hominum fecit, & orum quae dicuntur apud eos ani∣malium abstinentiam induxerunt, ingrati existentes ei qui omnia fecit Deo. To speak for example, from Saturninus and Marcion, those that are called Encrati∣tes, preach abstinence from marriage, frustrating that which God framed of old, and indirectly blaming him that made male and female for the procreation of man∣kind, and introduce abstinence from those which they call living creatures, being ungratefull to God that made all things. If Marcion and Saturninus had this doctrine from Simon Magus, of ne∣cessity it must have been on foot during the time of the Apostles. Onely, here will ly a difficult objection from that which I shewed a little afore, that Simon Magus baited his doctrine with the pleasures of sensuall concupiscence, as the meanes to gaine followers, if, in stead of the hardship of Christs Crosse, he could perswade them, that, believing the secret knowledge, which he taught, the free use of them was the meanes to attain the world to come. And of Cerin∣thus in particular, he that shall peruse what Eusebius hath related out of Cais and Dionysius of Alexandria, Ecclesiast. Hist. III. 28. shall easily perceive the whole aime of his Sect to have been the injoying of sensuall plea∣sure,
So that the saying of those whom Saint Paul writes against, 1 Cor. XV. 32. Let us eate and drink for to morrow we shall dy; exactly fits his followers. And so doth the pretense of those who seduced the Galatians to observe the Law, though themselves kept not the Law that they might not be persecuted with the Crosse of Christ. Gal. VI. 12, 13. That is, that would have them comply with the Jewes in keeping the Law, so farre as might save them from being persecuted by the Jews; as well as with the Gentiles in their Idolatries, to save them from persecution at their hand. According to the common principle of the Gnosticks, that it was a folly to suf∣fer for professing the Faith. To this it is easie to answer; That the devil might have severall baits for severall qualities of persons, even in the same common principles of Simon Magus; whereof, if we see some sects imbrace some, others those that seem inconsistent with them, being certified, that both spring from the same source, it is no wayes incredible that the seeds of all of them were sowen in his com∣mon doctrine. That Carpocrates, that Prodicus and the Gnosticks that followed Nicolas, according to Epiphanius, should be remarkable for unnaturall unclean∣nesse, having the way plained for them by Simon, how can it be strange? that re∣fined spirits should be taken with such grosse pretenses as brutish people are apt to be seduced with, would be strange on the other side. And that Magick which Simon and Menander, with the Basilidians, and Carpocratians frequent∣ly practised, (whatsoever the rest did) had alwayes pretenses of austerity in discipline, not onely as a meanes to obtaine influence from pow∣ers above, but to seduce the simple with a colour of severity and abstinence. Seeing then that Saturninus, upon Irenaeus his credit, derived this discipline from the doctrine of Simon Magus, how can it seeme improbable, that during S. Pauls time some branch of the same doctrine should spread over the parts of Asia concerned in S. Pauls Epistles to Timothy and to the Colossians. Whe∣ther by Cerinthus or by whom besides him, I need not dispute. There is no doubt indeed, but, according to Epiphanius, his Heresie had vogue in these parts; As in Galatia, besides Epiphanius, Sirmondus his Praedestinatus saith, that it is condemned there by S. Paules Epistle. And Gaius in Eusebius III. 28. testifieth, that Cerinthus pretended revelations by Angels, and Tertulli∣ane, contra Marc. V. that those who seduced the Colossians did the like. But whether Cerinthus, or some other branch of Simon Magus, the source of his doctrine is plainly from the same principle with Marcion and the Eucratites afterwards. Now, if any man demand, what all this may conduce to the understanding of those Scriptures which speak of our Lord Christ; let it be but considered, that Simon Magus, pretending to be the Christ, and to seduce Christians, from our Lord Jesus, to himself, and withall, and to be worshipped with honours due to God, doth hereby effectually suppose, that our Lord was effectually so worshiped by Christians from the beginning. Irenaeus saith further, of the doctrine of Simon Magus, I. 20. That he was glorified of many as God, and taught that he was the man who had appeared among the Jewes as the Sonne, (that is, the Messias) had come in Samaria as the Father, but to the rest of the Gentiles, as the holy Ghost. So that being indeed the soveraigne power of all, that is, the Father, he was content neverthelesse, to be whatsoever they called him. Hic igitur a multis quasi deus glorifi catus est, saith Irenaeus, & docuit semetipsum esse qui inter Judaeos quidem, quasi filius apparerit, in Samaria autem quasi pater descenderit, in reliquis vero gentibus quasi Spiritus sanctus adventaverit. Esse autem se sublimissimam virtutem, hoc est, eum qui sit super omnia Pater, & sustinere vocari s quodcunque um vocant homines. Where pretending first to be both Father and Sonne and holy Ghost, Secondly to be worshipped for God, it is manifest, that, setting up himself in stead of our Lord Jesus, for the Messias, whom the Samaritanes expected as well as the Jews, he had no other reason to pretend to be also the Father, and the holy Ghost, but because he knew our Lord, whom he counterfeited, had taught that he is one and the same with the Father and the holy Ghost. And so, by
what the counterfeit would be, it appeareth what the truth is, and taught him∣self to be; To wit, the Sonne of God, to be worshipded as one God with the Father and the holy Ghost. For, we are not to think that Epiphanius contra∣dicts his Master Jrenaeus, when he saies, that Simon, who praetended to be the Father among the Samaritanes, (as the Son among the Jewes) made his con∣cubine Selena to be the holy Ghost, whom he called also the Ennaea, or, Con∣ceit of him the Father, whereby he made the angels that made the world and mankind. But rather to understand that, intending to adulterate the Christi∣ane Faith by bringing in a counterfeit imitation of it, on purpose he pretended himself and his Conceit to be both one, because he knew, that, according to the Christian faith, both Father and Sonne, (both which he pretended to be, as you have heard) are one and the same God with the holy Ghost; which, he pretended his Conceite to be, according to Fpiphanius, but himself among the Gentiles, according to Irenaeus. The Heresie of his Scholar Menander is thus described by Irenaeus L. 21. Qui primam quidem virtutem inognitam ait om∣nibus, se autem um esse qui missus sit ab invisibilibus salvatorem pro salte homi∣num. Mundum autem factum ab Angelis, quos & ipse similiter ut Simon, ab Enna emissos dicit. Who saith, that the first Power is unknown to all, and that himself was the Saviour that was sent by the invisible Powers for the salvation of men. But that the world was made by the Angels, whom he also, like as Simon, sayes, were put forth by the Fathers Conceit. Where you see, above the Angels, whom he maketh Creator of the world, the unknown Father, whom he pre∣tendeth to make known, his Conceit from whence the Angels came, and the in∣visible Powers, that sent him for the Saviour of the world. Both these then, pretending to be that which our Lord Christ indeed and in truth is, did make themselves one ingredient or parcel of that unknown and invisible Godhead, from whence they so made the angels to proceed, that neverthelesse, banding a faction against the same, they make the coming of a Saviour ne∣cessary for this end, to deliver mankind from the servitude of these Angels that made the world. As for Saturninus, pretending the father of all to be unknown, (otherwise then as he pretended to make him known) it appears why he is a∣mong the Gnosticks. But he pretends that two sorts of men were made by the Angels: One by the good; beeing an Image of the Power which is above, which being infinitely taken with, they said; Let us make man after our image, because it was instantly with drawn from their sight. But so that it had not come to life had not the power above struck a sparke of light into it. The other by the devils, which the Saviour, who is indeed unknown, onely seemed a man, came to subdue. So Irenaeus l. 22. But Basilides; Ʋt altius aliquid & veriimilius adinvenisse vidatur, in immensum extendit sententiam doctrinae suae, ostendens, Nun primo ab inoto natum Patre. ab hoc autem natum Logon, deinde a Logo Phronesin, a Phonesi autem natas Sophian & Dynamin, a Dynami autem & Sophia Virtutes & Principes & Angelos, quos & Primos vocat, saith Irenaeus l. 23. He, that he may seem to have added some higher thing, and more likely to their invention, extending the meaning of his position beyond all bounds shews, that Nus (or Meaning) was first born of the Father who was not born: Of him Logos, (Reason or the Word) of him Prudence, of it Wisdom and Power, of them Virtues Princes and Angels, whom he calls the prime ons. Where you see manifestly, the fullnesse of the Godhead is made to consist of the Titles and Attributes of our Lord Christ. Which Valentinus after these makes to consist in XXX. Aeones, or intelligible worlds, which he derives from the unknown Father, and silence, or his conceit and Grace, (Bythos or the bot∣tome, and Charis Ennaea or Si) in whom he placed the first source of this Fulnesse. And it hath been observed already, that his number of XXX. is the same that the heathen Gods are contrived into by Heiod Theogonia. Much to my purpose. For S. Cyril. Catech. V. calls Valentine . The Preacher of the XXX Gods. This fullnesse of the Godhead which they taught being the deity which they worshipped. As did also not onely Ptolemaeus and Secundus who followed Valentine, and changed what they thought fit in his
designe, or, the Gnosticks which followed Nicolas, as you may see by Epi∣phanius; But the rest from Simon Magus, whose followers worshipped him and his Trull Selene▪ under the images of Jupiter and Minerva, saith Irenaeus expresly. For Menanders first Power, and the Ennaea or Conceit thereof, and the invisible Powers by whom and from whom he pretended to be sent for the Saviour of mankind, shew, that this was that fullnesse of the Godhead in which he taught his followers to believe. And when Eppnius, confuting Saturninus, saith, that according to him, ; Thee shall be found no fullnesse in the Power above; It is manifest that he taught his followers to worship that fullnesse which Epiphanius refuseth Simon Magus himself meant the like when he said, according to Epiphanius; that the Angels, though they proceeded from his Ennaea, or Conceit, yet were without the Fullnesse, that is, not comprehended within it. As for Cinthus, whom all agree to have made our Lord Jesus the Sonne of Joseph and Mary, born as other men are, Epiphanius saies further of his sense; ; But, that after Jesus was growne a man, who was borne of the seede of Joseph and Mary, the Christ came downe upon him from the God that is above, that is the Holy Ghost in the shape of a dove at Jordane, and revealed to him the Father that was unknowne, and by him to his disciples, whereby, after the power came downe upon him from above, he did miracles. And that, when he had suffered that which came from above flw up againe from Jesus. So that Jesus suffered, and rose againe, but the Christ which came upon him from above flew up againe without suffering, which is that which came downe in the shape of a dove, and that Jesus is not the Christ. Where, you see, he makes the coming of Christ to be nothing else, but an escape made by the Holy Ghost, when he came upon our Lord, out of the Fullnesse of the Godhead, to return thither againe when he had suffered. Now it is agreed upon, that Cerinthus had spread his Here∣sies in Asia, when Saint John writ his Gospell: And though Epiphanius report, that it was Ebion whom Saint John met with in the bath, and refused to come in it so long as he was there, calling away his Scholars with him; Yet it must be resolved, that it is a meere mistake of his memory, because him∣selfe testifies, as afore, that the Heresy of Cerinthus flourished in Asia and in Galatia, and because Eusebius after Irenaeus, (who conversed with Saint Johns Scholar Polycarpus) reports it of Cerinthus. As for the Heresy of Ebion, it is manifest by Epiphanius himself, in his Heresy that it sprung up first, and flourished most in the parts of Palestine, beyond, or besides Jordane, which they called Peraea, what time the Church of Jerusalem had forsaken the City, to remove themselves to Pella, where God had provided for them at the destruction of it. So that it appeareth not that Saint John saw the birth of it, being probably, removed into Asia before that time. I shall therefore neede to say nothing of the Heresy of Ebion, having Saint Jerome in Catalo∣go to witnesse, that the Gospell of Saint John was written at the request of the Bishops of Asia, in opposition to Cerinthus: But, the stocke of that evidence which I shall bring out of the Scripture, for the state of our Lord Christ, and his Godhead▪ before his coming in the flesh, lying therefore in the beginning of that Gospell which was writ on purpose to exclude it; I shall referre the rest of that which I shall gather out of the New Testament, to the sense and effect of it.
CHAP. XIII. The Word was at the beginning of all things. The apparitions of the Old Testa∣ment Prefaces to the Incarnation of Christ. Ambassadors are not honoured with the honour due to their Masters. The Word of God that was afterwards incarnate was in those Angels that spoke in Gods Name. No Angel honour∣ed as God under the New Testament. The Word was with God at the begin∣ning of all things, as after his return. THE Gospel of Saint John then beginneth thus; In the beginning ws the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; The same was in the beginning with God. In which words, the Socinians will not have the be∣ginning to be the beginning of all things, but the beginning of preaching the Gospel; That is to say, when John the Baptist began to preach; And the Word to be the man Jesus, so called, because, he was the man whom God had ap∣pointed to publish it. So that, in the beginning was the Word, is, in their sense; When John the Baptist began to preach, there was a man whom God had ap∣pointed to publish the Gospel. And truly, I cannot deny, that the beginning here, might signifie the beginning of the Gospel, by the same reason, as in the Scripture, and in all Languages, words signify more then they expresse. But that reason can be no other then this, because a man speakes of things mention∣ed afore in discourse, or, of that which is otherwise known to be the subject of his discourse. So, words signifie more then they expresse, because something that is known need not be repeated at every turne. What is the reason then why this addition, not being expressed, is to be understood? Forsooth, Saint Mark beginneth his Gospel thus; The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Sonne of God. As it is written in the Prophets; Behold I send my Messen∣ger before thy face, that shall prepare thy way before thee. The voice of him that cry∣eth in the wildernesse: Prepare e the way of the Lord, make his path plaine. John was baptizing in the wildernesse. Is not this a good reason? Because, in one Text of Saint Marke, you find the beginning of the Gospel to be the preach∣ing of John, therefore, wheresoever you read the beginning, you are to under∣stand by it the beginning of the Gospel? At least, in the beginning of S. Johns Gospel we must seek no other meaning for it? But who will warrant, that the word Gospel in S. Marke signifies the preaching of the Gospel, as sometimes it does, or, this book of the Gospel, which S. Mark takes in hand to write? The words, it is manifest, may signifie either, and therefore it cannot be manifest, that the word beginning, without any addition is put to signifie the one and not the other. For, if you understand the beginning of the book of the Gospel, when S. John saies; In the begining was the Word; Their turne is not served. As for the title of the Word, which scarce any of the Apostles but S. John attributes to our Lord; Look upon the beginning of his first Epistle; That which was from the beginning, which we have heard and seen, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life, (for the Life hath been manifested, and we have seen and bear witnesse, and declare unto you that everlasting Life which was with the Father and hath been manifested unto us.) That which we have heard and seen declare we unto you. Here, it must be a man that S. John calls the Word, when he speakes not onely of hearing, but of seeing and handling the Word of Life; But when he saies, that the Word was with God from the beginning, and since hath been made manifest to us, is there nothing but the man, and his office of preaching the Gospel to be considered, for the reason why he is called the Word? What meant then the Apostle Ebr. IV. 12, 13? The Word of God is quick and active and cutteth beyond any two edged sword, and cometh so farre as to divide between the soul and the spirit, to the joints and marrow, and judgeth the thoughts and
conceits of the heart. Neither is any creature obscure to it, but all things naked and bare to the eyes of him whom we have to do with; Where you see, he begins his discourse concerning the Gospel, but ends it in God: And therefore at∣tributes to the gospel under the name of the Word, those things which onely God can do; because, to the Author of it, under the Name of the Word, he attributes the knowledge and governing of all things. For the reason, then, why our Lord is called the Word, we must have re∣course to that which the most ancient Fathers of the Church, Clemens Alex∣andrinus, Tertulliane, Origen and others, with Justine the Martyr have taught us; That God spake unto the Fathers of the Old Testament, by the ministery of the same second person of the Trinity, by whom in our Flesh the Gospel was intended to be published, in the last ages of the world; And that there∣fore our Lord Christ is called the Word of God. The Socinians think they have said enough, to refute and renounce this advantage, which Christianity hath al∣waies used against the Jewes, when, with the Jews, they have alledged, that all those apparitions, which those Fathers believe, were ministred by our Lord Christ, were the apparitions of meere Angles, among whom one, as principall in the Commission, represented the person of God, and, in that regard, is both called by the propper name of God not communicable to any creature (which we, I know not by what right, translate Jehovah, seeing it is a thing manifest, that our Lord Christ and his Apostles did not pronounce it, as it is certaine the Jewes among whom they lived, did not at that time, and also worshiped with the honour that is properly due to God alone. And truly, that it was alwaies some angel, that is called by the proper name of God, and worshipped as God by the Fathers in their apparitions, is a thing so manifest, through the Scriptures that I will not undertake any unnecessary trouble to prove it. Neither do I think this any thing prejudicial to that which the Fathers of the Church teach. For, when they deliver, that these appariti∣ons were of the nature of prefaces, and preambles to the apparition of the Word in our flesh, it seems to be supposed, that, as the Word at the last assum∣ed our flesh wherein to appear, which afterwards he was never to let go againe, (according to the saying of divines after S. Gregory Nazianzene, quod semel ac∣cepit, nunquam dimisit) so, at the first he was wont to assume some Angelicall nature, wherein he might appear, to deal with men; though, not to retaine it for ever, but to dismisse it, the businesse for which it was assumed being done. Neither is that any thing difficult which may be objected, that these Angels did take unto them usually the bodies of men, in which they might converse with men; And therefore that, when they are called by the name, and worshipped with the honour of the onely true God, there being something visible to which these things cannot be attributed, they must be ascribed to the invisible nature of the Angels; Not for it self, (which were Ido∣latry) but in regard of God, whose person they represent as Ambassadors, and therefore are honoured with the honour due to the Prince whom they re∣present, as the Jewes, and with them the Socinians do understand those titles, wheresoever, in the Old Testament, they are attributed to Angels. This were some thing indeed, if it were not manifest, that the proper name of God is attri∣buted to those Angels, by whom God deales with men, without assuming to them mens bodies. There is nothing of this kind more eminent then that of Moses, Exod. XXIII. 21, 22, 23. Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Look to thy self because of him, and hear his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your apostasy, for my name is in the midst of him. But, thou shalt hearken to his voice, and shalt doe all that I shall speak, I will be an enemy to thine enemies and persecute thy persecutors. For, afterwards, when they had sinned, and God proffers to send an Angel with them to drive out their enemies, because if he should go himself among them, and they rebell againe, he should destroy them; It is manifest, that Moses is not content, till he hath obtained of God, that himself would go along with them. For before, when Moses had
pitched the Tabernacle without the camp, he spake with God face to face there, and the people worshipped towards that quarter: But afterwards, by his prayer he obtains that Gods face should go with them to give them rest, having otherwise no desire to venture upon the voyage, Exod. XXXIII. 2, 5, 9, 10. 11, 14, 15, 16. Whereby it is manifest, that, the face of God, in this place is the same, that is called in another place, the Angel of Gods face, because he re∣presented the person of God, and therefore is called by the name of God, and the name of God is said to be in him, and Moses is said to talk face to face with God, because he had conference with this Angel in the name of God, who is called God, face to face: Whereas, when God proffers barely an Angel, he is not content, but insists upon this. And for this reason it is, that, whereas it is certaine, that the Law was given by the ministery of Angels, neverthelesse it is said, that God spake all the ten commandments; Because that Angel that had the commission, and is called God, spake them. And afore, though it is certain, that it was the Angel of God, who went before the camp of Is∣rael in a pillar of a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night (because it is said Exod. XIV. 19. And the angel of the Lord that went before the camp of Israel removed, and came behinde them, and the pillar of cloud removed from before them, and stood behind them) yet it is said Exodus XIII. 20. that it was the Lord that went so before them. It is therefore manifest, that the Name and Worship of God is given to the Angels, that represent God, as well when they assume to themselves no bodies as when they doe. As for that which the Jewes, and with them the Socinians alledge, that it is because Ambassadors represent the persons of the Princes that send them, and therefore are honoured with the honour that is properly due to them; It is ridiculous, and against common sense. For certainly, it is one thing to say, that Ambassadors are honoured in consideration of the Princes from whom they come, another, with the same honours. Ambassadors are strangers where they come Ambassadors, and therefore, for their own sakes, must be respected where they come, otherwise then at home, otherwise then their aequalls, where they come: much more in respect of the Princes from whence they come. But that any Prince should honour the Ambassador of any Prince with the same ho∣nour wherewith he would honour his Master if he were there, is ridiculous to imagine. Much lesse the Ambassador of God, between whom, and any crea∣ture that he can imploy upon any Ambassage, there is incomparably more distance, then between any Prince, and any subject he can use. Honour, in∣wardly, is nothing but the esteem a man hath of that which he honours, out∣wardly, nothing else but the signes whereby he expresseth it. And, though, the conceit which a man hath of God, is comparable with that which he hath with his creature, as both are representations to mans mind, and therefore in themselves, of the same nature; yet the one represents God, incomparable to that which the other represents, concerning the creature. As for the outward signes of honour, though they may be equivocall, and ambiguous, yet there wants not meanes to determine, whether a man intend to expresse that esteem which is incomparable to any he can have of any creature, or not. This is the esteem which the propper name and worship of God signifies, which, if they who know not God should tender to a creature, they must be thought Idola∣ters; If they which know God, they must know, that God is in that creature as Christians know that God is in Christ, whom therefore they worship for God. When, therefore, we find the Fathers of the Old Testament worship∣ping the apparitions they had, for God, when the Scriptures call them God, it is because God was in them for the time, as for ever in Christ, after whose coming, we do not find any angel called God, or worshipped for God. Not that before his coming all angels that come from Gad are called by the name of God; But that, where they are so called, so it was. For, I need not stand here to shew, how many apparitions of Angels are mentioned in the Old Testament, of whom there is none called by the proper name of God, or said to be worshipped by the Pro∣phets, whom they deal with. It is true, S. John in the New testament, two se∣verall
times, tenders the Angel that appeares to him that worship which he re∣fuseth; Apoc. XIX. 10. XXII. 12. But though, he saies, in refusing it, worship God; yet doth it not appear, nor is it of it self any way credible, that S. John should be so surprized, as to honour and esteem the Angel as God, whom he knew to be sent by God. For, to bid him reserve unto God that honour which he re∣fuses, is to bid him reserve unto God that honour, which is incomparably more then that which he refuseth. And who is it that can say or imagine, that Cor∣nelius intended to worship S. Peter for God, because he tenders him that ho∣nour which S. Peter refuseth, Acts X. 26. Saying; Arise, I also am a man; Being one whose Religion was to worship the onely true God, whose servant be thought S. Peter to be. And therefore I shall not need to say that, which otherwise I should have said; That S. John knew not this difference betwen the dispensa∣tion of God in the Old and New Testament, nor the reason why the Fathers worshipped those Angels that dealt with them in Gods Name, which, out of this difference, may be observed; To wit, because the Word of God (who, at this time had assumed our flesh, in the womb of the Virgin, subsisting therefore by the Word which assumed it, and not to be dismissed any more) formerly assumed an Angel subsisting afore, to deal with man by, and therefore dismissed him againe when the businesse was done Let us now compare that sense which these words create, according to Soci∣nus, with that which followeth from the premises, and then I will be willing to leave it to the reader to choose. For, is it not a great secret which the Evan∣gelist discovers by these words, in his sense, that, when S. John Baptist began to preach, there was such a man in the world, as he whom God had appointed to publish the Gospel? Is it that which he needed tell them, that knew all before, that there was six moneths between their ages? Or, did it not concern them to know, that the same Word of God, which dealt with the Fathers, which, by and by, he meanes to tell them, was incarnate, the same was from the begin∣ning; that is to say, to the confusion of Arrius, no lesse then of Soci∣nus, from everlasting? Was it not to the purpose, to settle that which Cerinthus undermined, upon the same credit, upon which they were Christians? Proceed we now to that which followes, and we shall finde, that, if we admit Socinus his sense, when S. John saies; The Word was with God, and af∣terwards; The same was in the beginning with God; I say if we admit the sense of these words to be this; That, what time S. John Baptist preached, Jesus was with God in heaven; We shall not give an account of those things which he sayes of himself in the Gospel pertinent to Christianity; Which, according to the sense of the Church, we shall do. John III. 11, 12, 13. Our Saviour saith to Nicodemus; Verily, verily, I say unto thee; We speak that we know, and we witnesse what we have seen, but ye receive not our witnesse. If I have said to you earthly things and ye believe not, how will ye believe if I tell you heavenly? And no man is gone up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Sonne of man that is in heaven. Againe, John V. 19, 20, 30. Our Lord, gi∣ving a reason why he bad the man whom he had cured take up his bed and walk, Answers and sayes to them; Verily verily I say unto you; the sonne can do nothing of himself except he see the Father do something: For, what he doth the same doth likewise the Sonne. For, the Father loveth the Sonne, and showeth him all that he doth: And will shew him greater things then these, that ye may mar∣vaile. And to the same effect, our Lord saith to the Jewes, John VIII. 38. I speake what I have seen with my Father, and therefore ye do what ye have seen with your Father; Or, at your and my Fathers house; . So John VI. 46, 50, 51, 58. 62. Not that any man hath seen the Father, but he that comes from God; He hath seen the Father. And; This is the bread that commeth down from heaven, that a man may eat of it and not dy. I am the living bread that is come down from heaven. And againe; This is the bread that is come down from heaven. And last of all; What, then, if you see the Son of man go up thither where he was before? Finally, when our Lord, now ready to
leave the World, tells his disciples, John XVI. 29. I came forth from my Fa∣ther and came into the World: Againe, I leave the World and go to the father; I demand of all the World that read, and believe by these words, that our Lord going back to the Father, stayes there for everlasting; whether they can under∣stand, when he affirmes in the same form of words, that he came from the Fa∣ther, that he meanes onely, that he had been with the Father since the Baptist began to preach? Or that he had been there from everlasting before? When he saith; What if you see him go up thither where he was before? That he had been there afore while the Baptist was preaching, or that he had been there afore, a while answerable to that while that he shall stay there, after his going hence? When he saith; That they will not believe him when he tells them heavenly things; Because none of them have been in heaven, as the Sonne of man, who, being come from heaven, notwithstanding remaines in heaven; Whether he mean onely; That, having been there in heaven, and learnt the effect of his commission, and, being still there in heart as all Christians are, he can tell them things from heaven which they will not believe? Or, that having been in heaven, and not having forsaken it for his coming into the World, he knowes the truth of all that he witnesses here, by seeing the counsailes of God there; even while he is here? And, that these are those things which he hath seen in his Fathers house; to wit, those counsailes, which the Father out of his love to him▪ had made him acquainted with, and taught him to execute, even as they had learnt in the devils shop, their Father, to execute his designes? For, can any man imagine, that his being onely born of the Virgine by the power of God, (which is, they say, the holy Ghost) is a sufficient reason, why God should not onely shew him what he meant to do for our salvation, but joyne him with himself in the work, and that honour for it, whereof no Angel, that is the high∣est creature is capeable? Or, that all this is such an expression as manhood can bear, of that participation of Gods counsailes, which the Word having been ac∣quainted with from everlasting, was no stranger to, while, being in the World, he was executing the same? Surely, when our Lord sayes, that he is to leave the world, to go back to the Father, he declares an intent to abide in heaven for everlasting. Therefore when he saies; he came forth from the Father to come into the world; To understand onely, that he left the private life he had lived afore he began to preach, to appear publickly to the World in his Office; might justly be accounted a piece of frenzy, if there were not haeresy in it: The opposition between heaven, where the Father is, and the world, being so manifest in the words, that nothing but the vaine glory of maintaining a party could cause it to be overseen. If these things be true, we shall not need to go farre for the sense of our Lords words John XVII. 5. And now glorify thou me, O Father, with that glo∣ry which I had with thee, before the foundation of the World. Because we see how many times in this Gospel, by being with the Father, our Saviour expres∣seth (not his being in heaven when the Baptist began to preach, but) his being in heaven from the beginning of the World, till he was born upon earth. For, can any doubt be made, that the glory which he had with the Father from the be∣ginning, is that which he was to be exalted to at his rising againe? As for that answer of his to the Jews, that demanded of him (having said; Abraham your Fa∣ther desired to see my day, and saw it, and rejoyced) Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? To which Jesus answered and said; Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am; John VIII. 56, 57, 58. I perceive the World is ashamed to hear, what Socinus is not ashamed to answer: That the sense of the words is, and so they ought to be translated, Before Abraham be∣come Abraham: Or, before he become Abraham, I am: Meaning, that, here you see me, before the calling of the Gentiles, whereby the Prophesie of Abra∣hams name Father of a great people, is fulfilled. For the words, ; make, both the name of Abraham, to go before the Verbe in sense, and the verb to signifie the time past,: So that there must have been another  after , as well as this that goes afore, and if there had been so, it
must have been translated, before Abraham was Abraham, or, before he was Abraham; not, before he become Abraham. But for our Lord to say; be∣fore Abraham was, I am; to wit, in the purpose of God; is no lesse imperti∣nent to their question, then to say; I am here before the calling of the Gentiles. And to imagine, that our Lord would give an answer utterly impertinent to their question, I know not how it can stand with his profession; though, not to declare all that truth, which, for the present, they were not able to beare, may well stand with it. CHAP. XIV. The Name of God not ascribed to Christ for the like reason as to creatures. The reasons why the Socinians worship Christ as God do confute their limitati∣ons. Christ not God by virtue of his rising againe. He is the Great God with S. Paul, the true God, with S. John, the onely Lord, with S. Jude. Other Scriptures. Of the forme of God, and of a servant in S. Paul. BUT the Apostle adds still more and goes forwards, saying; And the Word was God: Though here the Socinians thinke they have enough to plead, when they can say, that the name of God which is here used, is not proper to signify God himself, which the name of four letters  so signifyeth in the Old Testa∣ment, that it is never attributed to any creature but by abuse; That is to say, as imployed to expresse the sense of such men as believe not in the true God alone, but attribute his honour to some of his creatures. For it is very well known, and granted on all hands, that the name , which the Greek  here translateth, is attributed first to Gods Angels, then to Gods mi∣nisters in governing his People. The reason whereof I take to be this, that, having entred into covenant with God, to have him for their soveraigne, and to live by his Lawes, they must needs be bound to acknowledge and to honour those who had commission from him, whether immediately or mediately to go∣vern his people by the said Lawes, in stead of God himself; as deputies, Commis∣sioners, or Ambassadors represent the persons of those Soveraigns from whom they come. This, I suppose, is a generall reason why this name of God in the Old Testament, is communicated to the Governours of Gods people, which the Socinians cannot with any reason refuse: Neither can I imagine how it should be more evidently justified then by that of God to Moses, Exod. VII. 1. Behold I have made thee Pharaohs God, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Pro∣phet. For Aaron is made Moses his Prophet, to publish his Orders to Pharah because he was a man of a ready tongue; which Moses was not, Exod. IV. 14, 15, 16. Prophet being no more then Interpreter, or Truchman, as On∣kels translates it. And therefore Moses is called also here Aarons God, be∣cause he was to give the Orders which Aaron was to publish. But Pharaohs, God, as Ruler and Prince over Pharaoh (who was Ruler and Prin of all Egypt) as to those things which God should by him command Pha∣raoh to do. I suppose then, that we cannot come to a more peremptory issue with the Socinians, then by putting to triall, whether this name of God be attributed to our Lord Christ,▪ to signify such a quality as is incompetible to a creature; no that be more peremptorily tried, then by evidencing what is the honour and esteem, which the name of God importeth in our Lord Christ, and in Gods creatures. For, seeing that honour inwardly, is nothing else but the esteem which a reasonable creature beareth in mind of that which it honoureth, outwardly, the signs of that esteem; And, seeing the distance between the na∣ture of God and that of the creature is so unvaluable, that it is impossible, that he who believeth, that there is that which deserveth the name of God,
should ever imagine that there is more then one; It must remaine, no lesse impossible, that, whosoever takes God for God, should ever take any crea∣ture of never so great eminence, for the same. Indeed, that inward honour which I found in the esteem of the minde, is a thing of a finite and moderate nature, whether it represent God or his creature; the understanding in which it is, not being capable of any thing, that is not proportionable to it: Which notwithstanding, nothing hinders a finite conceit, in the mind of a crea∣ture, to represent an infinite perfection in that which it representeth, if any true conceit of God can be found in any of his understanding creatures. It is then manifest, that, (I say not among the Socinians, but) among those who, upon misunderstanding the grounds of Reformation, have fallen away from the most holy Faith of the Church concerning the ever blessed Trinity, there hath fallen a difference whether our Lord Christ is to be worshipped as God or not; Soci∣nus being now in appearance the head of that party which would have it so. And therefore I shall not much need to dispute that, but onely for satisfaction of the reader, repeat some of those texts of Scripture, which they seem to have stopped the mouthes of their adversaries with. For, when the Apostle saith; Heb. I. 6. When he bringeth his onely begotten Sonne into the World, he saith; And let all the Angels of God worship him; Supposeth he not, that men should do that, which Angels by Gods authority do? And our Lord discourses, John V. 22, 23. that God hath given the power of judging to the Sonne; That all may hanour the Sonne as the Father. He that honoureth not the Sonne, honoureth not the Father that sent him. And▪ This is that will of God, the knowledge whereof moves Angels and men to fall down before the Lamb that was slaine, and give him honour and glory, Apoc. V. 8-13. Nor can any Christian deny, that he was worshipped in any other sense or quality, either by the blind man whom he had restored to sight, John IX. 39. or by others, whom we find to be accepted of him, as those who had been well instructed of him and by him in that which they owed him. Luke XVII. 5. Lord increase our Faith. Mar. IX. 24. Lord uphold my unbelief. Mat. XX. 30. Have mercy upon us, O Lord thou Sonne of David. Luke XVII. 13. Jesu Master have mercy upon us. And; Lord save us we perish. Therefore our Lord saith to the Angel of Laodicea, Apoc. III. 18. I advise thee to buy of me gold tried from the fire. For what should he buy it with, but the worship of God by prayers? And the Apostle, Heb. IV. 14, 15. We have not an high Priest that cannot compassionate our in∣firmities, but who was tempted in all things like us without sin. Let us therefore go to the Throne of his grace, that we may obtaine mercy, and find grace for help in time. Againe, S. Paul, Rom. X. 12, 13. The same Lord is rich to all that call on him. For, whos shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. For, that the worship of the onely true God goes with the name of the Lord, ascribed to the Lord Jesus in the New Testament, no question can be made So saith S. Luke, of the first of Martyrs Acts VII. 59, 60. And they stned Stephen praying and saying; Lord Jesu receive my Spirit. And, kneeling he cried with a loud voice, saying, Lord, lay not this sinne to their charge. Every Christian can tell by what he does, whom Stephen calls Lord. And that is enough to shew, how ridiculous they make themselves, who, when S. Stephen, saies, , would have it understood, that he calls upon the Lord of Jesus, not upon the Lord Jesus. For when S. Stephen offers to Christ the same prayer, which Christ had offered to the Father, and David to God, Luke XXIII. 46. Psal. XXXI. 6. Is it not the same honour, whereof God alone is capable? For they that should say, that S. Stephen prayed this, not be∣cause all Christians are to pray so, but because he saw our Lord Christ at the right hand of God; Should make that, which would have been Idolatry other∣wise, to become acceptable service to God, upon an accident depending on the free will of God. And, what else did S. Paul, when he said, 2 Cor. XII. 8, 9. Therefore besought I God thrice, that it might depart from me: But he said to me; My Grace is sufficient for thee: For my power is effectuall through weak∣nesse. Most willingly therefore will I glory in my weaknesse, that the power of
God may dwell in me. And S. John, when he prayes; Come Lord Jesus, Apoc. XXII. 20. prayes to him whose coming he desires, that is, whose strength is effectuall through weaknesse. And whom else prayes S. Paul to when he saies, 1 Thes. III. 11, 12. But God who is our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ prosper our Journey to you. And, 2 Thes. II. 16. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who hath loved us, and given everlasting comfort, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and strengthen you in every good word and work. For there being here no difference between the worship ten∣dered to God and to Christ, I must needs infer, that it is the same which S. Paul signifies, when he intitles his Epistle to all that call upon the name of the common Lord, 1 Cor. I. 2. It is true, they that alledge all these arguments, doe likewise caution, that this worship, and these prayers, which are tendered to God absolutely, are tendered to Christ, with limitation of some certaine circumstances, which be∣ing supposed, it becomes due to Christ, being alwayes due to God. But if the difference between God and his creature be not acknowledged, it is impossible Christianity should stand. If, the difference between the worship due to God and to his creature be not acknowledged, it is impossible the difference between God and his creature should stand; Because worship is nothing else but the ac∣knowledgement of this difference: Therefore, where the worship of God is tendered to his creature, either the creature is made an Idol, or truly supposed to be God. Therefore our Lord argues, that the Father judging no man him∣self, hath given the power of judging to the Sonne; That all may honour the Son as they honour the Father; Because he that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father. John V. 22. 23. To wit, since the setling of Christianity. Whereby we may see how easie it is to answer the objection that is made from the words o S. Peter, Act. II. 36. Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made this Jesus whom ye crucified, Lord and Christ; As if this honour and worship were due to our Lord Christ upon the title of being raised from the dead by God; And so much signified by S. Paul, when he tells the Jews of Pisidia, Act▪ XIII. 33. That God hath fulfilled the promise made to the Fathers, to them and their children, raising up Jesus, as it is written in the second Psalme; Thou art my sonne this day have I begotten thee. For, when the Apostle argues, that Christ is become so much superior to the Angels, as he hath inherited a more excellent name: Because to whom of the Angels was it ever said; Thou art my sonne this day have I be∣gotten thee? Heb. I. 4, 5. It is pretended that, (not the title of Sonne of God, which at present I speak not of, but) the honour and worship due to him that weares it, is due by Gods raising him from the dead, to the estate of sitting at his right hand. Then which nothing can be more unjust. For, as it is truly said by our Lord after his rising againe, Mat. XXVIII. 18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth; So it is no lesse truly said Mat. XI. 27. All things are delivered to me by my Father: Neither knoweth any man the Sonne but the Father, nor knoweth any man the Father but the Sonne, and whomsoever the Son will reveal him to. And therefore not disputing at present, what the power given the Sonne by the Father is, it shall be enough for my pupose, that it is the same which was given him when he rose from the dead; To wit, that which all Christians acknowledge, when they Worship him for God. For, how should any man understand that the man Jesus, by being raised from the dead, by being taken up into heaven to the Throne of God, by any thing that his hu∣mane nature can be indued with, should be worshipped for God, had not this worship been due to him from the time of his being man, as I have shewed you, those who make this objection do acknowledge it to have been due? For, it is our Lords argument, that the Son is to be honoured as the Father, because his Father hath given him the Power of raising the dead to life, and of judging the quick and the dead, John V. 25, 30. even then when he argued with the Jewes. Therefore, when S. Thomas, being satisfied that our Lord was risen from the dead, crys out, my Lord and my God, John XX. 28. There can be no
more cause, to understand any abatement in the notion of God or Lord, then when David, or our Saviour upon the Crosse, cries out, My God my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Psal. XXII. 1. For, if David, or S. Thomas, were such men as believed those to be God which were not, it would be necessary to say, that their God is not absolutely God. But supposing them to ac∣knowledge the true God, we cannot deny him to be the true God, whom they so acknowledge. In the words of S. Paul, Rom. IX. 5. Of whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed for evermore; there is some pretense made, that Erasmus finds not the word God alledged by S. Hillary, and S. Cypriane. And Grotius, I know not upon what mistake, hath said; That it is not in the Syriack: For, he that shall read the Syriack will find it there, as plain as any thing else that is there. And, supposing it not there, he that considereth what the Jews (with whom S. Paul having been bred, never fell from their God) understand by the Blessed, will never understand him to be called any thing lesse then God, that is called blessed for evermore. Now when S. John saith, 1 John V. 20. We are in the true God, in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternall life; When S. Paul saith, Titus II. 13. Expect∣ing the blessed hope and glorious appearance of the great God and our Saviour Je∣sus Christ; When S. Jude saith of the hereticks whom he writeth against; Denying that onely Lord God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, Jude 9. It is stoutly insisted upon by the Socinians, that God and Christ are spoken of here as seve∣rall persons, and so, that these attributes, belonging to God, concern not Christ. And, examples are brought to show, that it is not unusuall, and there∣fore not unreasonable, that, in the words of S. John, This he is the true God, should have reference, not to the Sonne Jesus Christ, mentioned next afore, but, to the true God, which is the Father, mentioned at more distance; That in the words of S. Paul and S. Jude, though the article is not repeated, when they say; ; Yet this does not argue the same Christ to be meant by both titles referred to him by the same article; But is onely a bare want of the article in the second place, of which they give us examples enowe. But all this can prove no more, then that these texts might be so understood, if there were any thing in the words to argue that so they must be understood, which here appeares not. On the other de▪ for the text of S. Jude, if we compare it with S. Peter, who (writes the same things with S. Jude, of the same Hereticks) we shall find, that, in the beginning of the chapter, in stead of the words quoted out of S. Jude, he puts onely, that they deny the Lord, or the Master that bought them: In the end of it, he signifies manifestly that he speakes of Christians that fell away, 2 Pet. II. 1, 20, 21, 22. Whereby it may appear that it is our Lord Christ Jesus whom he calleth the onely Lord or Master, because he re∣deemed us from the State of captives, and therefore that it is the same whom he calleth God. And truly, as I shewed afore, that S. John in his Epistle to the seven Churches in the Revelations, writes against the same hereticks, so can there no question be made, that they are the same, of whom he sayes 1 John II. 22, 23. Who is the liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? This is the Antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Sonne. Whosoever denieth the Son, neither hath the Father; Though we suppose this Epistle to be written to the then Christian Jewes. For, whereas they all pretend to hold God the Father, whom, as Jews originally, they acknowledge; the Apostle argues, that, bring∣ing in another Christ, not the Son of God who made the world, they could not rightly say, that they held God the Father. So that, his argument, being proper against them, demonstrates who they are. And this is the reason of that which went afore; And ye have an unction from the holy one, and know all things. I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no ly is of the truth; And of that which immediately followes; Let that therefore which ye have learned from the beginning remaine in you. If that remaine in you which ye have heard from the beginning, ye also shall remaine in the Sonne and in the Father. For, because they knew what Faith they had im∣braced
when they became Christians, no man need tell them, that they who would not have our Lord Jesus to be the Christ were liars, and the holy Ghost, which good Christians receive upon the hearty profession of Christianity, he justly presumes, will maintaine them in it. This for the text of Saint Jude. But I say further, that the Name of the true God, the great God, the onely God, which all of them attribute to God, is attributed to him in equivalent terms, not onely in those texts of the Old Testament, (when the proper name of God is given to the Angels that spake in the person of God) which I spoke of afore: But also in those, where the name attributes an action of the onely true great God are given to the Messias, which, we agree, is our Lord Jesus. And there∣fore that there can be no cause to bring in unusual figures of speech to expound these texts, for fear they should say that, which is so many times said in the Scriptures. S. Paul Rom. XIV. 10, 11. We shall all stand before the judgement seate of Christ, saith he; For it is written; As I live saith the Lord, unto me shall every knee ow, and every tongue give praise to God. Which, any man may see, is said of God, by his Prophet, Isa. XLV. 23. And therefore I marvaile, it should seem strange, that the same person should be called the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, Titus II. 20. when the appearance there mentioned is not the appearance of the Father, but of Christ, who shall appear judge at the last day, though he have from the Father the glory wherein he shall ap∣pear. Againe, when he saith, 1 Cor. II. 8. Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: It is manifest, that he ascribes unto Christ, the title of the onely true and great God in Psal. XXIV. 7, 8, 9, 10. So the Apostle Heb. I. 10. affirming that to be said of Christ, which we read, Psal. CII. 25, 26, 27. Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thine hands: They shall perish, but thou shalt indure; They all shall wax old as doth a garment: And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall never fail. For, whereas they grant, that the end is of Christ, where he speakes of ending the world at his coming to judgement: But not the begin∣ning, where he speaks of making the world, because there he is called by the proper name of God; I call all the world to witnesse▪ what there is in the words to argue, that he speakes not still of the same person, of whom he began to speak. What will they not do to rack the Scriptures, and force them to say what they never meant, that are not ashamed to advance pretenses, in which there is so little appearance, rather then confesse what all the Church of Christ maintaineth? So, when the Prophet sayes, Mal. III. 3. Behold I send my messenger, and he shall sweepe the way before thee, and suddenly shall the Lord, whom ye seek, come to his Temple: It is so manifest, that he ascribes the title of the onely true God to the Messias▪ that Grotius, who is so much carried away with the Socinians exposition of divers texts in this point, could not for∣bear to say, that the hypostaticall union is signified by this: And therefore it is manifest, what Lordship we are to understand, where Zachary saith to the Baptist his Sonne; Thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his wayes, Luke I. 46. So when the Prophet David saith of the Messias, Psal. CX. 1. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstool: And the Apostle inferreth upon it, Heb. I. 13. To which of the Angels said he ever; Sit thou at my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstoole? He remitts us, for his meaning, to that which he had premised there of Christ. Heb. I. 3. that having merited by himself the cleansing of our sinnes, he sate down on the Throne of Majesty in the highest heavens. And againe, Heb. VIII. 1. We have such an high Priest, as is set down on the right hand of the Throne of Ma∣jesty in the heavens. For, the Majesty of God, being presented in the Scri∣pture, by that which is most glorious upon earth, of a King upon his Throne, as king of heaven and earth, whose commands all the Angels stand about the
Throne ready to execute; To seat our Lord Christ upon the same Throne, is to commit the highest degree of treason against the Majesty of God, by chal∣lenging for him the honour due to God alone, if he be not the same God, on whose behalfe those words challenge it. Ask any Jew, that hath learned God from the Old Testament, what , The Thron of Glory, is, or ra∣ther, what he is that sits on it, and see if he do not refuse our Lord Christ that priviledge, because he must allow him to be the onely true God, if he do not But, why should I be troubled to fit him with the title of the onely true God, wo expressely challenges to be esteemed aequall to God. John V. 21, 22, 23. For, as the Father raiseth and quickneth the dead, so also doth the Sonne quicken whom he please. For neither doth the Father judge any man, but hath given all judgement to the Sonne, that all may honour the Sonne as they honour the Father; He that honoureth not the Sonne honoureth not the Father that sent him. Which is as much as if he had said, he that honoureth not the Sonne as he honoureth the Father; having said afore; That all may honour the Sonne, as they honour the Father. As for that answer of his, John X. 32-36. The Jewes answered him saying; For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because thou being man makest thy self God. Jesus answered them; Is it not written in your Law, I have said ye are Gods? If he called them Gods, to whom the Word▪ of God came, and the Scripture cannot be voided; Tell you him whom the Fa∣ther hath sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Sonne of God? Where, they say, it is manifest, that he challengeth not the title of God properly, but as it is communicated to creatures, as here to the Judges of Israel. It is to be granted, that our Lord here imployes that which S. Chrysostome often calles , that is, good husbandry or sparingesse in his language; Expressing in more reserved terms, that which he intends not to renounce. For, seeing the Jewes ready to stone him for that which they understood by it, no marvaile if he abated his plea without quitting it, arguing from the lesse, if they to whom the Word of God came are called Gods, much more he that is sanctified and sent into the World by the Father, may call him∣self so, and plead this reason too, without disclaiming the property of the title, because of that which immediately followes; If I do not the works of my Fa∣ther believe me not. But if I do them though you believe not me, believe the workes: That ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him. Where, it is plaine, he holds up his claime, by pleading the evidence of it. As for that of S. Paul Phil. II. 6-11. Let the same minde be in you as in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, made it not an occasion of pride, (or, of ad∣vantage) that he was equal with God: But emptied himself, having taken the form of a servant, and become in the likenesse of men: And being found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient to death▪ even the death of the Crosse. Wherefore God also hath overexalted him, and given him the name that is above every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and upon the earth, and under the earth, and every tongue confesse, that J. Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father. Here I admit with Gro∣tius, the speech to be of Christ incarnate, that the man Jesus is said to have emptied himself, and taken the form of a slave, becoming obedient to death. For, this man it is, who, when he so emptied himself, was presently in the form of God, of which he emptied himself, thinking it no occasion of pride (so I allow him to translate it, though some words of Eusebius make me think it more properly translated advantage) that he was qual to God; but, conde∣scending so far to dissemble what he was, as to be crucified. But supposing this, I demand, how came Jesus to be in this forme of God, before he humbled himself, and wherein it consisted? For, if they say, that, in consideration of his undertaking the message of God, (when, being thirty years old, he was taken up to heaven, as they say) he was exalted to it, then can they not say that he was indowed with it from his birth, as being conceived by the H. Ghost. But if as S. Paul saies, he was so, when he emptied himself of it, then it is to be demanded, by virtue of what
he was so; For, by virtue of being conceived by the H. Ghost, and born of a Vir∣gin, according to them, he will no more be so, then the first Adam, being formed of Virgin earth, and the breath of God breathed in him. But if, by virtue of the power and glory of God, that is, of God dwelling in him, according to Grotius, then by virtue of the hypostatical union, which afore, you saw, he confesseth. But the name above every name, at which all things in heaven and earth and under the earth bow, importing the honour that is proper to God, which no man can give to any creature without making it God, though given to the man Jesus, yet signifies, the reason for which it is given to stand in the Godhead, that is communicated to his manhood; And that alwaies due since he was man, though not declared to be due, nor published to the world while he was in it, till he was overexalted to it, upon his rising againe, and the holy Ghost sent to inable his Apostles to preach it. CHAP. XV. Not onely the Church but the World was made by Christ. The Word was made flesh in opposition to the Spirit. How the Prophets, how Christians, by receiving the Word of God, are possessed by his Spirit. How the title of Sonne of God importeth the Godhead. How Christ is the brightnesse and Image of God. THis is the next argument, which the next words of S. John point out to us, when he saith; All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made. Which, because they are peremptory in this cause, so long as they are understood as all Christians have hitherto understood them; (That the World was made by that word of God which, we believe to have been incarnate in our Lord Christ) Socinus hath playd one of his Masteerpeeces upon them, to per∣swade us to believe, that they mean no more, but that our Lord Christ is the Au∣thor of the Gospell, whereby Christians are, as it were, new made, and created a Church; Seeing it is manifest that the Prophets do often describe the delive∣rances and restorings of Gods people, by comparing them to the making of a new World, with a new Sun and Moon and Stars, and all Creatures new. But when rhey do so, it is first understood, that they speak as Prophets, for whom it is proper to express things to come in figurative speeches, because it is not the intent of Gods Spirit, that the particulars signified should be plain afore∣hand, that the dependance of Gods people upon him and his word may be free▪ Then, by the consequence of the Prophesies, compared with the events, argument enough is to be had, that these speeches are not properly but figuratively meant. As for example, when the Prophet Esay saith; Behold I make a new Heaven and a new Earth; In that very addition, of new, there is argument e∣nough to conclude, that he speaks by a propheticall figure, which if a man read on, he shall find still more to conclude. But had he sayd; Behold I make Hea∣ven and Earth; Either we must understand make, for have made, or that he means to make indeed such as these are: And that, supposing these destroyed; In asmuch as, these abiding, those that might be made, could not be called Heaven and Earth, but a Heaven, and an Earth. Now, in these words, there is no∣thing added to intimate any abatement in the proper signification of all things: And therefore S. John, speaking in such terms, as he that writeth dogmatically would be thought so to use, as not to be mistaken, must needs be understood to mean, that the World was made at first by Gods word, which, by and by he will tell us that it was incarnate. Especially, that we may not make him to spend words to tell Christians such a secret as this; That Christ is the first Au∣thor of the Gospel, and Founder of his Church, which they that believe not might know by seeing Christians spring from his Doctrine. Neither is that
which followes any thing less clear; He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not. Though Socinus hath used his skill to darken it with a strange devise of three senses of this one word World, in this one sentence; which he conceives will be an elegant expression, if we under∣stand the World, when it is sayd, He was in the World, to signifie his new peo∣ple: when it is sayd; The World was made by him; The Church, that is, all Christians: When it is sayd; The World knew him not; the unbelievers. And truly I believe, most Languages will justifie, the people among whom a man lives, to be called the World. The ordinary French sayes; Il y a beaucoup de monde dns ceste ville. There is a great deal of World in this Town; word for word: But that, in the two clauses following, the World should stand, first for Believers, then for unbelievers; is such a figure, without any thing added to give occasion so to understand it, as nothing can be added to make it passable, though something might be added to make it to be understood. Besides, consi∣der what followes; He came to his own, and his own received him not. For, are the Jewes his own people onely because he was of that people? Are the Jewes no otherwise his own then the English may be called mine own, because being English, I bring that which here I have written to the English? Surely S. John meant to aggravate their fault more, then by charging them to have refused a Countryman of their own: To wit, him that had made them, and whose they were upon that score. Consider what went before; This is that true Light that lighteth every man that comes into the World. For, unless we understand this to be every man that comes into the Church (which will be to deny that Christ gives any light to unbelievers, at least to be signified by these words, and to make them import no more then the same great secret, that Christ is the Author of Christians) we must understand by it, (as the truth requires it to be understood) That our Lord came into the world because he came to live a∣mong that people, called the world, by that most ordinary figure of speech, that is called ; That the World so properly called (and therefore all that it containeth, that is, the World  so called, to wit that peo∣ple) was made by him; and that neverthelesse, this world, being the body of that people, knew him not, that is owned him not being his own, as all people are whom he enlightneth. And what meanes the Apostle when he saies of the Sonne Heb. I. 2, 3. Whom he made heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds. And; Who beareth or moveth all things with his powerfull word. For, if any man attempt to apply the same salve to this wound also, what will he have these worlds to be, but those of which he saith againe, Heb. XI. 5. By faith we understand that the worlds were made by the Word of God: To wit, the world of invisible things, and this visible world, which, by the Jewes writings we understand, that their ancestors were wont co call this world, and the world to come, because they ex∣pected to live in it after this; Whereupon the same Apostle saith againe, Heb. II. 5. For he hath not subjected the world to come to Angels; meaning the in∣visible world of Angels, which to us is to come. As for that which follow∣eth, whether he sustaine or whether he move all things by his word, seeing it is his word that does it, the same is Gods Word that made all things, called his word also, because incarnate. And what is it lesse for him to move all things, then that which S. Paul saith of God, Acts XVII. 28. that in him we live move and have our being? And S. Paul Col. I. 16. For in him (or rather through him) were all things created that are in heaven▪ and that are on earth, visible things and invisible, whe∣ther dominions, or magistrates, or powers, all things were created by him and to him. For what hath Christ done for the angels, that he should be said to have made them? suppose the redemption and reconcilement of mankinde make a new world with us, is the reconciling of the Angel to us by reconciling of us to himself, the making of them, as it is the new making of us? Is the making of him head of them the making of them? If it be, it is not he that made them, seeing it is the Father that made him head of them. But what shall become of
all visible things, besides man, which are said here to have been created by Christ, and cannot be made anew? Therefore, it is the whole world that S. Paul meanes was first made, not men and Angels that he meanes were restored by Christ. And when he saies they were made by him and to him, that is, for him, he barres that snare, which some put upon the Apostles words, when he saies, By whom also he made the worlds; To wit, that he meanes, for him he made the worlds; according to a common saying among the Jews, which they think he points at; That the world was made for the Messias. I see that  signifies sometimes , both serving to signify a meane, which belongs still to the ef∣fective cause. As when it is said that all things subsist , Apoc. IV. 11. that the martyres overcome , Apoc. XII. 11. that the false Prophet deceives, , Apoc. XIII. 14. It is all one whether we understand, For the will of God; For the blood of the Lamb, and the word which they witnesse; For the signes which were granted him to do; Or, by and through the same: because both import a mean effective cause. But that  should signify  for the final cause, is that which no Greek will indure. And in this place, S. Paul, having said that all things were made , through him, and to him, that is, for him; Leaves no room to understand any thing else by these words. But there is a further reason in the case, and theme which S. Paul speaks to, whereby it is evident, that he challengeth the making of all things to Christ, because he challengeth to him that worship, which the Hereticks, whom he writes against, tendred to Angels, as those by whom the World was made; Which, I shewed before, was the doctrine of Simon Magus and Cerin∣thus, both in the Apostles times, and inferreth the abstinence from Gods crea∣tures, as proceeding from another principle, from which also Moses Law came according to their doctrine; the observation whereof they therefore pressed, not as Moses had delivered it, but as it was revealed to them by the said An∣gels; from whom, Tertulliane saith, they pretended to have received those do∣ctrines, which they imposed upon the Collossians, though according to the Law of Moses. And this is the ground of those things which S. Paul dis∣courses, as well against legall observations, as against the worship of angels, Col. II. 16.—which, if you will survay what Crotius hath noted upon that place, and upon 1 Tim. IV. 1-5. you shall finde to be directly opposed to the doctrines of those Heresies, which had their beginning even during the Apo∣stles times. So that, the reason why he saith, that They hold not the head, from whom the whole body, furnished and compacted by joints and bands, groweth the growth of God, Col. II. 19. is because they would not have the Angels and the World to be his work, which therefore S. Paul must be understood to oppose. And truly when they grant, the passage of the Psalme noted by the Apostle, and repeated before, Heb. I. 10. Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foun∣dation of the earth—to belong to Christ, where it speaketh of changing the world, but to God, where it speakes of making the world; (there being no difference imaginable, between the making and the changing of it) what reason can be imagined, why all, and the proper name of God with all, should not be said of Christ? Thus much at least, our Lord not onely sayes but argues, John V. 19 That God hath given him such workes to do as himself doth, (to raise the dead, for example, and to judge both quick and dead) that all men might ho∣nour him, as they do the Father; which is neither more nor lesse, then, to esteem him neither more nor lesse. And in the place afore named, resuming and re∣inferring his claime of being equall to God, which, to divert the fury of the Jewes, he had seemed a little to wave, John X. 37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father believe me not▪ but if I do them, though ye believe not me, believe the workes; That you may know that my Father is in me and I in him. Where you may see that, by the miracles, which our Saviour shewed them, having obliged them to believe that he was a Prophet come from God, and by consequence that whatsoever he came to teach them is true; By the works which he fore∣told, of his sitting down at the right hand of God, sending the H. Ghost, calling
the Gentiles, raising the dead, and judging both quick and dead, he obligeth those that believe him to be Christ, to believe him to be God, being such things as none but God can do. Now when S. John saies further; And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us; And we saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten son of God, full of grace and truth; It is not to be denied, that the name of flesh intimateh the weak∣nesse of that meane estate, in the which it pleased Christ to come: But that implying this, it should not expresse his being man, is a thing which the bare name of flesh will not indure; The people of God onely being acquainted with spirituall and invisible substances, in opposition to which, man being call∣ed flesh, (or, flesh and blood) the weaknesse of his nature must, by consequence be implied, the nature it self being directly understood and expressed. Wherefore when the Apostle saith John IV. 2, 3. Every Spirit that acknowledgeth Jesus who is come in the flesh, to be Christ, is of God. And every spirit that acknow∣ledgeth not Jesus Christ that is come in the flesh, to be Christ, is not of God; It is manifest, that he speakes of those heresies, which would have the Christ to be something else then the man Jesus, belonging to the fullnesse of the Godhead, whether it came upon the man Jesus to leave him againe (according to Cerin∣thus, during the time of the Apostles, and Valentine, and others afterwards) or, whether it never appeared in the person of a man in the World: For, I have made it manifest before, that these were the Doctrines, of those Haeresies, wher∣of he gives them warning. Besides, we must here recall all the reasons that have been used, to shew, that S. John in the premises, speaks of the state of the Word before the birth of our Lord, and not before his appearing to Preach: By which it will appear, that we shall not need to dispute with Socinus, a∣bout the signification of the word , whether it may at any time, or whether here it may, or must signifie was, or became: The consequence of the Text necessarily inferring, that, when S. John sayes, ; his meaning is not, that this Word was a mean man, but, that the Word became man, which it was not afore. And therefore, for S. Johns meaning, we must look to the opposition between the Flesh and the Spirit, so often expressed and sig∣nified to be in our Lord Christ, by the Apostles. S. Paul speaking of the Fa∣thers, Rom. IX. 5. Of whom, sayth he, is Christ according to the flesh, who is God blessed for evermore: Intimating that he is another way according to the Spirit. That way he expresseth, Rom. I. 3. saying that Christ who came of the Seed of David according to the flesh, is declaed, (or as the Syriack translates it, known to he) the Son of God according to the Spirit of Holinesse, by rising from the dead. Whereupon another Apostle sayes, 1 Pet. III. 18. that he was put to death in the flesh, but quickned in or by the Spirit. Or as S Paul again, 2 Cor. XIII. 4. Cru∣cified out of weakness, but alive out of the power of God. For in all these spee∣ches, as the flesh, and the weakness thereof signifies the manhood, so the Spirit the Godhead. For, in the Gospells, sometimes he professeth to do miracles, and cast out Devils by the power of God; sometimes by the Holy Ghost, Mar. VI. 5. IX. 39. Luke IV. 36. V. 17. VI. 19. Where we hear what the Sinne against the Holy Ghost in the Gospell is; Namely, for those that stood so plentifully con∣vict, that these works were done by the power of God in him; to say, that they were done by the Prince of Devils. For, vvhen the Baptist sayth, John III. 34. He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: For God giveth him not the Spirit by measure; He maketh the difference plain enough, between the fulness of the Spirit dwelling in Christ (vvhich is the Godhead of the Word incarnate, never to be parted from the Manhood of Christ) and, that mea∣sure of it by vvhich the Prophets spake, for the time that they vvere inspired. As S. Paul sayes of the Church, that grace is given it, according to the measure of Christs gift, Ephes. IV. 7. Wherefore the Apostle, having observed afore, that Melchisedeck is called a Priest, not according to the commandment of a carnall Law, but according to the virtue of indissoluble Life, Heb. VII. 16., thus proceed∣eth Heb. IX. 13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkled, sanctify the polluted to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall
the blood of Christ, who, through the everlasting spirit offered himself to God blame∣lesse, cleanse our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? For, though the Soul of Christ raised from the dead have immortality, which is life indissolu∣able, yet it hath not the virtue of it, which is to be ascribed to the Spirit, which raised him from the dead as vvell as us▪ according to S. Paul, Rom. VIII. 10. 11. If Christ be in you, though the body be dead, because of sin, yet the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised Iesus from the dead shall quicken your mortall bodies also, through his Spirit that dwelleth in you. And whether the cleansing of sin can be ascribed to any gift bestowed upon the humane Soule of Christ, as here they vvould have it ascribed to the immortality thereof, let all the World judge. I deny not indeed, that Christ offers the Sacrifice of himself to the Father, in the Heaven of Heavens, as the Priest offered him the blood of those Sacrifices which were burnt without the Camp, in that Holy of Ho∣lies: But, if I should deny, that he offered himself to God vvhen he vvas cru∣cified, I might as vvell deny that the Priests offered therein Sacrifices to God, when they killed them at the Altar, and burnt them upon it. So manifest, so certain it is, that the eternall Spirit, by virtue whereof the blood of Christ, being offered, cleanseth sin, was in Christ before his rising again. And this is that which S. Paul saith, 1 Tim. III. 16. And without crontroversie, Great is the mystery of Godliness; God was manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, preached to the Gentiles, seen of Angels, believed of the World, taken up into Glory. It is sayd indeed, that the Syriack, the Vulgar Latine the Arabick, and the Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name, all want  here, and understand S. Paul to speak of the Gospel all the while; And that, the Gospel being sayd to be preached, before it is sayd to be taken up into Glory,  must be no more, then, that it is ex∣alted and glorified. As if the order of the words did inforce, that which is first sayd to have been first done, or as if , or  did not sig∣nifie the taking of him up to God, but the making of the Gospel famous. Such violence will a prejudicate supposition offer even to Gods words, rather then to quit an argument. For, to what sense can the Gospel be sayd to be manife∣sted in the flesh, because preached by the man Christ? And, suppose it may be sayd to be justified by the Spirit, (as Wisdome is justified by the Children of Wis∣dome, Mat. XI. 9. Luke VII. 35.) how much more proper is it to understand, that God, who appeared in the flesh, should be sayd to be justified, so to be, in or by the Spirit, the Works whereof shewed him so to be, as afore? Neither shall we need to make any greater doubt of the reading of those vvords of S. Paul, Acts XX. 28. Look therefore to your selves, and to the whole Flock, ever which the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he hath gotten with his blood. Though the written Copy at S. James, and the Sy∣riack read here , instead of : Because, that the Church over which the Holy Ghost makes Bishops, it bought with the blood of Christ, is the same with that of the Apostle afore, that the blood of Christ; offered by the eternall Spirit, cleanseth sin. Neither is it so easie to avoyd the words of the Apostle▪ Heb. XI. 16. as some imagine, For he took not Angels, but the Seed of Abraham he took. Suppose  be to challenge, which is done by laying hands on that which we challenge: Is the ground therefore void, upon which he challenges these to life as his own, that through feare of death were in bondage? does not the whole Epistle argue, that this is done by the offering of our flesh? saith he not expresly, that it behoved him to become like his Brethren in all things, and that he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, because he that sanctifieth, and those who are sanctified are all of one. Heb. XI. 11. 14. 17. does Christ vindicate man∣kind, or the Seed of Abraham? For, though this is written to the Hebrews a∣lone, yet it was written at such time as all christians understood, that it belongs no less to the Gentiles. Wherfore it is manifest that the word , (wch might seem to signifie, Christs challenging mankind, or vindicating them into freedome from death, as well here, as elswhere) is restrained by the Text and
consequence of the Apostles discourse, to signifie the assuming of mans nature, by the means whereof, he won mankind into freedome, and maintains it in the same. In fine, when the Apostle sayth, 1 Pet. I. 11. That the ancient Prophets did search, against what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ that was in them did declare and profess the sufferings to come upon Christ, and the glories fol∣lowing the same; He sheweth plainly, that the same Spirit, by which they spake by fits, dwelt in the flesh of Christ for ever, having once assumed it: Of which Spirit the Evangelist sayth, Marke XI. 8. That Jesus knew by the Spirit how the Pharises reasoned of him within themselves. For, as I sayd afore, that when it is sayd in the Old Testament, that the word of God came to this or that Prophet, an Angel appeared unto him, speaking in the person of God, vvho vvas therefore vvorshiped as God, because the Word of God (for vvhich be∣ing incarnate, our Lord Jesus is for ever to be Worshiped as God) vvas in that Angel at the present for that Service; So I must further note here, that, upon such Word of God coming to a Prophet, he became inspired, that is possessed, and acted by the Spirit of God, for the time of that Service, vvhich God, by such a message imployed him about. Not that all Prophets did receive such Word, by such message from God, before they spake those things, which, we believe still they spake by the Spirit of God. For, there is a great deal of ap∣pearance in the Scripture, for that which the Jewes doctors deliver unto us, Abarbanel by name, (alleging Maimoni for his saying) upon Numb. XI. that there are inferior degrees of Prophesie, which comes not by apparitions, in which a man saw one that spake to him in Gods Name; but sometimes meerly by inspiration of Gods Spirit, inwardly moving either to act, or to speak as God moved. So it is often said, that the Spirit of God came upon, passed upon, invested either Judges or Prophets, Judg. III. 10. XI. 29. XIV. 6, 19. 1 Sam. X. 6, 10. Judg. VI. 34. 1 Chron. XII. 18. XXIV. 20. whereupon, it is to be acknowledged that those Judges were also Prophets, from Joshua the successor of Moses, to whom that promise of God Deut. XVIII. 18.—seems to belong in the first place. Nor is it therefore requisite, that I dispute here, by what meanes, these Prophets were all assured, that it was Gods Spirit, not an evil Spirit which moved them either to act or speak; Much lesse, how they were inabled to assure others of it. Thus much we see in the case of Balaam (who by sacrifices to devils hoped to obtaine of them a commission to curse Gods people) that when he went to meet his familiars to that purpose, and was met with by God, he knew God so well, and his message, that he durst not but do it. I shewed you afore, that those Angels, by whom God spake to the Prophets in the Old Testament, did not alwaies speak in the person of God; and, that in the New Testament the Word of God, having once assumed the flesh of Christ though we read of divers apparitions of Angels, yet we never read that the Angel who speakes in Gods Name is called God, or honoured as God. As for those Prophets which we read of in the Churches under the Apostles, 1 Cor. XII. 10, 28, 29. XIV. 29, 32, 37. Ephes. III. 5. IV. 11. as it is necessary to understand, that their Graces were inferior to the Graces of the Apostles, that it may be true which S. Paul saith, 1 Cor. XIV. 32. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; So can there be no reason to doubt, that they were of that inferior sort of Prophets that spake by the meer inspiration of Gods Spirit, without aparition of any Angel speaking to them, either asleep or awake, either in the name onely, or further in the person also of God. When therefore the Angel Gabriel appeared to the blessed Virgine, saying; Luke II. 35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the most high shall oversha∣dow thee; And therefore, the holy thing that is born, shall be called the Sonne of God. We are to understand that the holy Ghost (who upon the Word of God delivered to a Prophet, possessed his soul for a time, till he had de∣livered Gods Word to them to whom it was sent) upon this message posses∣sing the flesh of the blessed Virgine, made it a tabernacle for the Word of God alwayes to dwell in, in which Word, the Spirit of God alwaies dwelt:
For so the difference holds between our Lord Christ, in whom dwells the fullnesse of his Spirit, and his servants, that have each of them his measure of it, If we understand the word incarnate to have in it resident the power of Gods Spirit, by which our Lord Christ proved himself the sonne of God; (in particular, as S. Paul saith, by rising from the dead, by the Spirit of holynesse) But the servants of God, to whom this word came, to be possessed and acted by the same Spirit onely, while they were charged with the Word of God, that is with their message. Neither seems it more difficult to understand how Chri∣stians are possessed of Gods Spirit by the generall Promise of the Covenant of Grace, when the assistance of God is, by Gods appointment, assured them to all such purposes, as the common profession of Christianity re∣quires. This is the reason of the alliance which the Scriptures expresse, between the Word and Spirit of God in our Lord Christ; in regard whereof, I have thought requisite to referre those Scriptures which speak of the Spirit of God in our Lord Christ, to the grace of union, rather then to the grace of unction, as the Schoole distinguisheth; that is to say, rather to the Godhead of the Word dwelling in the flesh of Christ, (containing alwayes and implying the Spirit) then to those graces parted out upon his soule which I neither doubt of, nor that they are expressed in diverse passages of the Scriptures. And this is the rea∣son why the very name of the Spirit is attributed to the word incarnate, in divers passages of the most ancient Church-Writers, which Grotius hath carefully col∣lected, upon the foresaid text of Marke II. 8. And the position of Cerinthus is very remarkable, that, our Lord Jesus Christ being born as other men of Jo∣seph and Mary, at his baptisme, the holy Ghost (that is Christ) saith he, came down upon him, in the shape of a dove, revealing the unknown Father to him and to his followers, and that by this his Power, coming upon him from above, he did miracles. And that when he had suffered, that which came from above flew up againe from Jesus. So that Jesus suffered and rose againe, but Christ that came upon him from above, which is that which came down in the shape of a dove, flew up againe without suffering: So that Jesus is not Christ. For, hereby, as it is manifest, that they hold with the Church, that Christ is God (as∣suring us thereby that it was the originall faith of the Church) so they shew that the overshadowing of the blessed Virgine by the holy Ghost imports the incarnation of the Godhead, to them who believe it, as the coming down of the holy Ghost at the Baptisme, imports the dwelling of Gods Spirit in Christ till his suffering, to Cerinthus. And the same Epiphanius, telling us of the Ebi∣onites, that sometimes they contradict themselves; Otherwhiles, saith he, they say otherwise; that the Spirit of God, which is Christ, came upon, and invested the man that is called Jesus. I will give you here, if you please, that which goes before in Epiphanius: Some of them say, saith he, that Christ is that Adam, that was framed first, and inspired with the breath of God. Others of them say, that he is from above, and was made before all things, being a Spirit, (or the Spirit) and above the Angels, and ruleth all things, and that he is cal∣led Christ, and hath inherited that world, and cometh hither when he pleaseth: As he came in Adam, and appeared to the Patriarchs, putting on a body, com∣ing to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The same say he came these last dayes, putting on the same body of Adam, and appeared a man, and was crucified, and rose, and ascended againe. Here you see, that, borrowing from the Scriptures the cor∣respondence between the first and the second Adam, they force upon it their own fable, that both was one. You see also by the same reason, that, their relati∣on of Christs appearing to the Patriarches, (as in our flesh afterwards) though corrupted by them, is neverthelesse borrowed from the Tradition the Church. In fine you see, that the rule of all things, the inheritance of the world, and the principality of Angels, and the Spirit that is called Christ, here mentioned, argues, that the faith of the Church, which they corrupted by denying these attributes to the man Jesus, attributed the same things,
to him, which, they denying, were therefore excluded out of the Church. When S. John proceedeth, saying; We saw his glory as the glory of the onely begotten Sonne of God; he refers to that which went afore; he dwelt among us. Now, seeing it is so ordinary for the Jewes, to call the majesty of God dwell∣ing among men , which is the very word that S. John uses, ; we are obliged thereby to understand, that, the majesty of God dwelling a∣mong us in the tabernacle of Christs flesh bodily, (as figuratively it had done in the Tabernacle or Temple of the Jews) declared it self, notwithstanding, by those glorious works which it wrought in his flesh, to be what it was. For the title of Sonne of God is given in the Old Testament to the Angels first, and to the Messias, when David saith, Ps. LXXXIX. 18. I will make him my first born, high∣er then the Kings of the earth. Whereby it is evident, that this title in the Li∣terall sense belonged first to David: Of whom also, he that will maintaine the difference between the literall and the Spirituall sense upon that ground which I setled before, must maintaine those words of David, Psal. II. 7. Thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee; To be said. Now I suppose, that those who expected the Messias to come as a temporall Prince, to deliver the people of Israel from the yoke of their oppressors, into the free use of that Law which they had received from God, (as did not onely the rest of the world when Christ came but even his own disciples, before his rising againe) could by no meanes be informed of that Spirituall kingdome, which, by the dwelling of the Word in our flesh, was intended to be raised. Which if it be true, though they called the Messiah the Sonne of God, as well as the Sonne of David, yet is it impossible that they should conceive the same ground for which he is so called, and by consequence, understand the title in the same sense, as we do. And this differ∣ence of signification is necessary, even in the understanding of the Gospel. For when the Centurion saith, at our Lords death; Mark XV. 39. Of a truth this man was the Sonne of God; It is not reasonable to imagine, that he who dream∣ed not at all of his rising againe, but was a meer heathen, should call him the Sonne of God in that sense which we believe: But either as Heathenisme al∣lowed Sonnes of the Gods, as some thinke; or as, by conversing with the Jews, they had understood them to hold the Messias whom they expected to be the Sonne of God, as Prince raised by God. What shall we say then of the Apo∣stles demand; Ʋnto which of the angels said he at any time; Thou art my Sonne this day have I begotten thee? When we find the title of Sonnes of God, in the Old Testament, attributed to Angels, Surely it is necessary to have recourse to that sense, in the which it was then known, that Christians attributed this title to our Lord; Still known by the honour, which then and now the Church tendereth him according to it. For, what will all that Socinus acknowledgeth availe to make good the Apostles assumption, when he saies that our Lord is the Sonne of God, because conceived without man by the holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgine? Is this any more then Adam may challenge, for which he is called the Sonne of God, Luke III. 38? For the effective cause entereth not into the nature of that which it produceth: Neither importeth it any thing, to the state of our Lord, that he was conceived of the holy Ghost, if we suppose nothing in him but a soul and a body, which those that are born of man and woman have. How then is the title of the Sonne of God, incompetible to the Angels, which Adam thus farre challenges? If you look back upon the premises, there remaines no doubt, nor any way to escape it otherwise. The holy Ghost overshadowing the blessed Virgine, not onely workes the concep∣tion of a Sonne, but dwells for ever according to the fullnesse of the Godhead, in the manhood so conceived, as, by the nature of the Godhead, planted in the Word, which then came to dwell in the manhood so conceived. Therefore that holy thing, which is borne of the Virgine, being called the Sonne of God, is made so much above the Angels, as the esteem which this name imports is above any thing that is attributed to them in the Scriptures. Therefore is this Sonne of God honoured as God during his being upon earth, by them that were
instructed to understand the effect of it, though, they that were not disciples, but took it onely for a title of the Messias, which they knew he pretended to be, perhaps conceived not so much by it. Therefore, our Lord himself poses the Pharisees, how they would have David to understand the Messias to be his Lord, whom they knew to be his Sonne, Mat. XXII. 42, 45. Mark▪ XII. 35, 37. Luke XX. 41, 44. This is then that which S. Paul saith, Col. I. 19. For in him it pleased God that all the fullnesse should dwell. And Col. II. 9. 10. For in him dwelleth all the fullnesse of the Godhead bodily. And, Ye are filled through him. Speaking of Christ. I shewed you before, that the heresies of that time, some whereof it is manifest, were then seducing the Colossians, did all agree in preaching God the Father of all things to be unknown, together with all that belonged to the compleating of the Godhead, till they made him known. And all this contri∣ved by the devil to subvert the Faith of Christ, by counterfeiting something like it in sound, like false coyne, to cozen the simple with. Whereas therefore S. Paul here saith, that the fullnesse of the Godhead dwelleth bodily in Christ; And our Lord so often in S. Johns Gospel, that the Father dwelleth in him, and he in the Father; And the fullnesse of the holy Ghost dwelleth in the Word incar∣nate, as I shewed even now; It is manifest that they laboured to introduce a counterfeit Fullnesse of the Godhead, of their own devising, into that esteem and worship, which the fullnesse of the Godhead contained in the Father Sonne and holy Ghost preached by our Lord Christ, and his Apostles, challengeth. And therefore that, the fullnesse of the Godhead challenged by S. Paul to dwell in the flesh of Christ, must stand in opposition to that fullnesse which these sects worshipped; Being challenged by S. Paul, as vindicating the Christian Faith from that corruption wherewith these Sects pretended to adulterate it: And being challenged by those Sects, (in opposition to S. Paul and the Christian Faith which he vindicateth) to rest in those whom they severally preached, not in the Sonne and holy Ghost together with the Father, as he maintaineth. For, when the fullnesse of the Godhead is said to dwell bodily in the Sonne, it is to be understood, that the holy Ghost also dwells in him without measure which with the Father makes up that fullnesse that S. Paul understands, in op∣position to those which the heresies preached. For, as it is plaine that the Valentinians worshipped their thirty Aeones or, intellectual worlds, so it is certain, that the rest of their Sects worshipped that fullnesse which they preach∣ed. Nay those that held the world to be made by Angels, that fell away from the fullnesse, worshipped also those Angels, (which the Christians call devils) as the heathen did, and all Magicians do, as all ages witnesse. This also is the reason why S. Paul saith further, that the fullnesse of the Godhead dwelleth in Christ bodily; because in the Temple, and Sanctuary, and Ark of the Covenant and Sacrifices and Ceremonies of that people (all pledges of Gods presence) it is certaine to Christians, that the fullnesse of the Godhead dwelt, as the body in the shadow, equally correspondent to it. For so, I shewed you afore, that the ark of the Covenant, which in the XXIV. Psalme is called the Lord of glo∣ry, is by the Apostle said to be our Lord Christ. But, this reason is imployed by S. Paul to make opposition against them, who pretended the Law to be gi∣ven by those Angels, the worship of whom, together with the observation of the Law, (or at least of such precepts thereof as they might pretend the said Angels to have revealed to them) they undertook to revive, that, by this coun∣terfeit Christianity, they might avoid that persecution which the Jewes, out of their zeal for the Law, brought upon true Christians. For if it were the ful∣nesse of the Godhead which dwelt figuratively in the ark of the Covenant, as now bodily in the flesh of Christ; then were not those Angels authors of the Law, nor the observations thereof to be renewed together with the worship of those Angels. And therefore it is not to be omitted, that when S. Paul addes; And ye are filled through him, who is the head of all principality and power: Through whom ye are also circumcised with that circumcision which is done with∣out hands, by putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, through the circumcision
of Christ; He withdraweth them from the observations of the Law, by declaring, that the intent of them is fulfilled in good Christians, from the fullnesse of the Spirit, that is of the Godhead, that dwelt in Christ. Which is that which S. John intendeth when he saith; That we saw his glory, as of the onely begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth; That is to say; Of that grace which contained the truth of those figures and shadows: As it followeth by and by; Of his ful∣nesse we all have received and grace for grace: Because the Law was given by Moses, but grace and peace came by Jesus Christ. For, the Grace of the Gos∣pel of Christ, as it comes in stead of the grace of Moses Law, and both from the fullnesse of Christ, which, as I said afore, was resident for the time, in that Angel that delivered the Law to Moses in Gods Name. In fine▪ so manifest are those words, that Grotius himself (who otherwise in expounding this Epistle hath warped to the Socinians) could not forbear to avow, the bodily dwelling of the fullnesse of the Godhead in Christ, to signify that, which the Church calls the hypostaticall union of the natures. Here I argue, that, when S. Paul saith, Phil. II. 6, 7. that our Lord being in the form of God, emptied himself ta∣king the form of a slave; this emptinesse, which he took, is directly opposed by S. Paul to that fullnesse of the Godhead which he had, and dissembled, by the emptinesse of that state which he assumed. For here it is much to be observed, that as S. Paul affirmeth, the fullnesse of the Godhead to dwell bodily in Christ, because the holy Ghost is understood alwayes to be resident in the Word incarnate; So by the same reason, the Fa∣ther also is contained in the Sonne, as the Sonne in the Father likewise: God the Father being so called in the New Testament (where the Sonne is revealed) in respect of the Sonne who revealed it, and whom it revealeth. And that in opposition to that fullness, from which, each of the aforesaid Sects pretended the Revelation of the Father, otherwise unknown. It is not therefore to be doubted, that our Lord, when he saies, as many times in the Gospel he does, John X 38. For my works sake believe, that the Father is in me and I in him. XIV. 7-11. If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also: And henceforth ye know him and have seen him. Philip saith unto him, Lord shew us the Father and it shall suffice us. Jesus saith to him; So long am I with you, and knowest thou not me? Philip, he that hath seen me hath seen the Father, and how sayest thou, shew us the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me? the words that I speak to you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that abideth in me, he doth the works. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. If not: believe me for the very works sake; I say it must not, it cannot be doubted that our Lord meanes by these words; not that he said nothing, did nothing, but by commission from God, which every Prophet could say, so farre as a Prophet; And, the Jews need not to have ta∣ken up stones to throw at him, when he said, John X. 10. I and the Father are one; had he meant no more, but, that it was his Fathers will which he decla∣red: But, of necessity, these sayings must import, that as the Word containeth the Holy Ghost, and is contained in it; So is the Son contained in the Father, and the Father in the Son who revealeth him; as the Gnosticks hereupon took occasion to pretend, that the unknown Father was contained in that Fulness, by which the severall Sects of them pretended that he was made known. And therefore, when S. John saith; That the glory of our Lord was seen to be the glory of the onely begotten Son of God; though it be granted, that the title of onely begotten implyeth and insinuateth by way of elegancy dearly beloved, because every onely Son is so, (as you may see it shewd by testi∣monies both of the Scripturs and other writers in Grotius) yet if this be the rea∣son of that elegance in the word, the ground of it therefore cannot be denied; And so the question will have recourse, why the only begotten Son; and, if not because conceived by the Holy Ghost, then, because in him dwelleth bodily the fulness of the Godhead. To which sense, the words of the Apostle John I. 18. are very pertinent; No man hath seen God at any time: The onely begot∣ten Son that is in the bosome of the Father he hath declared him. Hear Irenaeus
II. 7. Irrationale est autem & impium adinvenire locum in quo cessat & finem habet qui est secundum eas Propater & Proarche, & omnium Pater, & hujus Pleromatis. Nc rursus in sinu Patris alterum quendam dicere tantam fabricasse creationem fas est, vel consentiente vel non consentiente. Now it is unreasona∣ble and impious to imagine any place, in which their Forefather and Forebegin∣ning, the Father of all, and of this Fulness, ceaseth and endeth. Nor is it lawfull again to say, that any other in the bosome of the Father, made this great creati∣on, either with his consent or without it. For here you see, that the Gnosticks faigning, some Principle besides the Father, but resident in his bosome, to have made the World, are reproved by Irenaeus for adulterating the Christian Faith, which, maintaining the Son to be in the bosome of the Father, signified him to be no stranger to the Father but, of his own nature. Whereby we see further, what S. John means, when he sayes, that the Word was in the beginning with God, and came into the World from thence. In fine, when S. John attributes to our Lord the title of onely begotten, of the light, and the truth (which, he that reads Irneus will see, that the Gnosticks made severall persons, constituting that Fulness, which severall Sects of them did imagine) it must be concluded, that ey, finding these titles attributed by the Christians to our Lord, did, by attributing them to severall persons, of whom the severall Sects of them fra∣med their severall Fulnesses, adulterate Christianity: And that he, finding them so doing, vindicates it to the be true sense, by fixing the said titles, and the Godhead which they import upon our Lord Christ, where they are due. Here I alledge the words of the Apostle Heb. I, 3. concerning Christ; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the Character of his substance, and sustaining, or moving all things; as it follows in those words which have been already exami∣ned. Which words the Socinians think they avoid fairely, by saying, that; As the words of men are all Images of their minds, so the man Jesus, being to signifie, that is, to resemble the counsell of God to mankind, is called the i∣mage of God, as I sayd afore, that he is called the Word of God in their sense. And to this they think the words of S. Paul inclinable, 2 Cor. IV. 4, 5, 6. where he saith, that; The God of this World hath blinded the conceptions of unbelievers, that the inlightning of the glorious Gospell of Christ, who is the Image of God, might not shine on them. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake. Because it is God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, that hath shined in our hearts, to enlighten us with the knowledge of the glory of God in the face (or person) of Christ Jesus: Be∣cause in these words, which intitle Christ the Image of God, the preaching of the Gospel is so much insisted upon, as the reason of it: But, as for the rea∣son, why our Lord is called the Word, I refer my self to the premises; so, that he should be intituled the Image of his glory, the character that is printed off from his substance; that in consideration of the same, he should have pur∣ged mans sins, and be set on Gods Throne, to be honoured with Gods own ho∣nours, which all follows in the Apostles words▪ is too gross for any reasonable man to digest. And therefore, in the title of Gods Image (as I sayd before, in the title of Gods Word) there must be couched and understood a reason, up∣on which all this may flow; Which is nothing else, but the fulness of the Spirit, or the Godhead, lodged for ever in the flesh of our Lord, and rendring him capable as well to redeem all sinnes, and to be advanced to the Throne of God, that is to the Worship of God, as to preach and make good that Gos∣pel, wherin the glory of Gods Wisdome and goodness so much appeareth. And thus, and not otherwise the account will be sufficient; not only why our Lord s intituled the Image of God, but how he is preached to be the Lord, and the Apostles his Slaves, how the glory of God shines off from his person, or face, upon the hearts of Believers. For I do firmly believe, as the Apostles wri∣tings have alwaies reference to the Scriptures of the old Testament, to shew how they are fulfilled by the new; So, that our Lord is here called the image of God, as the second Adam, in reference to the first, who is said to have been made in the Image and likenesse of God. But, with that difference which S. Paul
hath expressed. 1 Cor. XV. 45. As it is written; the fist Adam was made a living soul, so is the second Adam made a quickning Spirit. For, having shewed, that the Spirit of Life which raised Christ from the dead, is the fullnesse of the Godhead hypostatically united to the flesh of Christ; well may I inferre, that it is in consideration therof, that he is called the image of Gods glory, and the express character of his substance; from which will also follow, the expiation of our sins, and his sitting upon Gods throne, to be worshiped as God. Thus shall the first Adam, made a living soul in the image of God, be the figure of the se∣cond Adam, made a quickning Spirit in the image of God; Thus shall the Old Testament be the figure of the new, and the animal life, given by the Word and Spirit of God, the figure of spirituall and everlasting life given by the same Spi∣rit of God dwelling in the Word of God incarnate. I will here shew you the strange tale that Saturninus framed out of the relation of Moses, concerning the making of man, related by Epiphanius, that you may judge thereby, of the truth of that which he indeavored to disguise.  (So I read Epiphanius, in stead of , which makes no sense) —Because, saith he, that same light (which was the image of the Power above) peeping down, wrought a certaine provocation in the said Angels (by whom he saith the World was made) they attempted to frame man out of the ust they had to the image above. For, being in love with the light above, and ta∣ken with the lust of it, appearing and disappearing to them, and unable to satisfie themselves of the comelynesse of that which they were in love with, because his light flew up as soone as it came at them, hereupon this Iugler frames the scene, and saies, that the angels said; Let us make man; to wit, According to the image; not, according to our image, because he denies that man was made after the image of God that made the world, but after the image of the unknown Father, which peeped down upon them in the Fullnesse of the Godhead, and drew back straight; Shewing thereby, that the Christi∣ane Faith which he meant to sophisticate, makes the living soul, to which the first Adam was framed, to be the image of God, because the quick∣ning Spirit, which our Lord Christ was to become by being incarnate, was figured by it.
CHAP. XVI. The testimonies of Christs Godhead in the Old Testament are first understood of the figures of Christ. Of the Wisdome of God in Solomon and elsewhere. Of the writings of the Jewes as well before as after Christ. BEE This then the evidence of the state of our Lord Christ afore his com∣ing in the flesh, out of the Scriptures of the New Testament: The sense of which to make good, I have been forced to imploy two peremptory argu∣ments grounded upon that reason, upon which we admit the New Testament to have been signified by the Old. The first, the Name and honour of God alone given to the Angels that were imployed by God to speak to his Prophets in his own person and names as the forerunner, of our Lord. The second, those passages of the Old Testament concerning the Messias, which attribute to him the name, and works, and honour of God, and, by those that admit the New Testament, cannot be denied to belong to our Lord Jesus, by the ewes them∣selves, they are most an end acknowledged to belong to the Meas. And of this I was to put the reader in mind, that he may expect this truth out of the Old Testament, by evidences answerable to that declaration thereof, which the Light of that time required. For▪ I shall freely avow, that the next argument that I shall use, standeth absolutely upon supposition of that which I deliver∣ed in the first book, concerning the figuring of the Messias, by those persons, of whom the Prophets of the Old Testament writ; So that, the sense of the passages which I shall now alledge is in some sort fulfilled and verified in those things which fell out to those figures; Though, admitting the said ground, it will be requisite to look after a more perfect and compleat verifying of them in our Lord Christ; Whereupon it cannot be strange, that the meaning of them should appear more full and proper in him, then it can be maintained in them, of whom, it cannot be denied that they are meant in the Old Testament. Sch is that memorable passage of the Prophet David, Psal. XLV. 8, 9. Thy seat O God is for ever; The Scepter of thy kingdome is a scepter of righteous∣nesse. Thou hast loved righteousnesse, and hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladnesse above thy fellows▪ And Psal. LXXII. 15. He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gd of Arabia: prayer shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall e be praised. Of the same kind is that of the Prophet Isaiah, IX. 6, 7. A little one is given us: A sonne is borne us; On whose shoulder is the Rule: And his name shall be called the Ad∣mirable, the Counsellor, the mighty God, the Father of eternity, the Prince of Peace. Of the greatnesse of his Empire and peace there shall be no end: Ʋpon the Throne of David and his kingdome, to restore and settle it in judgement and righ∣teousnesse from this time forth for evermore. And Isa. XI. 12. And there shall come forth a shoot from the root of Jesse, and a bud shall come up from his stock; Ʋpon whom shall rest the Spirit of the Lord: The Spirit of wisdom and under∣standing, the Spirit of counsel and fortitude, the Spirit of knowledge and godlinesse, and he shall smell with the fear of the Lord. And, Jer. XXIII. 5, 6. Behold the dayes come saith the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a sproute of righteous∣nesse, and he shall reign as a king, and be wise, and execute judgement and righte∣ousnesse upon the earth. In his daies shall Judah be saved, and Israel dwell safe; And this is the Name by which they shall call him: The Lord our righteousnesse: Or, our righteous Lord. For, I do avow and maintaine, that all that will justifie, that our Lord is foretold and figured in the Old Testament, upon true grounds, and consequent to their own sayings, must say; that these things are verified of some Prince of Gods ancient people. This of Jeremy for the purpose in Zorbabel, who is called the Sprout, Zach. VI. 12. And King. Zach. IX. 9.
Jer. XXXI. 7. those things of Esay in Ezekias, as those things of David, no man doubts to be fulfilled first in Solomon, of whom the title of Psal. LXXII. saies expresly, that it is intended. Neither will I make any difficulty to yeeld the Socinians, that the title of Zorobabel, may well be, God is our righteousnesse, or, that the title of Ezkias, in Isa. VII. 14. may well be God is with us; No otherwise, then the pillar which Moses erected Ex. XVII. 15. is called, the Lord my standard: Or, the altar of Isaac Gen. XXXIII. 20. God the God of Abraham. But when it is granted on their side, (which the Jews themselves cannot refuse) that these things are meant in a more sublime sense of the Messias; And that, in respect of Salvation purchased us, and divine honors to himself (which the Socinians cannot refuse though the Jewes do) those things which are said of God in the Old Testament are attributed to our Lord Christ in the New; Then will I stand upon it, that, the throne of the most high God ascri∣bed to our Lord Christ by David, imports no more then when he saies, Psal. CX. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstool: And therefore, that there can be no cause either to abuse the signification of the Name of God, when the Prophet saith; Thy throne, O God, is for ever: Or to have recourse to that other shift, that God is said to be Christs Throne, because the founder of it, when it is manifest, that the Throne which is spoken of is Gods Throne. For it is to be considered, that, when it is said; Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; using that Name of God which is communicated to his Angels, and to the Rulers of his people, and therefore, in the first place, to the Messias, that is to our Lord Jesus, sup∣posing him to be the Christ; Whatsoever conceit of the Messias the Old Testament can allow, when the new declareth that our Lord Jesus is set down at Gods right hand upon his own Throne, it necessarily declareth him the same God, with him, upon whose Throne he sits. In like manner, I do not deny, but challenge and maintaine, that the prayer and praises tendered the Messias according to David, may and must be understood to be such as might be tendered to Solomon an earthly Prince. But, when I can charge all that ad∣mit the New Testament, by their own consent, that it is the honour of the one∣ly true God which Christians tender our Lord Christ, of whom they agree that this is said; When I can charge the Jewes themselves, acknowledging likewise that this is meant of the Messias, that the title, and workes, and attributes, and worship of God are ascribed to the Messias, even by the Old Testament; I need not be thought to weaken the cause of our common Christianity, by making the ground of it unremoveable. Neither shall I stick, by the same reason to acknowledge among the rest of those titles which Isaiah prophesieth of Ezeki∣as, no, that his name shall be, the mighty God; but that, is as the pillar of Moses is called, God is my standard, so the title of Ezekias shall be, God is mighty; Be∣cause of the might God should shew by him, in doing good to his people. And, as I will not say that he can be called the Father of eternity; so I can say, and do, that whosoever will maintaine that God intended that Moses Law should cease, (which is so often said to be given for ever in the Scripture) must grant that those words which may signify eternity, when the matter or circumstance of the speech requires, do signifie no more then a time, whereof the term is un∣known, in the Old Testament. I say likewise, that the then people of God were to understand, that Isaiah promised them Gods Spirit, and the graces thereo, to rest upon their Princes by whom he promiseth them deliverance. But, all this being granted, when it is either granted or proved on the other side, that the name and workes and titles and worship of the onely true God are ascribed and challenged to our Lord Christ, by his word of the New or Old Testament, and the grounds upon which the meaning of it is evidenced▪ upon supposition hereof, I will neverthelesse, challenge, that sense of these Pro∣phesies, in behalf of our Lord Christ, by virtue of the subject matter of the New Testament, and the whole current thereof, determining the capacity of those words wherein these Prophesies are delvered, unto it. For, I professe and main∣taine, that the difference between the Literall and mysticall sense of the Old
Testament (necessary to be maintained, by all that will maintaine the truth of Christianity against the Jews) cannot be maintained, without granting such an equivocation in the words of it, as the correspondence between the kingdom of heaven and that of Israel, the Priesthood of Christ and Aaron, the Prophe∣ticall office of Josua and Jesus, in fine, between the land of Canaan and the heavenly Paradise produceth; And that, when this is maintained through∣out the Scripture, then is that great work of Gods wisdome, in making way for the Gospel by the Law, glorified to the conviction of the Jews, which, when it is sometimes challenged, and elsewhere waved, becomes a stumbling block to the obstinacy of that willfull People. It remaines, that I omit not those things which Solomon preaches of the Wisdom of God, in so sublime and mysterious language, that when we read S. Paul intitling Christ, The power of God and the wisdome of God. 1 Cor. I. 24. we cannot refuse to understand them of the Godhead dwelling in his flesh, as the Church hath alwayes done. Wisdome was at the making of all things, was brought forth before any thing was made, Gods delight, that delights it self in Gods workes, especially in conversing with mankinde, Prov. VIII. 23-31. Adde hereunto Prov. IV. 7.  Wisdom is the principal, or, be∣ginning, ; Adde Prov. III. 19, 20. that God made heaven and earth by Wisdome; Adde the words of a Prophet to whom God sends his friends to be expiated and reconciled to God, Job. XLII. 7, 8. that Wisdome is known to God alone, as that which he looked upon, when he ordained the creation of the universe, Job. XXVIII. 20-28. Adde the Prophet David signifying the same in fewer words, In wisdome hast thou made them all, Psal. CIV. 24. that Wisdome which saith to all men, by Job▪ XXVIII 29. by David, Psal. CXI. 10. by Solomon, Prov. I. 2 IX. 9. Eccles. XII. 15. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdome: In which Wisdome, the whole businesse of Solomons doctrine seems to be▪ that, the whole happinesse of man consisteth. Is all this with Socinus but a figure of Rhetorick called Prosopopaeia, whereby Solomon brings in Wisdom, in the person of Gods favourite, to signify that it comes from God, and to inflame all men to love that which Solomon had prayed for to God, to make him a happy Prince, 1 Kings III. 9, 11, 12. 2 Chron. I. 10, 11? Truly this were something for a Jew to acknowledge, that the wisdome of Gods people, (which Moses) also shews, consisted in their Law, Deut. IV. 6.) came from God, to order their doings to God. For, from hence it will fol∣low, that, as those that are to give account to God of the most inward inten∣tions and inclinations of the heart, so are they obliged to order them, and all the productions of them, according to his will, and to his honour and service. But for a Christian▪ that hath learnt, the whole work of the Law to have been preparative to that which our Lord by his Gospel was to do, and that, before the Law, the Fathers were instructed to live as Christians now do, or should do, (the Law adding nothing but civile Lawes, to inforce the obedience of them that rebelled against their discipline, and ceremonies, to figure the Gospel to come) for such a one not to understand; when Gods Prophets pro∣claime, that the wisdome by which God made the World takes delight to converse with mankind, to reduce it from Idols to the worship of God, to stirre up Prophets to preserve them in it, and to foretell Christ to come; that the same wisdome which did this afterwards in our flesh, did it afore without it, is a fault to the Christianity which he professeth. He that writ the Wisdome of Solomon, though no Christian, aw more, when he said Wisd. X. 1, 2. This, Wisdome, preserved the first Father of the World who was made alone, and drew him out of his sinne, and gave him strength to rule all things: Proceeding to shew the same of the Fathers that succeed. The same author having presaced, Wisd. VI. 23. that he would shew how Wisdome was brought forth, adds, Wisd. VII. 22-27. that description which attri∣butes to Wisdome the same that the Apostle ascribes to Christ. The image or shine of Gods glory, and substance, the unstained mirror of his virtue, the breath of his Power, the flowing forth of the glory of the most High, which sustaineth all things
that he made, and, remaining the same, renewth, or, maketh new all things, and setling upon holy mens mindes, makes them Gods friends and Prophets. And this, having premised, that the Spirit of God goes through all the World, and that Wisdome is a Spirit that convinceth the secret perversenesse of the heart, Wisd. . 5, 6, 7. Then, of the death of the first-born in Egypt, XVIII. 14, 15, 16. For when all things were possessed by still silence, and night was at the middle of her course, thy almighty Word came from thy Royall Throne in heaven, strong as a man of Warre, into the midst of a Land to be destroyed, bringing thy unained command like a sharp sword, and standing filled a with death, while reaching to heaven he stood upon the earth. The like you have in the Wisdome of the Sonne of Sirach, when he proclaimeth that Wisdome which God brought forth, and by which he made all things, to be the Author of that Wisdome which he teacheth. And in the additions to Jeremy under the name of Baruch in the Greek Bibles, shewing the Israelites, that they were in bondage for de∣serting that way of Wisdome, which, unknown to the Idolatrous Nations, he that founded the Earth, and ordained the rest of the World by Wisdome hath seen and made known to them; addes immediately, Baruch III. 12-15. this is our God, nor shall any other be valued besides him. He found out the way of Knowledge, and gave it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved: After∣wards, he appeared on arth, and conversed with men. Which words, I much marvaile, to see stand suspected to some great Scholars, as foisted in by Chri∣stiane Copyists. For, what do they import more, then, that the Wisdome of God, which dealt with men by the flesh of Christ, dealt with them afore by the Prophets? Which the Jewes themselves, who deny the Wisdome of God to be incarnate in our Lord Christ, cannot refuse. This Wisdome of God, this Word of God, this Spirit of God, this image of his glory, this mirror of his sub∣stance, by which he made the World, coming to holy men by the ministery of Angels, (in whom it was resident for that service) made them Gods friends and Prophets; as, coming to us in the flesh of Christ (which he took never to let go) it hath made us the children of God, that is, Christians. This is indeed that great figure▪ in which the eloquence of the Old Testament consisteth, and may be called, as by the Greek Fathers many times it is, , or, good husbandry of language, intimating the way of Gods dispensing the knowledge o himself, which that time was capable of, by such sparing expressions, as, be∣ing expounded by the appearance of our Lord Christ in the flesh, may well make all doubt of the true intent of them to vanish. And therefore, I must needs applaude the practice of the Primitive Church, related afore out of S. Athaasius in Synopsi Scriptur, and others, to instruct the learners of Christi∣stianity out of those books which we now call Apocrypha. For, by this point, which cantaineth the summe of Christianity, it doth appear, (as also by divers others it may appear) that the Secret of Christianity (folded up in the writings of the Prophets, unfolded in the writings of the Apostles) though the same for substance, yet, (without disparagement to the Prophets, because the counsaile of God required it) is more clearly and plainly set forth in them then in the writ∣ings of the Prophets, as the twilight is a degree to the light which the sun-rise bringeth with it. What impressions of this sense may yet be discerned in the Jews writings, I will not stand to inquire here, where I write to all English, so farre as they are capeable of those things. wherein they are all concerned, whether capable or not, remitting the Readers that are capable, to those that maintaine the truth of Christianity against the Jewes; And to those things, which Grotius upon the beginning of S. Johns Gospel, (whereof hitherto I maintaine the true meaning) and upon other Texts which I have imployed to that purpose, hath observed ou of the Chaldee Paraphrase, Philo the Jew, and others of that nation, besides diverse Heathen Philosophers, whose sayings, otherwise ungrounded, seem to come from the sense of that people. One thing I will observe, which is very ordinary among their Ancient Doctors, to call the Angel which speakes to the Fathers under the proper Name, and in the person of God, Metatron, signi∣fying
neither more nor lesse, then Metator in Latine, as you may see in Bux∣torfius his great Lexicon; that is, an harbinger, or quartermaster of lodgings. Whereof it is impossible to give so fit a reason as this; That they understood him to be the fore-runner or harbinger of the Messias, and therefore the Mes∣sias is our Lord Jesus; The ancient Fathers of the Church having declared, from the very mouth of the Apostles, that those dispensations were managed by the Word of God, now dwelling in our flesh, as prefaces and praeludes to the incarnation of our Lord, making way for it by the Ministery of the Pro∣phets, as Saint John the Baptist did, at a nearer distance, before his coming. CHAP. XVII. Answer to those texts of Scripture that seem to abate the true Godhead in Christ. Of that creature whereof Christ is the first-borne, and that which the Wisdome of God made. That this beliefe is the originall Tradition of the Church. What meanes this dispute furnisheth us with against the Arrians. That it is reason to submit to revelation concerning the nature of God. The use of reason is no way renounced by holding this Faith. I Have, in this defense, given the true meaning to very many texts of Scri∣pture, that are alledged against the Faith of the Church; Some remaine, which I thinke fit to repeate, and answer in this abridgment. There be those that lay a great waight upon that of our Lord, John XVII. 3. This is eternal life, to know thee the onely true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent; But the same exclusive onely, or something of the same force is found in many other places: 1 Cor. VIII. 4, 5, 6. There is no other God but one. Ephes. IV. 6. One God and Father of all. 1 Tim. II. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus. And, wheresoever we read, the onely God, or, the onely wise God, or the like. The rest are not many that I shall name. Mat. XXIV. 36. Of that day and hower knoweth no man, nor the Angels of heaven, nor the Sonne, but the Father alone. Col. . 15. The first-born of the whole crea∣ture; Seemeth to ranck Christ with the creatures, being of the same birth. John XIV. 28. The Father is greater then I. For answer to the first, I will not insist, that the words are to be construed thus; This is eternall life, to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent, to be the onely true God; Or thus; To know thee onely to be the true God, and to know Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent; For the Greek article, which the Latine wanteth, the English punctu∣ally answereth, determines the words, , the onely true God, to go together, as agreeing in the same case with thee, that went afore. But this I say, that the exceptive onely, can by no reason be understood, to exclude the attribute of the true God, which it restraines in these words to the Father, from any, that, by the sense of him that speaks them, can be understood to be in∣cluded in it. And that, the sense of our Lord may be, notwithstanding this onely, to include the Sonne in the property of this attribute, the true God, I go no fur∣ther then the sense of all Christians, who all affirme the father to be the onely true God, but believe the Sonne to be the same onely true God neverthelesse. And that this is his sense, I referre my self to the titles, attributes, workes and worship of the onely true God, challenged hitherto from his words. And this sense, the words of S. John, (the meaning whereof, according to the ordina∣ry reading I have shewed before, not to advantage Socinus) seem to intend, according to the true reading, which the Vulgar Latine, (justified by the Mar∣ques of Velez his Spanish Copies, as you may by the readings added to the Great Bible) preserveth. We know that the Snne of God is come, and hath gi∣ven us understanding to know the true one: Et sumus in vero filius ejus Jesu
Christo▪ And we are in his true Sonne Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternall life. Whereas it is ordinarily read; And we are in the true One, in his Sonne Christ; Or, Through his Sonne Jesus Christ. 1 John. V. 20. For it seemeth, that the Apostle folding up both attributes; of the True one; (that is, as it followeth, the True God) and the True Sonne of God, in our Lord Christ; pointeth at the words of our Lord, recorded by himself alone, John XVII. 3. This is eternall life, to know thee the onely true God, and whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ; Challenging for him, that, he is no more to be ex∣cluded from the Title of onely true God, then, from that of author of eternall Life. If it be said; This cannot be; Because there would be, then, more then one onely true God: The answer is ready, that this is not an argument from the force of these words, that this cannot be the sense of them: But from the light of reason, that this sense cannot be true. I know it is a trick that Crellius puts upon the Reader, throughout his first Book de Deo Trino & Ʋno, that the sense of the Church is not the sense of the Scriptures, because it contradicteth the evidence of natures light. But, when the sense of the Scripture is in questi∣on, the dictate of reason concerning the truth of the matter is to be set aside, that it may be judged, without anticipation of prejudice, from evidence planted in the very words of it. And this is the answer to the rest of those texts, that have the like exclusive, but not in so strong terms as this. Now, when our Lord saith; Of that day and hour knoweth not the Sonne. I know S. Hilary laboureth very eloquently to shew, that he meanes no more, then, that he had not commission to declare it. But this would make the sense of our Lord, to be the sense of those men, who, when they are asked that which they hold unfit to declare, and yet would not seem to refuse the civility of de∣claring it do answer, that they know not; to wit, so as to hold it fit to be told. I will not tye my self to maintaine this reservation fit for our Saviour to use: Especially, where no circumstance of the case, or the discourse ap∣peares to intimate such a meaning to them whom he discourseth with. When he said in the Comoedy; Tu nescis, id quod scis Dromo, si sapias; If thou beest wise, thou knowest not what thou knowest; Every man understands his meaning to be; thou wilt not declare it: Whether, when the Messias saith; I know not the day of judgement; Men would conceive that he meant no more then this; That he is not to declare it; seems to be very questionable. I can by no meanes comprehend how it can be prejudiciall to the Faith to say, that the humane soul of Christ, (the knowledge whereof is necessarily limitted to the capacity of a creature, and knowes things above nature, by voluntary re∣velation of the Word and Spirit, which knowes whatsoever is in God. 1 Cor. II. 10, 11.) should be ignorant of something that is to come. Luke II. 40, 52. It is said; The child grew and waxed strong in Spirit, growing full of wis∣dome, and the grace of God was upon it. And, Jesus improved in wisdome and sta∣ture and grace with God and men; Shall I go and say, that he seemed thus to grow, as boyes in the Schools, when they cannot answer texts of Aristotle, that he speakes there in the sense of the ancient Philosophers? The Schoole Doctors will have our Lords humane soul to have known all from the moment that he was conceived, and think him not ound in the Faith that doubts of it. But if onely originall Tradition be matter of Faith, according to the Principle that is setled, the meaning of particular texts of Scripture cannot be such: Especial∣ly, when it is evident, that such a meaning is not necessarily consequent to that which is matter of Faith. And▪ if you look but upon the sayings of the Fathers that are alledged by the learned Jesuite Petavius, 1 De Trinitate III. 5-11. You shall easily perceive how truly it is said by Leontius de Sectis pag. 546. Speaking of the Agnotae, who were a Sect of Eutychians which held that our Lord knowes not all things; . But we say, that we are not to stand stifly upon these things. Therefore neither did the Synod (of Calcedon) trouble is
about any such position as this, Yet it is to be known, that many of the Fathers▪ even almost all say, that he was ignorant. Certainly Irenaeus and Athanasius, if narrowly examined, demand no more, but that he is ignorant of nothing ac∣cording to his Godhead. So that it is so farre from being matter of Faith, that it is not in the Church ever to make it so, whatsoever the Church may do to oblige the members of it not to declare their judgment to the scandale of others, in a point so obscure. Now the words of S. Paul do manifestly distinguish between our Lord Christ and all Creatures, insisting thus; Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of the whole Creature: For in him were all things created, whether in Hea∣ven or on Earth. Surely, he, in whom, as by whom all things are sayd to have been made, is not intended to be comprised in the number of things made, by being called the first born of the whole Creature. And therefore I conceive the word , in the compound  is to signifie according to the He∣brew, not first, but before. We have eminent examples in the Gospels▪ John I. 15. the Baptist sayth, of our Lord Christ; . Because he was be∣fore me. Our Lord. John XV. 18. . The world hated you before me. And that endless dispute among Chronologers, about the words of S. Luke II. 2. ; I conceive, cannot be so well composed, as by translating it; This inrolling was made before Quirinius was Governour of Syria. That is to say, before that which was made under Quirinius, who was imployed divers years after, to inroll all the Jews and their Goods when Archelaus was confiscated. For Ter∣tullian, with whom Josephus fully agreeth, sayth, expresly; That the taxation at which Christ was inrolled was made under Sentius Saturninus Governour of Syria, and that the Records of it were then in Rome, extant when he writ. Let then  signifie him that was brought forth before all creatures; Or, let it signifie by way of metonymy the Heire of all things, (as the Apostle calls our Lord Christ, Heb. I. 2. because the first born is heire by Law) and we shall not need to feare, that our Lord Christ shall become a Crea∣ture, by being the first born of the whole creature. For my part, I should not think I had granted any such thing should I grant, that the word , here may be taken in a generall sense, to signifie, as well the production of Gods Word, as the production of his Creature. I know, how much dispute there hath been with the Arians, about the sense of Solomons, Prov. VIII. 22. ▪ Nor do I believe it can be compu∣ted by reading , which the same seems to require. First, because it must be  not . For it is not true that God got wisdome when he made the World, but was possessed of it. Secondly, because Wisdome Eccles. XXIV. 14. having spoke of her dwelling with God, as in Solomon, and his appointing her to dwell in Israel, addeth; . Before the World from the beginning he made man, and I faile not for everlasting. And further in the beginning of the Chapter, according to the Latine Copy; Ego ex re Altissimi prodivi, primogenita ante omnem creaturam: I came cut of the mouth of the most High, the first born before any Creature. So it to the words of S. Paul, that without doubt he had them in mind when he writ. And again, Eccles. I. 4; 16. : Wisdome was made before all things, and the under∣standing of prudence from everlasting: After which there follows in most Greek Copies, . Which the Vulgar Latine rendreth; Fons apienti Verbum Dei, in excelsis, & ingressus illius mandata aeterna. As, if he should say, that, the fountaine of Wisdome is that Word which was with God in the highest, and whereby God hath made Heaven and Earth (as the Psalmist sayth) By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made and all the Hosts of them by the breath of his mouth, Psal. XXX. 6.) and the proceedings of Wisdome, are the everlasting Commandements: To wit, of the Law, whereby he instructed his people. But this; by conse∣quence, supposing the Old Testament to be a Tigure of the New, must be un∣derstood
of all those waies, vvhereby God conversed vvith mankind, to pre∣serve it from falling quite away from his truth, from the beginning, as I have shewed afore; Being nothing else, but forerunners, and prefaces to the com∣ing of our Lord in the flesh, vvhich therefore, supposeth the being of this Wisdome before the World, by virtue of that vvhich vvent before, vvhere he sayth, that Wisdome was made afore all things. And again, . The Lord himself made her, and saw and numbred her: Which though it may be understood of the wisdome which he poured out upon his works, as straight it followeth, yet when it is sayd, to have been brought forth before the world, and before all things; more is sayd, and more must be understood. Now S. Athanasius against the Arians, I know, embraceth another sense of Solomon, as speaking of Christs taking flesh, to be the beginning of Gods waies wth man redeemed. But I say also, that he produceth this other sense that I speak of, that the VVisdome of God was brought forth by him, before he made the VVorld by his wisdome; and that this production may be signified by the word , though it commonly signifie the production of a Creature, which was not afore, but beginneth to be in him. The passage of Athanasius is remarka∣ble, though upon occasion of that of the Apostle, , Heb. XIII. 2. Who was faithfull to him that made him; which he hand∣leth Orat. II. contra Arrian. . For words extinguish not the nature of things: But rather their nature draws to it self and changes the words. For, words are not before things, but things are first, and after them words. Therefore when the beeing signi∣fied is a thing made or created▪ then, made, and became, and created, are properly sayd of them, (for I read ) signifying a thing made. But when the beeing is a thing ingendred, and a Son, then, made and became, and created, is not properly put upon it, nor signifies a thing made, but a man uses the word made, for ingendred, without difference. VVhich proceeding to declare by instances in the vvord , or made, he sheweth, that it may as vvell be sayd of  created, which he equalleth unto it by the premises. For a little after, he saith, vve may understand the same, . If he say of himself, The Lord created me; vvhich are the vvords of Solomon here questioned. And by and by; . Though Parents say, the Sons that spring from them are made and created, and come of them, neverthelesse, they deny not their Offspring. And again, Orat. III. . For it is the same thing to say, that he is not made, and to speak of his not being a Creature. VVhich makes me confident that the word  in S. Paul may so be understood, vvithout prejudice to the Faith. And surely, when he sayth Gen. IV. 1.  I have got a man with God; As the word is the same with that which Wisdome useth in the Hebrew, Prov. VIII. 22. ; So the sense is the same with the Greek ; for, she got a Son by bringing him forth; which is called creare liberos in Latine, , in Greek, and to make Children in other Languages. And this is equivocation is very happy in our Mother English, when by getting of Chil∣dren, (vvhich formally and properly signifieth the purchasing of them into the Fathers Power as his own, vvhich is in Greek , in Hebrew ) it sig∣nifieth by vvay of metonomy the act of Generation vvhereby they are brought forth, vvhich is the proper signification of the Greek vvord here used, , in the same sense vvith the Latine, create liberos, as I sayd. I know how much dispute there is, that our Lord, when he sayth, The Fa∣ther
is greater then I; is to be understood of his humane nature: VVhich, to me, I confesse seems very hard, that our Saviour should tell his Disciples for their comfort, that God is greater then man, and that therefore they ought to be comforted, because he was going to God. And having alwaies given this reason, vvhy the eternall VVord of God was imployed in redeeming man∣kind, because it came from God from everlasting; I find, that the priviledge of being the fountain of the Godhead, vvhich is of necessity proper to the Father alone, importeth that, which the Sonne and the holy Ghost cannot have; Not as if they had not the Godhead, which is the same in the Father Sonne and holy Ghost; But, because they have it not from themselves, and that it is necessarily more to give then to receive. Whereupon it cannot be denied, that the Sonne and the holy Ghost, though honoured with the titles, works, attributes, and worship of God, are neverthelesse expressed and signi∣fied by the Scriptures, as depending upon the Father, and as something of his, namely his Sonne and his Spirit, though the same God also neverthelesse. And this is without doubt, the true answer to most of what Crellius brings, in the second part of his first book De Deo, that our Lord came not from himself, nor to do his own will, or, to seek his own glory, that he that believeth in him be∣lieveth not in him, but in the Father that sent him, John XII. 4. that he was called of God as Aaron, Heb. V. 4. 5. that he received instruction from the Father, that he prays to him, that his words and workes are not his own but his Fathers, and much more containing one and the very same difficul∣ty, which is assoiled by saying; That wheresoever the weaknesse of his hu∣mane nature is not signified, by the importance of what is said, the rest is to be referred to the commission which he undertook to execute in our flesh, which Commission supposes his coming from the Father of everlasting, as the ground and reason of his undertaking of it. This is that which the Prophet David signifieth, Psalm. XL. 7, 8, 9. Sacrifice and meat offering thou desirest none, mine ears hast thou bored; (Which the Apostle, Heb X. 9. quotes thus: A bo∣dy hast thou fitted for me; The taking of our flesh being his giving up of him∣self for a servant to do Gods message in it, as the servant that had his ear bored, was to be free no more, Exod. XXI. 5.) Burnt offering and sacrifice for sinne thou acceptest not; Then said I, loe I come: To do thy will, O God, written of me in the volume of the Book is my desire, yea thy Law is within my heart. For, his freedome in undertaking this commission, as it supposeth a ground, why it should be tendered, so it importeth that obedience which God rewardeth. And this is the cause why our Saviour tells his disciples, If you loved me, you would be glad that I go to my Father, because the Father  greater then I; For, if the Commission came from him, then is he to performe all that the execution thereof inferreth: That is, to exalt our Lord to that estate which his disci∣ples would be glad of, if they knew what it were. Nor let any man think, that there is any danger of Arrius his heresie in all this. I confesse the reasons I have advanced against Socinus do not formally destroy the pretense of the Arrians. And the reason is because I find that I cannot kill those two birds with one stone; Nor make the reasons that I advance, to evidence the meaning of these Scriptures which are in question not to be that which Socinus would have, to reach so farre, as expresly and formally to destroy that sense which Arrius pretendeth. I am confident, that, who will take the paines to consider, that the Word was in the beginning when all was made, shall have no ground to say, that there was another beginning, before the beginning of all things, when that Word was made. That this word was with God at the beginning, as his bosome counseller; Shall not sy when God wanted his counsell. That this Word was God; Shall not say, that any Christian is to count that God which is made of nothing. That all things were made by it; That any thing was made by that which is not God. That the glory thereof in our flesh, is the glory of the onely begotten Sonne of the Father; shall make any difference between the honour of the Father and the honour of the Sonne. And so I count it enough▪ that the sense of the Scriptures here pleaded, hath in it enough to resist the
Arians with, though this resistance be not here expressed. But, thus much is evident, that, as the Latine Fathers, especially since S. Augustine, have understood these words to be meant of our Lord Christ, according to his humane nature; so the Greek Fathers have understood them to be true even ac∣cording to the divine nature, upon that reason which I have declared. And S. Hilary of the Latine Church, though afore S. Augustine, expresseth the reason which I have alledged, ab authoritate originis, because the pri∣viledge of being Author and originall, in respect of the Sonne and ho∣ly Ghost, is that which they, in respect of the Father, can have nothing to countervail. And this I say, because I am perswaded, that it is a consideration necessary to the maintaining and evidencing of the Tradition of the Church in this point. For, those that understand the state of this dispute, must needs know, that the most ancient writers of the Church, Justine the Martyr, Irenaeus, Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origen, and the rest that were before the Council of Nicaea, do speak of the Sonne of God, as of the Minister and work∣man to execute the counsels of God in making and governing of the World. And therefore are spoken of, by very learned men of these times, enemies enough to those Heresies, as men to be suspected in the sincerity of the Christiane Faith. A thing not to be marvailed at, in those that believe, the expresse act and decree of the present Church to be the reason and ground of believing, For, upon that account, what hinders that to become matter of Faith, being decreed by those which are enabled on behalf of the Church, which was not matter of Faith an hour before? But, those that draw the reason why they be∣lieve, from the evidence, which the society & communion of the church, tender to common sense, that nothing could be refused by the whole body thereof, but that which appeared to all, contrary to that which all have received from the beginning; will count it a violent abuse to all reason, to make the Christiane Faith larger in the stream then it was in the fountaine. And therefore, though the terms of the Scripture, agreeing with those which the most ancient Fathers of the Church use, may justly authorize and bring into use those expressions which have not been usuall, upon a due understanding of the intent to which they are used; yet is there no power in the Church, to render those terms, which have passed for Christian and Catholick in the Primitive times of the Church, suspected of Heresie in these times. Origen is strongly charged by the ancient times, in particular by Epiphanius▪ as the Seminary of the Arians. And that the Arians might not have advantage by many of his sayings, were too much to undertake, and that which my businesse no way requires. The Socinians have made their advantages of Erasmus his writings. And is any man so silly as to imagine, that Erasmus was therefore of Socinus his Faith? Have they not made the like use of Mal∣donate, and his Commentaries upon the Gospels? And is there any appearance that his meaning should be that of Socinus? I will not therefore deny, that the Cardinall du Perron, in his answer to King James, pag. 633. does acknowledge that Arius were able to main∣taine himself within compasse of Tradition, were he to be tried by the Fathers before the Council of Nicaea. But I give the Reader notice that this is the con∣sequence and the interest of that position, which deriveth Tradition of Faith from an expresse act of the present Church, supposing the matter of it not to have been of force, and effectually acknowledged, in all ages of the Church. Which if it were true in this case, then could no man be obliged to believe the Trinity as matter of Faith; Though it might remaine questionable, whether or no a man may be obliged to conform to it, as consistent with the Faith and not to scandalize the unity of the Church, by rejecting the act and decree of it, according to the Position setled in the first book. I will further acknow∣ledge, that I have seen an answer to Crellius the Socinians book de Deo, by one Botsaccus, now of Danzick, I take it, in the end whereof I find a number of exceptions made by the Socinians, in their writings which I have not seen,
against the Faith of all that writ before Constantine in particular, as inconsistent with that of Nicaea, the particulars whereof, because I have not seen the books, and therefore cannot presume to answer particularly, I could not here repeate, would the model of my book give leave▪ In general; whosoever will take the paines, to peruse that which is there alledged shall perceive; First, that those who alledge them fall out among themselves perpetually, sometimes and for some sayings, challenging Tertulliane for example, or Clement, or Origen for one of them that believe not the Trinity, otherwise disowning them as those that helped to introduce the Faith of it: But no where remembring themselves concerned to make good that which they maintaine out of the words of Hege∣sippus in Eusebius; that the Faith of the whole Church was defloured present∣ly upon the death of the Apostles, and to shew, that such a change did indeed come to passe, in the Faith of the holy Trinity. Secondly, that there is no more difficulty in reducing the sense of their sayings there questioned to the sense of the Church after the Councile of Nicaea; then, in reducing the sense of Athanasius, when he alloweth, that, , may be understood of the proceeding of the Sonne from the Father, of everlasting; Or, the sense of all these Fathers, that understood the Father is greater then I, of the priviledge of the originall and author, which the Father of necessity hath personally, above the Sonne and the holy Ghost, the Godhead being one and the same; to the same sense. One passage of Tertulliane I have thought worth the clearing, because it seems to containe a remarkable conceit of his, in expounding the words of Solo∣mon in the Greek, , to the sense of the Church, so many years before Arius built his heresie, in a manner, upon it. The words are in his book contra Hermogenem, Cap. III. Quia & pater Deus est, & ju∣dex deus est, non tamen ideo Pater semper, & judex semper, quia Deus semper. Nam nec Pater potuit▪ esse ante Flium, nec judex ante delictum. Fuit autem tempus, cum & delictum & filius non fuit, quod judicem, & qui patrem Domi∣nu facre. For God also is Father, and God is judge, and yet not alwayes Fa∣ther and judge because alwayes God. For neither could he be Father before a Sonne, nor judge before sinne. But there was a time when neither sinne was to make God a judge, nor Sonne to make God a Father. He that reads this onely, would think at a blush, that it is the very marke of Arius his haersie, ; There was a time when the Son was not; But the answer is in his book contra Praxeam, Cap. V. Ante omnia enim Deus erat, solus ipse sibi & mundus & locus & omnia. Solus autem, quia nihil aliud extrinsecus prter illum. Caeterum ne tunc quide solus; Habebat enim secum quam habebat in semetipso; Rationem suam scilicet: Rationalis enim Deus, & ratio in ipso prius, & ita in ipso omnia. Qu ratio sensus ipsius est. Hanc Graeci  dicunt, qu vocabul sermonem etiam appellamus. Ideque in usu est nostrorum, per simpli∣citatem interpretationis; Sermonem dicere in primordio apud Deum fuisse; cum magis rationem competat antiquiorem aberi, quia non sermonalis a principio, sed rationalis Dus etiam ante principium. Et quia ipse quoque sermo ratione consi∣stens, priorem eam ut substantiam sum stendat. Tamen & sic nihil interest. Nam tsi Deus nondum sermonem suum miserat, & proinde um cum ipsa & in ipsa ratione intra semetipsum habebat, acite cogitando & disputand secum, quae per sermonem mox erat dicturus. Cum ratione enim sua cogitans, atque disponens, ser∣monem eam efficiebat, qum sermone tractabat. For, before all things, God was alone, to himself both World, and place, and all. But alone, because without, there was nothing besides him, otherwise even then not alone. For he had with him that which he had in him, his reason forsooth. For God is reasonable, and rea∣son was in him before, and so all things. This reason is his sense. This the Greek calls , by which name also we call speech. Therefore our people use, for one translation, to say, that speech was in the beginning with God; Whereas it is more pertinent, that reason should be counted more ancient, because God spok it from the beginning, but had reason even before the beginning: And because speech it self, standing upon reason, shews it to be the former, as that whereupon it
standeth. But even so it maters not. For, though God had not yet sent forth his speech, he had it no lesse within himself, with and within his very reason, silently thinking and disposing with himself those things, which he was to utter by speech. Further Cap. VI. & VII. Nam ut primum Deus voluit, ea quae cum Sophia ratione & sermone disposuerat intrase in substantias & species sas edere, ipsum primum protulit sermonem, habentem intra se individuas suas, rationem & sapi∣entiam, ut per ipsum ierent universa, per quem erant cogitata & disposita, imo & facta jam quantum in Deisensu. Hoc enim eis deerat, ut coram quoque in su∣is specibus & substantiis cognoscerentur, & tenerentur. Tunc igitur etiam ipse srm speciem & ornatum suum sumit, sonum & vocem, cum dicit Deus; Fiat Lux. Hc est nativitas perfecta sermonis, dum ex Deo procedit: conditus ab o primum ad cogitatum, in nomine Sophiae, (Dominus condidit me initium via∣rum) dehinc generatus ad effectum (cum pararet coelum aderam ei sil) ex∣inde um patrem sibi faciens, de quo procedendo filius factus est, primogenitus, ut ante omnia genitus; & unigenitus, ut solus ex Deo genitus; proprie de vulv cordis ipsius, secundum quod & Pater ipse testatur; Eructavit cor meum sermo∣nem optimum. Ad quem deinceps gaudens, proinde gadetem in persona illi; Filius meus es tu, ego hodie genui te, & ante Luciferum genui te. Sic & filius ex sua persona profitetur Patrem in nomine Sophiae dominus condidit me initium via∣rum in opera sua For as soon as God pleased to put forth into their own substances and kinds those things which he had ordered within himself, with the reason and speech of wisdom, the first he brought forth was speech, having in it reason and wisdom from which it is unseparable, that all things might be made by that, whereby they had been devised and disposed, nay made aleready as to the sense of God. For they wanted onely this, to be known and had in their own kindes and substances. Then there∣fore even Gods speech it self assumed his own kinde, and dresse, sound and voice, when God said; Let there be Light. This is the perfect birth of speech, as it pro∣ceedeth from God; First made by him for a thought devised by him under the name of Wisdome (the Lord made me the beginning of his wayes) then ingendered to ef∣fect, (I was together with him when he prepared the heavens) thenceforth making him his Father (for I read Patrem sibi faciens, not Pcm, as I find it promised) by proceeding from whom, he became a Sonne, (firstborn; as born before all things; and onely; as alone ingendered by God) from the proper womb of his heart, according as the Father himself also witnesseth: My heart hath uttered an excellent speech. To whom rejoycing according as he rejoyceth, in the Fathers person he saith; Thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee; And, before the morning starre have I ingendred thee. As the Sonne also in his person, professeth the Father under the name of Wisdome; The Lord made me the beginning of wayes unto his works. All this, if it be understood as becometh God, will containe nothing prejudiciall to the Faith of Gods Church, (whether it containe the true sense of the Scriptures or not) through sound and voice and speech, and thought or devise, if they be understood as they signify in Gods creatures, are inconsistent with his excellence. But so farre it will be from Arius his heresie, as to an∣swer the very ground of it, by saying; That the Word or reason, or Wisdome, of God, (which incanate, is our Lord Christ) was from everlasting in God, but not under the notion, quality, or attribute of Sonne, till the making of the World▪ And that, as Tertulliane said in the place from whence the objection is quoted, accidentis rei mentio the mention of an accessory, to wit, the decla∣ration of Gods will to make the World, gave him the denomination of Son, which he bore not afore, according to Tertulliane, (whether he hit the true sense of the Scripture in it, or onely indeavour so to do) though alwayes the same from everlasting. The answer to this difficult passage of Tertulliane may serve for another, contra Praxeam, Cap. II. unicum Deum non alias putat cre∣dendum, quam si ipsum eundemque & Patrem & Filium & Spiritum dicat: Quasi non sic▪ quoquc unus sit omnia, dum ex uno omnia, per substanti scilicet unitatem; & nihilominus custodiatur aeconomiae sacramentum, quae unitatem in trinitatem disponit, tres dividens, Patrem, Filium, & Spiritum Sanctum. Tres autem, not sa sed gradu, non substantia sed forma, nec potestate sed specie; Ʋnius
autem status, & unius substantiae, & unius potestatis, quia unus Deus, ex qu & gradus isti & formae, & species, in nomine Patris & Filii & Spiritus Sancti, deputantur. He thinkes he is not otherwise to believe one God, then saying, that the Father the Sonne and the Holy Ghost, are all one. As if one were not all as well, if all proceed from one; By unity of substance, forsooth, preserving neverthelesse the mystery of that distribution, which disposeth the Ʋnity into a Trinity, ordering three, the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost. But, not three for state but for rank, not for substance but for forme, not for power but for specialty: But of one state, one substance, one power, because one God, from whom those ranks, and formes, and specialties are understood. These words, non statu sed gradu,—both Cardinal Bellarmine, and Valentia, meeting in a passage of Bullinger, not na∣ming his author, have charged with Arianisme, being indeed Tertuallians words, manifestly expressing the Unity of the Godhead, the substance. state and power of it in the Father Sonne and holy Ghost, by their personall proper∣ties, characters, or notions, in the terms of gradus, formae, & species, rankes formes, and specialties, no other being then in use. In like sort Ignatius, according to the true Copies saith , Goa was born, Epist. ad Ephes. he calls him there, Son of God, and Son of man, , God manifest as man; He calls him , The eternall Word that came not forth from silence. Epist. ad Magnes. Athanasius de Synodis, quotes out of him, We have one Physitian bodily and incorporeal, ingendred and not ingendred, God in man: Justine calleth him the word of God, indistinct from him in virtue and Power, and caranate▪ He makes him the Lord of hosts, and the King of Glory; He expresseth his pro∣cession by light kindled from light, and fire from fire; Irenaeus expresly main∣taineth him one and the same God with the Father, and true God, and his genera∣tion ineffable, without beginning and from everlasting; Clemens makes him God quall to God, as his Sonne; Origen, not in any work now extant, that may be questioned, but, as he is alledged by Athanasius, de decretis Synodi Niceae, saies of him, that, if there be any image of God who is invisible, that image must also be invisible, with a great deal more to the same purpose, where he also quotes The∣ognostus in secundo hypopseon, affirming the same at large; to set aside those that are questioned. And, shall we not think our selves obliged, so to under∣stand their words, which the importunity of Heresies have made questionable▪ that they may consist, and agree with those which remaine unquestionable? Especially, all of them agreeing in this; That the world was made and is go∣verned by Christ; And, that the whole dispensation of God tending to the salvation of mankinde, whether before the Law or under the Law, as well as since his appearing in the flesh, was executed by him, as a preface and pro∣logue to his coming in the flesh; (a supposition which all seem to ground themselves upon, especially against the Jewes, in giving account of our com∣mon Christianity.) That our Faith is in the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost; That we are to glorifie, to worship, and to be baptized in the Name of the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost; And in counting all Hereticks that denied it. For, communion with the Church (not communicating with those who believe it not, because they believe it not) is an evidence which no words of doubt∣full construction can obscure, in the judgement of any man that is reasonable. Nay, among the very heathen, that have made any mention of the Christian Faith, doth not Plinies Epistle concerning the Christians acknowledge, that they sung hymns to Christ, as to God? Doth not Lucian in his Phi∣lopatris, manifestly expresse the Faith of the Trinity, as the cognizance of Christians at that time? hath it not appeared by these inventions where∣with the Gnosticks sophisticated it, that the Fulness of the Godhead consists in the Trinity, according to the Christian Faith, as according to the severall Sects of them, in their severall inventions. That the Christians honoured and worshipped the blessed Trinity, as those Sects did those imaginati∣tions of their own, which they call the Fullnesse of the Godhead? When Ebion, Cerinthus, Artemon, Theodorus, and after them, Sabellius, Noetus, Praxas,
and Palus Samosatenus were disowned by the whole Church, and excluded the communion of all Christians, did not all Churches, that agreed in refusing them, find themselves possessed of a contrary Faith, as the reason for which they were refused? Were all Christians, out of their simplicity, cunning e∣nough to assoile all the reasons, whereby these, and Arius to boot, did or might argue their pretenses, from texts of Scripture? Or did they think themselves bound, to rest in the visible consent of the whole Church, whether they were able to do that or not? In fine, the learned Jesuite Petavius, in the Preface to his books de Trinita∣te, and the beginning of the first, as he hath evidently shewed, that the sub∣stance of the faith of the Trinity is acknowledged by these ancient Christians, some of whose words seem to disparage the Godhead of our Lord Christ; So he indeavoureth to shew, that they did it out of a desire to reconcile the faith, with the doctrine of Plato and his followers. If his opinion be admitted, there will remaine evidence enough for the Tradition of Faith, even in their writings, whose skill in the Scriptures, goes not the right way to maintaine it; The plain song will be good musick, though the descant transgresse. Though, for my part, having seen what he hath said, I repent me not of that which I had con∣ceived out of Tertullian; That out of a desire to reconcile the creation of wisdome in the Proverbs, according to the Greek (not the doctrine of Plato) with the rule of Faith, they conceived this a supposition fit to do it; That, by Gods proceeding to create the World, his mind or wisdome, which incarnate is our Lord Christ, attained, not the essence and being which it had in God from everlasting, but the denomination and quality of his Word and Sonne. For you shall find there, that most of them concurre in the speculations of Tertul∣liane. Whereby you may see, that this learned Jesuite is not agreed with the Cardi∣nall du Perron, to deny the reason why we hold the Faith of the holy Trinity originally, from the decree of the Council of Nica, and from that authority of the Church which maintaineth it; But from the reason whereupon that decree was grounded and made: That is, from the meaning of the Scriptures expressed and limited by the Tradition of the Church. And therefore, not burthening my self here, with the expounding of all those passages of their writ∣ings, before Arius, which may seem to derogate from the Tradition of the Church in that point; I shall referre the Reader to those things, whereby he showeth that they do unanimously concurre in maintaining the same Faith. For, if there be amongst them, that have had speculations, tending to reconcile some Scriptures to it, which are not onely ill grounded, (as, I dispute not but this of Tertulliane is) but also prejudiciall to the Faith, as some of Origens, whom I have mentioned already; That this is to be imputed to the inconse∣quence of their severall discourses, not to any difference in their common Faith; I remit you to that which he hath said, to judge. Onely, whereas he de Trinitate II. 2. hath given you a full account of those Fathers, which ex∣pound the words of our Lord; The Father is greater then I; to be meant of his Godhead, (which I have onely named in gross) I will advise you again here∣upon, that many things which are said of the Sonne, as inferior to the Father, (as when he is said to Minister unto the Father in creating the World) may be imputed, not to any inequality in that Godhead, which is the same in all the Trinity, but unto the manner of having it, (the Father originally, as the Foun∣taine, the Sonne and the holy Ghost as from him) wherein the difference of the persons consisteth. To the same Petavius, de Trinitate VIII. 2. I remit them that would be satisfied of the sense of the Fathers▪ in that which I alledged, for the reason why our Lord is called the Word, by S. John; To wit, that the intercourse between God and man, after the fall, was executed and managed by his Ministry. Not because I think this name of the Word, unfit to signifiy the originall proceeding of the Sonne from the Father; much lesse his concur∣rence in and to the creation of all things: But because, believing as I do, that the mystery of the Trinity is revealed by the coming of our Lord; I find great
reason to conceive, that his Apostle intended thereby to intimate, that the god∣ly of the Old Testament, were reconciled to God by the meanes of his Word and Spirit, howsoever they understood that which is signified by these Titles. I know the Arians made their advantage of that which Justine and others had said; That God imployed his Sonne to man, because he was himself invi∣sible; To say thereupon, that the Father onely is invisible and incomprehen∣sible, even by the Sonne. And that S. Austine thereupon counts it rashnesse to say, that all the intercourse between God and man, was ministred by the Sonne the Father, and the holy Ghost not appearing at all in any of these Revelations. That Dionysius acknowledgeth▪ that all of them, Athanasius that some of them, were done by the Ministery of Angels; The testomonies whereof you may find collected there. And truly that God the Father was not revealed by these apparitions, were a thing utterly unreasonable to ima∣gine. That Gods Angels did attend upon his Sonne, in those messages, where∣in, some one of them caries the proper Name of God, is a thing which the Scriptures alledged afore, will necessarily require. But that, whereoever God deales with man by the Ministry of an Angel, to whom the proper name and honour of God is attributed, there the Sonne of God came to do Gods Word to man, for a preface to his coming in the flesh; And that whosoever received this word from God, was withall possessed by his Spirit; as I see it is very agreeable to the Scripture; so I find no reason valuable, why I should re∣pent me to have said it. I know, that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, hath been alledged for an au∣thority that interrupteth the Tradition of the Church, in the matter of the Trinity. And I acknowledge S. Basils judgement, comparing him with one, who dressing plants, and finding one that growes awry, bends it so without measure, that he sets it as much awry on the other side. For, writing against Sabellius, and not content to settle the difference of the persons, he saies that through heat of contention. he let fall words that signified also , difference of nature, inferiority of Power, and diversity of glory. Epist. XLI. Whereof, though I intend not to question any part, I will say, neverthelesse, as I have alleged this passage of Dionysius in evidence, for the unity of the Church, so here, that I desire no better evidence for the Rule of Faith, which the same presupposeth. Suppose for the present the sense of Dionysius to be questionable, as it was to these Bishops of Pentapolis his Suffraganes, who finding themselves offended at that which he had written, gave information of it to Dionysius then Bishop of Rome, and to his Synode, which Athanasius de Synodis Arim. & Seleuciae, expresly nominateth. Can there be a greater argument, that the communion of the Church stood ground∣ed upon the profession of that Faith, which he seemed to transgresse; then the concurrence of Rome, and the Churches that resorted to Rome, with those which resorted to Alexandria, in that Faith which he seemed to transgresse. Cer∣tainly, the agreement of all Christians in admitting the Scriptures, at this day, is not able to produce the like. And therefore, granting the writings of Dio∣nysius to have been an attempt upon the Faith; the opposition, that was so warmly made, assures us, that doctrine which the authority of a Bishop of Alex∣andria could not give passeport to, was inconsistent with the Rule in force. For, the Satisfaction which he tendred in the Letter recorded by Athanasius, shewes what the sense of the Church was, for satisfaction whereof he was for∣ced to write. And therefore, I may safely, and do acknowledge some of his words to be more offensive, then it can be fit for me to excuse: Though his own leter alledges the similitudes of a plant and the shoot of it, of a well, and the stream flowing from it, which the Church since Arius hath always used to make it understood. Which may seem to render him reconcileable to the Faith of Nicaea, by understanding the difference which he signifieth to consist, not in the God∣head, which may be understood to be the same in the fountain as in the stream, but in the rank and manner of having it, necessarily rendring that which proceed∣eth, in that regard inferior to that from whence it proceedeth. I know it is said
againe, that the Council of LXXX Bishops that condemned Samosatenus at Antiochia, in their Epistle alledged there by Athanasius, do say, that the Sonne is not  of the same substance with the Father; And that it is said, that the two parts of a contradiction may as well be reconciled, as this with the Faith of Nicaea. But, with what judgement, let S. Hilary speake, Libro de Synodis: Male intelligitur homousion: Quid ad me bene intelligentem? Male homousion Samosates confessus est: Sed nunquid melius Ariani negarunt? Octagita Episcopi olim respuerunt: Sed trecenti decm & octo nuper receperunt. The ho∣mousion is wrong understood: What is that to me that understand it right? Samo∣satenus acknowledged it wrong; Were the Arians more in the right in denying it? Fourscore Bishops resused it long since. Three hundred and eighteen have re∣ceived it of late. This had been enough to make a reasonable man suspect an equivocation in the businesse. But Athanasius would have told him wherein it consisted, and how, and in what sense Samosatenus maintained it. His argu∣ment was; If our Lord Christ were not made God of man, which first he had been made, then must he be , of the same substance with the Fa∣ther; and so there shall be three substances, one principall, that of the Father, two proceeding from him, of the Son and holy Ghost. And shall not all that imbrace the Creed of Nicaea disdaine Consubstantiality in this sense? Which plainly makes the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost of the same substance, no otherwise, then three men are said to be of one substance. I know Gregory of Noaesarea might have been further alledged out of S. Basil, Epist. LXIV. Where he acknowledgeth him to have called the Father and the Sonne . And the Sonne, . But this, in a discourse written to Aelian a Pagan, to convert him to Christianity, and at the bottom, consisting of nothing but equivocation of terms; He allowing himself to term the Sonne the creature and make of the Father, whom the Greek Fathers com∣monly call  or, the cause of the Sonne: And to call them two in notion, but one for hypostasis; because he takes hypostasis for substance, and notion, for that Character which distinguisheth between persons, which, in the now terms of the Schoole, are said to be known and discerned by their notions. But I will go no further in Origens behalf, or in behalf of any Scholar of Origens; If he have left that which necessarily imports an ill sense (whereof his Scholars, Dionysius, or Gregory of Noaesarea, may perhaps relish) either it was not publickly taken notice of when it was published, or passed over in silence for the present, in respect of his merit toward the Church: As it must be said of his opinion concerning souls flitting into new bodies. As for Euseb. of Caesarea▪ and the author of the Constitutions, which are both charged in this point; Eusebius, living in the time when the consent of the Church, over-ruled the contrary, rather evidenceth then interrupteth that Tradition, which con∣demneth him if he agree not with it. But the author of the Constitutions, is not known, at what time he lived, to write, in the name of Clemens the Apo∣stles Scholar, that which, for his part, he thought most likely to come from the Apostles. Whether or no he might think it became him, writing in that name, to use such terms as he found the ancientest Church-Writers use before the businesse of Arius; Whether or no he might mistake himself in doing so, I will not dispute. But, being hard to believe that he writ till the heresie of Arius and Enmus was down; As I can give my self no good reason▪ why he should bring in Arius under the habit of the Apostles; so I see the sus∣picion which he hath contracted, in a manner as ancient as the credit of his book in the Church. After all this, if any man marvail, that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria should think so slightly of Arius his opinion, as, in debating it, sometimes to side with him, sometimes with his adversaries, according to So∣zomenus, Eccles. Hist. I. 15. Let him consider, that the Ecclesiasticall Histo∣rians informe us, that the difference of Arius was commenced at a Consistory; That is, at a meeting of the Clergy to debate the businesse: Onely Sozomen∣us, that there had been divers meetings about it; In which Alexander had not
declared himself, but spoken sometimes on this side and sometimes on that. Not because there is any appearance in the story, that Arius himself could have construed his procedings, as if he had been doubtfull which side to choose; But because any wise man, in his place, would have thought it the way to pre∣serve his authority over Arius, by not declaring himself party against him till he appeared, untractable by that reason, which his authority must inforce, when it self would not serve the turn. As for the great Constantine, who, in his Let∣er to the Church of Alexandria declareth many times that the question con∣cerned not the substance of Faith; It must be said; that being no Christian as yet, nor catechized in the Faith, his information failed, either in matter of fact, reporting the position of Arius in such terms as might bear a good constructi∣on, (in which what latitude there is, it may appear by the premises) or in point of right, making that not to concern the substance of Faith, which indeed doth. For, those terms in which all the Ecclesiastical Histories agree that the debate was stated, are such, as indeed do concern the substance of Faith. Nei∣ther is there any mark, in the writings of the Fathers before this time, upon which it can be said, that any of them thought that there was a time when the Word of God, (which being incarnate in our Lord Christ) was not, but was made by God of nothing after that time; Which are the characters that di∣stinguish the heresie of Arius. Set aside then the Constitutions, Eusebius, Origen, and his Scholar Dionysius, as questionable in point of fact, or as grant∣ed, that the sense of their words, is not reconcileable with the Faith in point of right, the retraction of Dionysius, makes as much more for the Faith, then his misprision (condemned by Gennadius de Dogm. Eccl. Cap. IV. and Facundus X. 5.) against it, as the rejecting of Sabellius makes more for the same, then the doubtfull words of Gregory of Nocaesarea against. That which is to be said thereupon is, that there can be therefore no reason to blame the Councill of Nicaea for adding to the Creed the terme of , to oblige the Arians to the sense of the Church, S. Athanasius, in his Treatise de Actis Conc. Nicen. hath shewed us, that it was introduced, to cut off those equivocations▪ whereby, they ought to cover their owne sense, under those other words which were propounded as capeable of the Catholick sense. He that will say, that this course ought not to have been held, or that having ta∣ken effect, it ought not to have been retained, may as well say, that the faith of Christ, or the Unity of Gods service in that faith is not to be preserved. For, being once questioned, ther must be a Rule and a mark to discern Christians from Hereticks. I observe therefoe, likewise, that the troubles which Arius occasioned in the Church never came to an end, till the word person in Latine and hypostasis in Greek was admitted, in opposition to the word essence or na∣ture, included in the word , which the Council of Nicaea had introduced into the Creed, that the difference between the Church and Arius, might be stated upon the expresse terms of three persons and one nature. For it is evi∣dent, by S. Jerome, Epist. LVII. that the terme of hypostasis for person, was not then received (who writes to Pope Damasus to be authorized by him, whe∣ther to admit, or to refuse it:) But as, after that time, we hear no further question of the term, so, under the Emperor Gratiane and Pope Damasus, we find the dispute extinguished. But I say, neverthelesse, that there is no cause therefore to imagine, that the sense of the Church and the faith thereof hath received any change by the use of new terms, which the necessity of preventing Hereticks hath obliged the Church to introduce. And I say as the others said, that the importance and consequence of the said new terms ought to be reduced to that force; which the sense of the Church, according to the Scriptures, al∣loweth, or rather prescribeth. And that, whosoever shall take upon him▪ un∣der pretense of the most unquestionable decrees, that any age of the Church hath produced; to prescribe against that sense which the primitive records of the Church do inforce, in so doing, sets up the authority of that present Church against the Tradition of the Catholick. And, after all this, shall the Socinians be admitted to alledge, that S. Hilary, quittth a doubt whether the
holy Ghost is to be called God or not? Surely the Socinians cannot be ad∣mitted to alledge this, unlesse they will be content to submit to S. Hilary in the whole businesse: Nay, unlesse they will stand to the Church, to which S. Hilary stands. But, for those that are not Socinians, and would be satisfied, I will not use that wretched answer of Erasmus in that excellent preface to S. Hilarys works; That the Church hath since decreed otherwise: As if there were not a reason why the Church so decreed, or, as if he were not bound to render that reason for his discharge. But I will say, tha, as, in the case of the Nicene Creed and the word , it appeareth, that the Church may be ne∣cessitated to use such expressions, as have not been in use afore; and not onely to allow particular persons, as Doctors of the Church to use them, but to give them pasport and authority in the publick service of the Church. And, that people, or Doctors of the Church should stick at them when they are first fre∣quented, is no more to be marvailed at, then that the Socinians should marvaile that the Son of God, who acknowledges to come from the Father, and to re∣ceive all from him, should by any man be acknowledged God from everlasting; Unlesse it be marvailed, that all that allow it not are not Socinians. For, nei∣ther is it any marvaile that men should marvaile at the due consequences of those things which themselves admit: Nor that, marvailing at them, some should be Socinians, others continue Christians. All this would be good, in case it did appear, that S. Hilary had any where put any doubt, whether the holy Ghost may be called God or not. But the observation of Erasmus bears no more then this; That S. Hilary is no where found to call the H. Ghost God. which who will not laugh at, unlesse it could be said that S▪ Hilary no way saies as much as that is? For shall the Faith of the Church, or, shall the Faith of S. Hilary depend upon the use of that word? Shall it not serve his turne that he useth words signiying the same? Which, had Erasmus been so diligent to col∣lect, as the Socinians have been forward to make advantage of his negligence, they had never drawn that observation into consequence. He that would be satisfied of S. Hilaries Faith, as well as of the Faith of the Church before S. Hilary in this point; Let him peruse what Petavius hath collected, Dogatum Theol. 3. de Trinitate VII. 7-15. I am now, before I leave this point, to consider, what the light of reason argues against the mystery of the Trinity, which I acknowledge to seem so strong, that it seems to forbid all use of reason, in them, that admit the Christian Faith. For, seeing all use of reason supposes this principle, that those things which agree or disagree in a third agree or disagree one with the other; And, that the mystery of the Trinity inferres; Though the Father is God and the Sonne God, yet that the Sonne is not the Father; It seems, it cannot be main∣tained without disowning the use of reasonable discourse. This difficulty may be, and is branched out into many difficulties. It is argued, If so; Then shall there be three Gods, the Father one, the Sonne another, and the Holy Ghost a third: Or, three substancs of one Godhead; every person being God, which is the substance of the Godhead: Or, that the same thing, the Godhead, shall subsist thrice, to wit, in the Father Sonne and holy Ghost. It is argued, If so; Then shall every person be three persons; Because every person is God; that is, Father Sonne and holy Ghost: That the persons of the Godhead shall be both really the same and really diverse, or, not the same; Being the same God, yet severall persons. It is argued further, If so; Then shall the Sonne of God be his own Sonne; Because Sonne of that God, which the Sonne is. Then may there as well be more Sonnes, and then infinite. Then shall he be from everlasting because God, and not from everlasting, because Sonne. Then should the Father and the holy Ghost have been incarnate, because, one with the Sonne who is in carnate. Then cannot the Sonne of God be man, because God before. But all these consequences containe but one and the same difficulty from which thy proceed; as the same souldiers are showed in severall armes, and the same meats served with severall sauses. For, when the Father
Sonne and holy Ghost, (persons subsisting before they are distinguished by our understanding) are said to be one God, the ordinary discourse of reason, and the language that men use inferres, three substances, each subsisting of it self; that is three Gods, that is, persons of the Godhead, every one of them, Father Sonne and holy Ghost as God is; the same with themselves, supposing one God, not the same, supposing three persons. Againe, the Sonne being God, (as the Father and the holy Ghost are) and Sonne of God, it is no more, then that he should be his own Sonne. That he should be from everlasting, and yet Sonne, and no more Sonnes then he; no more, then that he is God, and the Sonne of God both. That he onely incarnate, never a whit difficult, then that, being the same God, he is neither Father nor holy Ghost. To answer then this one though great difficulty; First, I insist, that the So∣cinians who object it (which may be said of Arius, or Aetius, or whosoe∣ver may be found to have objected the like) cannot avoid as great inconve∣niences if they mean to be Christians. For; the Socinians pretending to honour the Sonne as the Father; the Arians the Sonne and the holy Ghost both; I demand, what greater inconvenience there can be objected to one that pre∣tends to be a Christian, then to give the honour due to God alone to his crea∣ture? Then, that the Sonne of God should be God and a creature both; Then, that he should create himself, as both God and creature: Then, that being made a man, he should be exalted to the power and glory of God, whereupon the honour of God becomes due? If reason and Faith agree both together to assure us that there is a God that made all things; It is not possible that any thing should be imagined more impossible, then, that one and the same subject should be truly qualified God and creature. He that can imagine a greater contradiction, a greater inconvenience, a greater inconsistence, then that the same thing should necessarily be what it is, and yet that, of it self, it may be and may not be what it is; Alwayes actually the same, and yet capable of be∣ing what it was not sometimes; The cause of all things, and yet depending on that cause which it self is, and so before and after it self; Well may he imagine some greater inconvenience then this, that our Lord Christ, made a man as other men are, onely conceived by the holy Ghost, without man, of a Virgine, should be made God, and indued with power and glory, to which the worship and honour of the onely true God is due. But let them that hope, hereby, to remove the stumbling block of the Trinity in Unity from before the Jews, con∣sider with themselves, what satisfaction they can hope to give them, or any reasonable creature, by inviting them, to give the honour of God to a creature, called God, because of that power and Glory which God hath given it above other creatures. For, seeing, the same power and glory which God hath given it, he might have given, and (setting aside his declared will to the contrary) may yet give, to as many as the Heathen Idolaters ever counted Gods; how shall he perswade them, that they are the lesse Idolaters, because they do it but to one besides God, and shall never be moved to do it to any more? Whereas, supposing the Father Sonne and holy Ghost to be one and the same God, we invite them not to worship any but God, though we invite them to worship that which they comprehend not, but believe. And there∣fore, for a direct answer to the difficulty made, I must take notice, that there are those that pretend to make evidence to naturall reason, that it is not onely con∣sistent with, but necessary to the perfection of the Godhead, that being one and the same singular being, it hath subsistence in three several persons; Whose opinion and reasons, did I write in Latine, I should find my self obliged to con∣sider. But the greatest part of those whom I write to not demanding these metaphysicks; I will neither censure them, nor hold my self liable to their censure for it, that, by not holding up so high, I betray the advantage of Christianity to the scorn of unbelievers. This I will say, that, speaking of the Godhead, it is not necessary to maintain that which I believe to be evident∣ly possible. Which is to say, that I may be bound to believe that of God,
which, I cannot evidence to reason, that there is no contradiction in it: Be∣cause, what the motives of Faith make evident, that it is revealed, that I am not able to comprehend, how possible or not. For though reason force me to at∣tribute to God all that is of perfection, and to remove from God all that is of imperfection in the creature; yet by all that, I understand nothing proper to God; Those things that are revealed, signifying nothing else but his proper nature, incomprehensible to man, till he see him as he is. What is the Word and Spirit of God, besides God, I understand not at all; But, let not, there∣fore, to believe that the Word tooke our flesh, and not the Father, having in it the holy Ghost without measure, whereof it giveth a certaine measure to be∣lievers. And, had I a proper conceit of that which they expresse, that which seems a contradiction would then appear necessary. In the mean time, all dis∣pute about essence and persons, and natures, and all the terms whereby, either the Scriptures expresse themselves in this point, or the Church excludes the importunites of heresies from the true sense of the Christiane Faith, improves no mans understanding an inch in this mystery. The service it does, is to teach men the language of the Church, by distinguishing that sense of severall say∣ings which is, and that which is not consistent with the Faith. And if any man hereupon, proceed by dicourse upon the nature of the subject, to inferre what is, and what is not such, his understanding is unsufferable. When therefore it is said; The Father is God, the Sonne God, therefore the Father is the Sonne; Here is nothing like the form of an argument. If, to make an argument in form, you change it and say; Whosoever is God is the Father: the Sonne is whosoever is God; (Proving both propositions, be∣cause; The Father is God, (as also the Sonne) and there is but one God; Therefore, whoso ever is God is the Father; Therefore the Sonne is whoso∣ever is God;) Here you have recourse to the matter in hand, trusting no more to the form of your argument, but to this consequence; That, If there be but one God, and the Father he, then, whosoever is God is the Father. Which failes, because the revelation which shewes the Father to be God, showes the Sonne to be the same God, which, he that did understand God would see to be necessarily consequent. Neither is there cause that any thing that we see in the creature should make us marvaile, why the Father Sonne and holy Ghost, being three who are God, should not be three Gods, or three substances of the Godhead; unlesse a man knew what God is, and, what the Father Sonne and holy Ghost import in God. Nor that the same substance should subsist thrice in three persons, unlesse he had a proper conceit of that which person and subsistence signifie in the Godhead. Nor, shall it follow, that every per∣son shall be three persons, because God we know, by discourse from the crea∣ture to be one; But what the persons are, which we believe to be in God be∣fore we think of God, is revealed, because we understand it not. Nor that the persons can be really the same, because really the same with the same Godhead; because, not completely the same with it, which though by reason not to be understood, grounds the difference between themselves. For the same reason shall it not follow, that the Sonne is his own Sonne; because not Sonne to the Godhead but to his Father: And therefore but one Sonne possible, be∣cause, the fullnesse of the Godhead is revealed to dwell bodily in Christ, the Father, and the holy Ghost. The Sonne notwithstanding from ever∣lasting; (because in God, in whom there can be nothing new) though brought forth by an operation, no lesse from everlasting, then incomprehen∣sible. In fine▪ the Son alone incarnate, though the Father and the holy Ghost abide in him being incarnate: Because the Father the Fountaine, the holy Ghost the stream that flowes upon believers; In whom, notwithstanding, the Father and the Son dwell, John XIV. 23. Because they are in the holy Ghost whom the faithful are indowed with. As for that which was feared, that all discourse of reason, all Arts and Sciences that have come from it must fail, if we grant not; those things
which agree or disagree with a third, to agree or disagree one with another; So farre it is from holding, that it seems to clear the truth. For, if it take place in that discourse which proceeds upon generall terms, abstracted from the particulars which we see, then can there be no cause why it should take place in that which proceeds upon terms revealed from the immediate sight of God, concerning God, whom we cannot know otherwise. For how should conse∣quences be framed upon terms, whereby, the things which they signify are not understood? Therefore, all the dispute that the Schools can have, of the holy Trinity, and incarnation of our Lord Christ, cannot advance us in the understanding of those mysteries; but onely teach us, by what terms we may expresse our selves in them, according to the Faith of the Church. And though something evident to reason come in argument with that which is so reveal∣ed, yet the effect of the argument must follow the nature of that which is revealed, and pretend no more then I have said. Where you see, there is nothing to hinder, that discourse which proceeds upon that which men understand of things subject to sense, (by considering that wherein parti∣culars differ, and that wherein they agree) to take effect no lesse, then if no∣thing were revealed.
CHAP. XVIII. The necessity of the grace of Christ, is the evidence of originall sinne. How the exaltation of our Lord depends upon his humiliation, and the grace of Christ upon that▪ All the work of Christianity is ascribed to the grace of Christ. Gods predestination manifesteth the same. THese things thus premised, the evidence which I make for originall sinne from the grace of Christ, as for the grace of Christ from originall sinne, consists in this proposition; That not onely the preaching of the Gospel, but also the effect of it, in converting us both to the profession and conver∣sation of Christians, is granted in consideration of the obedience of Christ, for the cure of that wound which the disobedience of Adam made. Here I must note, that the conversation of Christians, as it requireth and pre∣supposeth the profession of Christianity, so it comprehendeth all parts and of∣fices of a mans life, to be guided and lead according to that will and law of God which his word declareth; So that, to prove my intent, it will be requi∣site to shew, that it is through those helps which the grace of God by Christ, (that is, in consideration of his obedience and sufferings) furnisheth, that any part of a mans duty is discharged like a Christian; Which otherwise would have been imployed to the satisfaction of those inclinations, which the corrup∣tion of mans nature, by the fall of Adam, hath brought forth. This to do, I will begin as afore with the Epistle to the Romanes; In the beginning where∣of S. Paul having proved (that which Pelagius and Socinus both allow) that there is no salvation without Christianity, and, coming to render a reason for the necessity thereof, from those things which I pressed afore, concerning the disobedience of Adam, proceeds to maintain it by the antithesis of Christs obe∣dience, thus, Rom. V. 15-19. having begun to say, that Adam is the figure of him that was to come; But, the grace is not as the transgression. For, if by one mans transgression many are dead, much more hath the grace of God, and gift through the grace of one man Jesus Christ abounded to many. Nor is the gift as that which came by one that sinned; For judgement came of one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many transgressions to righteousnesse. For, if by one mans transgression, death reigned through one; much more shall they who receive the a∣bundance of the grace and the gift of righteousnesse reign in life through one Jesus Christ. Therefore, as by the transgression of one, the matter proceeded to con∣demnation upon all, so by the righteousnesse of one to justification of life. For, as by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous. Here, whosoever acknowledgeth, that righte∣ousnesse comes by Christ) which the free gift that brings from many transgressi∣ons to righteousnesse, and the abundance of the grace and gift of righteousnesse un∣to life, manifestly argues) can neither refuse, the contrary unrighteousnesse, which causeth condemnation and death, to come from Adams sin, nor yet the grace which voids it (called by S. Paul the gift which comes through the grace of one man Jesus Christ, that is that grace which he hath obtained with God) to be granted in consideration of Christ, through whom the Apostle saies, they that receive the gift of righteousnesse shall raign in life. For, how shall they raign in life through him, and through the gift of righteousnesse, but that through him they receive the gift of righteousnesse? Therefore S. Paul, lamenting after∣wards the conflict between sinne and grace, Rom. VII. 22.-25. I am content with the Law of God according to the inward man. But I see another Law in my members, warring with the Law of my mind, and captivating me to the Law of sinne that is in my members. Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ? To
wit, because from God, in consideration of J. Christ, and his obedience, (and not onely through the doctrine which he taught) he had help to overcome in so great a conflict. Wherefore it followeth immediately, Rom. VIII. 1-4. There is therefore now no more condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath freed me from the Law of sinne and death. For, whereas the inability of the Law was weake through the flesh, God sending his Sonne in the like∣nesse of sinnefull flesh, and for sinne, condemned sinne in the flesh, that the righteous∣nesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us, that walk not after the flesh but after▪ the Spirit. Whether you understand the Law of the Spirit of Life, or Life, to come in, by, or through Christ Jesus, if we be freed from the Law of sin and death by Christ, then by the helps God gives in consideration of his obedience. For how is sin condemned in the flesh, but, because it is executed? And how exe∣cuted, but, because we are inabled to put it to death? And how by Christs death, but by the helps which God grants in consideration of it? Therefore it followeth a little after; If man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his. But if Christ be in you, the body is dead indeed because of sinne, but the Spirit is life because of righteousnesse. But if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mor∣tall bodies, through his spirit that dwelleth in you. That Spirit, which makes righteousnesse a Law to us by Christ, shall raise againe these mortall bodies, which shall be destroyed because of sinne. So, as our rising from death is pur∣chased by the resurrection of Christ, so our rising from sin by his death, which purchased his rising againe. For, consider what S. Paul writes againe of our Lord Christ, Phil. II. 5-11. For, Let that sense be in you that was also in Christ Jesus, who, being in the forme of God, made it no occasion of pride that he was equal with God: But emptied him∣self, taking the forme of a servant, becoming in the likenesse of man, and being found in habit as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse: Therefore God also hath overexalted him, and given him the name, that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should how of things in heaven and on earth, and under the earth, and every tongue confesse to the glory of God the Father, that Jesus Christ is the Lord. Where, seeing i is manifest by the premises, that our humbling of our selves is, with God, the consideration upon which he promises, to exalt us; (being, as hath ap∣peared, the condition of the Covenant of Grace) it cannot be denied, that the humiliation of Christ was the consideration for which he was exalted. Neither is it any difficulty that Christ could not be exalted to any eminence, that should not be due to him as God in mans flesh, and therefore that which was due to him, as incarnate, could not be due to his Crosse; For, the assumption of mans nature being a work of God, and not of nature, the state which our Lord Christ was to assume in our nature was not determinable any way, but by the volun∣tary apointment of God and the Father, who ordered it: So that nothing hindred the effects of the holy Ghost▪ dwelling in our Lord Christ without mea∣sure, to be exercised in such measure and upon such reasons as God should ap∣point; nor the declaration of the fullnesse of the Godhead, dwelling in our flesh, to depend upon his obedience and suffering in it. The declaration hereof is that which S. Paul calls that name above all names, at which all things bow, which, the giving of the holy Ghost to our Lord Christ, to convince the world of it, upon his exaltation▪ is that which effecteth. So saith S. Peter, Acts II. 33▪ Being therefore exalted to the right hand of God, and having received the pro∣mise of the holy Ghost of the Father, he hath shd forth this which ye now see and hear. For it is true, our Lord promised his disciples the holy Ghost, John XIV. 16, 17, 18. XVI. 7, 13, 14, 15. But this promise he received upon his advancement to the right hand of God, being then, and thereupon enabled to perform it. And therefore, it is that which our Lord signifies Mat. XXVIII. 18. When he saies, All power is given to me in heaven and upon earth. Go ye there∣fore, and make disciples all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father the Sonne
and the holy Ghost. For the event shews that this power consists in sending the holy Ghost, whereby the World was reduced to the obedience of the Christian Faith. So that when our Lord saies, Mat. XI. 27. All things are delivered un∣to me by the Father; he means, the right to this power, though limited in the exercise of it, unto the time and state of his advancement, which gave him right in it: And though it be granted, as I said afore, that the generall terms of all power in heaven and earth, and all things, are to be understood of that which concerns his kingdome; Yet seeing the ground thereof, consisting in giving such measure o the holy Ghost to his disciples, as the advancement of his kingdom requires, supposes the fullnesse thereof to dwell in his own flesh; it imports no disparagement to the Godhead of Christ, that the exercise there∣of in our flesh is limited to that time, and that state of his advancement, which the Father appointeth▪ S. Paul. Ephes. IV. 7-11. writeth thus; Now to eve∣ry one of us is grace given according to the measure of Gods gift: To wit, in which God pleased to give it. Therefore he saith; Going up on high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men. Now, that he ascended, what is it, but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same who also ascended farre above all heavens, that he might fill all things. And he hath given some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors. Where it is manifest, that he sets forth the ascension of our Lord in the nature of a triumph, after the victory of his Crosse, as Conquerors lead captives in triumph, and give largesses to their subjects and souldiers. And that which S. Paul terms giving gifts to men, David, out of whom it is quoted, Psal. LXVIII. 18. calls receiving gifts for men; Our Lord being his Fathers Gene∣rall, and by his Commission conquering in his name. Receiving therefore of him who gave him Commission, the gifts which he bestowes at his triumph, can any man doubt, that he receives them in consideration of the dis∣charge of that Commission which he undertook? And these gifts are the meanes, by which the Gospel convicteth the World, and taketh effect in it. The same appears by the conquest of Christs Crosse, and those Scriptures that speak of it, Col. II. 15. Disarming principalities and powers, he made an open shew of them, triumphing over them through it; To wit his Crosse; to which he had said just afore, that he nailed the decrees of the Law that were against us. Heb. II. 14. Seeing then that Sonnes partake of flesh and blood, he also likewise did partake of the same, that, by death he might destroy him that had the power of death, even the devil, and free as many, as through fear of death, were, all their life long subject unto bondage. 1 Cor. XV. 54-57. When this corrupti∣ble shall have put on incorruption, and this mortall immortality, then shall that come to passe which is written; death is swallowed up in victory. Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is sinne; and the strength of sinne is the Law. But thanks be to the Lord, which giveth us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. How doth God grant victory by our Lord Jesus Christ? are we not, and he, severall persons by nature? the conflicts se∣verall? what doth this conquest contribute to ours, but by inabling us to over∣come? How that, but by the help of God, granted in consideration of it? How are slaves to the fear of death freed from death, by Christs death, but be∣cause there is no condemnation for them that live by the Spirit of life, granted them in consideration of his death? And, what is the triumph of the Crosse over the powers of darknesse but this, that, by the meanes of it, they are disa∣bled to keep mankind prisoners as afore? And wherein consists the condemn∣ing or the executing of sinne in the flesh which S. Paul spake of afore, but in this, that, by the death of Christ, we are inabled to put it to death? The Pa∣rable of our Saviour is manifest in this, that, as the branches bear fruit by be∣ing in the vine, that is of it, so Christians by being in Christ, John XV. 1-8, and that force by virtue whereof they bear it, not being conveyed but by Gods appointment, why God had appointed the merits and sufferings of Christ to go before this conveyance, but to procure it, is not reasonable. Therefore our
Lord John VIII. 31, 36. If ye abide in my word, ye shall be my disciples indeed, and shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. And againe; Verily verily I say unto you, that every man that sinneth is a slave to sinne. Now the slave abideth not for ever in the house, but the Sonne for ever. If therefore the Sonne set you free you shall be free inded. The Sonne of God sets free the slaves of sinne, not as the Sonnes of men, by the death of their Fathers, becoming heirs, and granting freedome to whom they please; but by dying himself, and by his death helping them to their freedome. And S. Paul, 1 Cor. II. 14. The naturall man admitteth not the things of Gods Spirit, for they are folly to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. To wit, by that Spirit, which Christ purchased the gift of, by his Crosse. And, why should the Soul of man take that for folly, which Gods Spirit revealeth, were there not a prin∣ciple bred in our nature, to determine all mens inclinations to this generall re∣sistence? Againe, the same S. Paul, teaching them not to think of themselves what the word of God allows not. 1 Cor. IV. 7. For who distinguisheth thee? Or what hast thou that thou hast not received? But, if thou hast received it, why boastest thou, as if thou hadst not received it? Here, if it be said, that the speech is of the office of Apostles, and the like, and the graces requisite to the dis∣charge of them, which are graces tending to the common benefit of the Church, not to the salvation of those particular persons to whom they are given; The answer is evident, that S. Paul speakes not of those graces, but of the right use of them, as it appears by the beginning of the Chapter; So let a man account us, as ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Now in stewards it is required that a man be found faithfull. And this fidelity it is, in which the Apostle appeales to God, and wisheth them not to judge before God, nor, to think of themselves above what is written, because, as they have it not but from God, and therefore not to boast of; So they have it not to the purpose, but, when God discerneth and alloweth it to be in them. And if it be said, that it is manifest indeed, by innumerable passages of the Apostles (of which divers have been produced afore) that the holy Ghost is granted to those that truly believe, to dwell with them, and to inable them to performe what they have undertaken in professing themselves Christians, And, before that, the holy Ghost is granted indeed, to those who preach the Gospel, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, and the like, to inable them to convince the World, that the Gospel which they preach comes from God, and that it is to be imbraced; But that it is not the holy Ghost, but their own free choice that determines them to adhere to that, which the holy Ghost, convinceth them that they ought to adhere to; I say, for the present, it is enough for me to shew, by the Scriptures, that, the conviction which the Gospel tenders is from the holy Ghost, the Gift whereof, the obedience of our Lord Christ hath purchased. There will follow enough to shew, that the effect of this conviction, to wit, conversion, is from the same grace. In the mean time, marke why our Lord challengeth the Pharisees and Scribes, of the sinne against the holy Ghost, Mark III. 28, 29. All sinnes shall be forgiven the sonnes of men, and blasphemies wherewith they shall blaspheme: But whoso shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost hath no forgivenesse, for ever, but is guilty of everlasting judgement. Because they said, He hath an unclean Spirit. Where, not to dispute at present▪ why the blasphemies against the holy Ghost, cannot be remitted, when all other sinnes are; I challenge this to be evident in the words of the Gospell, that their blas∣phemy against the holy Ghost consisted in this that, though convicted that they were Gods works which our Saviour did, yet they said, that he did them by the devil. I acknowledge it is the same crime, when they who have tasted the hea∣venly gift, and are become partakers of the holy Ghost, and have relished the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come, do fall away. Heb. VI. 4, 15. But with this difference, that these are convict by their profession, the other onely by their conscience: God onely knowing that hardnesse of heart, where∣with they resisted that conviction, which the holy Ghost in our Lord Christ tendred; These by professing themselves Christians (who are promised the
holy Ghost to dwell in them if their profession be sincere) acknowledging, that they transgresse the dictate of it. Hereupon S. Stephen, speaking by the holy Ghost, and doing signes and miracles, to convince the Jews, that so he did, Acts VI. 8, 10. justly charges them Acts VII. 51. Y stiff-necked, and un∣circumcised in hearts and ears, ye do alwaies resist the holy Ghost, even ye, as your Fathers. And therefore, our Saviour having said in one place Apc. III. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock; If a man hear my voice, and open the doore, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me; In another; John XIV. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make abode with him; as it cannot be denied, that the holy Ghost, and in him the Father and the Sonne, dwell in him that loves Christ; no more can it be denied, that Christ knockes at the door of the hearts of them that give him entrance, to make them so to love him, that he takes up his lodging in their hearts. Adde we now to the premises, the words of our Lord in the parable of the Vine, John XV. 5. Without me ye can do nothing. The words of the Apostle 2 Cor. III. 4, 5, 6. We have this confidence towards God, not that we are suffi∣cient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God, who hath also made us sufficient ministes of the New Testament, not the Leter but the Spirit. Remembring what I said afore, that this extends not onely to the grace of an Apostle, but to the right use of it. Of which right use the same Apostle 1 Cor. XV. 10. By the Grace of God I am what I am, and his grace towards me was not in vaine, but I laboured more then▪ they all, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me And againe, of the whole businesse Phil. II. 11. 12. Wherefore my beloved, work out your salvation with fear and trembling: For it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do; To wit, by the holy Ghost which Christ sends, and his influence, from the beginning to the end of the work of Christianity. And Ephes. II. 8, 9. 10. For by grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is Gods gift, not of works that no man may boast: For we are his making, created by Jesus Christ for good works, which God hath prepared afore for us to walk in. By the grace of the holy Ghost; which we receive upon becoming Christians, not by the works of the Law; (though, it be also the same grace that makes us Christians) by this grace are we saved. Therefore S. Paul againe, Phil. I. 6. Having this very confidence, that he who hath begun a good work in you will compleat it unto the day of Christ Jesus. And our Lord. John VI. 37, 44▪ Whatsoever my Father giveth me, shall come to me. And; No man can come to me unlesse my Father that sent me draw him. And the Apostle, 1 John VI. 19. We love him because he loved us first. Heb. XII. 2. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no change or shadow of turning. Gal. VI. 3. If any man think himself something, being nothing, he deceives himself. Heb. XIII. 22. God make you of one mind in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is acceptable before him through Jesus Christ. To wit, by the meanes of his Spirit. 2 Tim. . 9, 10. It is God that hath saved us, and cal∣led us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but his ow purpose, and grace given us through Christ Jesus, before eternall times, but now manifested by the appearance of our Saviour Jesus Christ, having abolished death, but shined forth life and incorruption by the Gospel. The abolishing of death and the de∣claration of eternall life, wherein the calling of men to Christianity consists, together with the saving of us, which is effected by meanes of the Sonne; how these things come by Christ, we learn from his words, John XII. 24, 31, 32, 33. Verily verily I say unto you; If a graine of wheat fall not into the earth and dy, it remaineth alone: But if it dy it beareth much fruit. And; Now is the judgement of this world; Now shall the prince of this world be cast forth: And I, when I am lifted u from the earth will draw all men to me. This he said signi∣fying what death he should dy; But, signifying also, what should be the force and effect of that death. Then those Scriptures, which make charity to be the gift of God and of the holy Ghost. John IV. 7. Rom. V. 5. 1 Cor. XII. 31.
XIII. 1. Gal. V. 22. which holy Ghost our Lord Christ by his death hath ob∣tained for us, as afore. Unto all which I will adde, in the last place, those which speake of the pre∣destination of God, as it signifies no more then the preparation of that grace from everlasting, whereby we are saved in time. S. Paul indeed, when he ex∣cludes the presumption which the Jews had of being saved by the Law, as the Fathers, they thought, were; distinguishing between the seed of Abraham ac∣cording to the flesh, and according to promise Rom. IX. 6-13. (which promise he supposes to be the forerunner of Christs Gospel) Manifestly declares no more, then the question which he is there engaged in requires him to declare: To wit, that they were not saved by virtue of the Law, but by virtue of that Grace which now the Gospel openly tendereth. So that, Israel and Esau, holding the figure of the Jews, (that expected to be saved by the works of the Law) Isaac and Jacob consequently answer the Christians, who expect salva∣tion, not by their birth, but by Gods promise, not by works, but by him that calleth; To wit, to the said promise. Whereby it appeareth, that the words of the Prophet which he alledgeth; Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated; signify no more, according to the spirituall sense of the Old Testament which the New Testament yeildeth, but; the accepting of the Church in stead of the Synagogue, of the Christians in stead of the Jews: And, that this is the pur∣pose of God according to choice; which S. Paul speakes of immediately afore; In as much as God purposed, from the beginning, (when first he took the seed of Abraham from among the Nations, to place his name among them) that his choice ones, of Isaacs posterity as well as Abrahams, should be those that bore the figure of the Christian Church promised afore, and born upon the pro∣mise that they should be beloved. All this being granted (which I count most true and undeniable) notwithstanding, the purpose of God according to choice, as it expresses a declaration of receiving the Church in stead of the Synagogue; so it implies, and presupposes a purpose of God, to make and to build Christs mysticall body, which is the Church; upon which purpose of God, all those pro∣phesies are grounded, whereby God foretelleth of his new people Israel accord∣ing to the Spirit, which Christians know to be those children, which he raised up to Abraham out of the stones. For, we cannot think so slightly of Gods providence, that, by foretelling this secret, he obliges himself, onely to finde sufficient meanes to convert men to Christianity; But also, those which should take effect, and bring to passe the conversion of the World to Christianity, by the Gospel of Christ. Seeing then, that the Church is nothing but the souls whereof it consisteth, and that the foreknowing and the foretelling of the Church, which Christians believe to be fulfilled, consisteth in foreknowing and foretelling the conversion of those persons who have constituted and shall con∣stitute the number of believers, from the preaching of Christianity til the worlds end; It followeth, that this purpose of God, according to election, can no way stand without an intent of God, to bring the said election (that is, this multitude of Gods choice ones) to Christianity, whether by the preaching of the Gospel, or, by the helps which depend thereupon, as it depends upon Christs death. And this is most manifest, by S. Pauls answer to an objection, which followes upon his conclusion of this point; That, if God hath mercy upon whom he pleaseth, and pardons whom he pleaseth, he has no cause to complaine of any man, (to wit of the Jews who believe not) because no man can resist his will; That is to say; because he is able to convert them if he please. Which inference S. Paul (not denying that God could convert the unbelieving Jews if he pleased) thus avoideth. Nay, O man, who art thou that disputest with God? shall the pot say to the potter; Why hast thou made me thus? and afore; What shall we say then? Is there injustice with God? God forbid. For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I compassi∣onate. So, it is not in the willing, nor in the running, but in God that shewes mercy. Rom IX. 18, 19, 20. 15, 16. Where it is plaine, that S. Paul, no way denies the truth of the assumption That God may, if he please,
imploy such meanes, as shall make any man a Christian: How he avoides the consequence is another matter, and not belonging to this dispute; inasmuch as it is manifest to all that understand learning, that it is one thing to prove a truth, another to clear the objections that ly against it. That I shall indea∣vour to do, before I leave the businesse: In this, I shall think thus much evi∣denced by the premises; that God, who knew (from the beginning of the send∣ing of Christ, and inabling his Apostles, and their successors of the Church to convict the world of it) who should obey the Gospel and who not, did so or∣der the meanes, by which this obedience was effected or not, that he might know, that it would or would not come to passe. And, this preaching of the Gospel, and the meanes and consequence of it, being granted in consideration of Christ▪ that, the reason why such meanes was requisite, is to be drawn from the fall of Adam, and the corruption of mans nature by it. And, to this sense seeme the words of our Lord to belong, John X. 28, 29. I give my sheep eternal life, nor shall they ever perish, nor any man snatch them out of my hand: My Father who gave me them is greatest of all, nor can any man snatch them out of my Fathers hand. Although, it seems, that he inlargeth the same sense to another effect, John XVII. 6.-12. I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world: Thine they were, and me thou gavest them, and they have kept thy Word. Now know they, that, whatsoever thou gavest me is from thee. For, the words that thou gavest me have I given them, and they have re∣ceived them, and know of a truth, that I am come forth from thee, and thou hast sent me. I ask for them, I ask not for the world, but for those that thou hast gi∣ven me, for they are thine. And, all mine are thine, and thine mine, and I am glorified in them. And I am no more in the world, but they are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father keep them in thy Name whom thou hast given me, that they may be one as we. When I was with them in the World I kept them in thy name: These whom hou gavest me I kept, nor is any of them lost but the Son of perdition, that the Scripture may be fulfilled. For afterwards it is said, that our Lord spake to those that apprehended him, to let his disciples go; That the word which he had said might be fulfilled, I have lost none of those whom thou gavest me, John XVIII. 9. But all this will not serve to make us believe, that his then disciples alone were the men that the Father gave to Christ, he having said expresly afterwards, John XVII. 20. I ask not for these alone, but for those that shall believe in me through their word. For this showes, that he prayes for his then disciples, in the common quality of disciples, that is of Christians, ha∣ving other prayers to make for the world, that is, for those that were not: As we see by and by John XVII. 21. and Luke XXIII. 34. But, in that he saith so often, that the Father had given them him, from whose appointment, the sufferings of Christ, the power which he is advanced to, the successe of the Gospel which he publisheth, dependeth; In that regard, I conceive the helps of Gods grace by the second Adam, whereby the breach made by the first is re∣paired, necessarily to be implied, in Gods giving unto our Lord Christ his dis∣ciples. And of this sense, much there is expressed by S. Paul Ephes. I. 3. 11. Blessed God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that hath blessed us with every spirituall blessing in the heavens through Christ: As he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blamelesse before him in love. Having foreappointed us to adoption to himself, through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will: To the praise of his glorious grace, whereby he made us acceptable in the beloved: Through whom we have redemption by his blood, even the remission of nnes, according to the riches of his grace, which hath abounded to us in all wisdome and prudence; Having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in himself, at the dispensation of the fullnesse of times, to restore all things, both in heaven and in earth, through Christ, in whom also we have received our lots, appoined according to the purpose of him that effects all things according to the counsel of his will. For, not to insist upon the force of those terms and phrases, which Saint Paul uses, whatso∣ever
blessings, it may be said S. Paul hereby signifies, to have been appointed to the Ephesians from everlasting as Christians; I suppose, it cannot be denied, that he presupposes, that they were also appointed from everlasting to be Chri∣stians, to whom by so being, those blessings, should become due. And all this so many times, and so manifestly said to have been appointed in Christ, or by Christ, or through Christ, that it cannot be questioned, that not onely the Gospell, by which they were brought to that estate, but also the meanes that inforce it, and the consequences whereby it takes effect, all depend upon Christ, and the consideration of his coming, to destroy the works of the devil in our first parents. CHAP. XIX. Evidences of the same in the Old Testament; Of Gods help in getting the Land of Promise, and renewing the Covenant: And that for Christs sake. That Christianity cannot stand without acknowledging the grace of Christ. The Tra∣dition of the Church; In the Baptisme of Infants: In the Prayers of the Church; In the decrees against Pelagius and other records of the Church. IT remaineth now, that I shew, how the same truth is signified to us in the Old Testament, whereof I will point out three sorts of passages, tending to prove it, and when they are put together, making full evidence of it. The first is of those, wherein it is acknowledged, that the inheritance of the Land of Pro∣mise, is not to be ascribed to any merit or force of their own, but to the good∣nesse and assistance of God: Then which nothing can be produced out of the New Testament more effectuall, to shew, that, whatsoever tends to bring Christians to the kingdom of heaven is to be ascribed to the grace of God; There being the same correspondence, between the helps of spirituall Grace, whereby Christians overcome their spirituall enemies, and the help of God whereby the Israelites overcame the seven nations, as between the kingdom of heaven and the land of Promise: And therefore, all those promises whereby God assures them of deliverance from their enemies, and maintenance in the possession thereof, all acknowledgements of Gods free gift whereby they held that inheritance, argue no lesse concerning those helps, whereby the children of the Church (answering to the land of Canaan here) are inabled to conti∣nue true spirituall members thereof, and to attain the land of promise that is above. I shall not need to produce many particulars of this nature, whereof all the Old Testament affordeth good store: That of Moses, Deut. IX. 3-8. I must not forget; where, assuring them of God to go along with them, he warns them, not to ascribe that favour to their one righteousnesse, (though he acknowledgeth that God imployes them to punish the seven nations) but to his covenant with their Fathers. And, that God enabled them to cast out those Nations, which were greater and stronger then themselves, it is oftentimes said there, Deut. IV. 37, 38. VII. 1. IX. 1. XI. 23. And this David sets forth, Psalm XLIV. as the ground of the prayer which he makes, that God would shew them the like grace in their present distresse, which is the whole businesse of the same. And the like you may see Psalm CXLIV. and in many other Psalms, if the very story of their coming out of Egypt were not evidence beyond all evidence for this. But there is besides, in the Old Testament, another sort of sayings, and sen∣tences, of prayers, and promises, and thanksgivings, whereby the inward and spirituall obedience and worship of God, (which the Law of Moses covertly intimateth, though expresly it do not covenant for it, as I have shewed) is ei∣ther on mans part acknowledged to the grace of God, or, on Gods part pro∣mised
to men that are qualified for it at that time, under the Law, correspon∣dently to those dispositions, which qualify us, under the Gospel, for the like promises. And to say truth, in these intimations, of the worship and service of God in Spirit and truth, required, assisted, or rewarded in the Old Testa∣ment, lies the effect and truth of that which hath been so often said, that the New testament is contained, though darkly, in it; And those who by the light of that time were reduced under this obedience, are the men whom S. Au∣gustine speakes of divers times, that though they lived under the Old Testa∣ment, yet they belonged to the New: And Eusebius, and divers of the Fathers besides, when they insist upon this against the Jewes, that Christianity is more ancient then the Law of Moses. It is neither possible nor requisite, to repeate here all of this nature, that is found in the Old Testament; Some thing for an essay I shall produce, that the reader may know by them, what passages of the Old Testament they are upon which I understand this point of Christianity to be grounded. I cannot name any thing more eminent then that promise of God by the Prophet Jeremy XXXI. 31-34. (which the Apostle hath ex∣pounded of the times of the Gospel, Heb. VIII. 8—. but, by the rule afore laid and grounded, must have been fulfilled in the return of the people from the Captivity, though more perfectly, and in a higher sense, in the redemption from sinne) whereby God promiseth to make a new Covenant with them, (which is no more then the renewing of the Old) under which they should not need to be taught to know God, because they should have his Law written in their hearts; as of a Truth we know they did not fall away any more unto Idols. The like Promises you have Jer. XXXII. 37-41. XXXI. 1, 2, 3. Isa. II. 1-4. Micah IV. 1-5. Ezek. XVI. 60. XI. 17-21. XXXVI. 21-29. And the fulfilling of them, at least in part, and according to the measure of that time, in the renewing of the Covenant Neh. X. I must write out a great part of the book of Psalms, if I would repeate here, the many prayers and praises of God, which are tendered in it, not onely for the temporall estate of David, and the maintenance of it, against the enemies of his title to the kingdome; but for the grace, whereby he, and every good Christian, is either enlightned in the knowledge of Gods Law (to wit, according to the inward and spirituall intent of it) or guided in it, and inabled to keep it. The CXIX. alone may serve for the rest. But you read besides every where, Mine eyes are ever look∣ing to the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. The Lord ordereth a good mans going, and maketh his way acceptable to himself. Thy loving kindnesse shall follow me all the dayes of my life. And, much more to the same purpose, the prayer of David at the consecrating of his and the Princes goods, to the build∣ing of the Temple, 1 Chron. XXIX. 15-20. For he thanks God, not onely for the gold and silver which they had to bestow, but for the good heart they bestowed it with: And prayes, not onely, that Solomon might build it, but that he might live in obedience to Gods Law. In the third place, there are some Prophesies concerning the Messias, inti∣mating, the kingdome which God designed for him to stand upon his obedience tendered to God; which is as much, to them that believe this kingdom to con∣sist in the spirituall obedience which Christians render his Gospel, as, that the helps which inable them to render this obedience are granted in consideration of his. Psal. XLV. 8. Thou hast loved righteousnesse and hated iniquity, there∣fore God even thy God hath anointed thee with the oil of gladnesse above thy fel∣lowes. The anointing of Christ, is his advancement; therefore the oil of glad∣nesse, which he is anointed with, containeth those graces which he is inabled to bestow upon it: The sword which he girds upon his thigh, the prosperous course in which he rides on, the sharpnesse of his arrows, entring into the bow∣ells of his enemies, and the subduing them to him, (which are the meanes by which he reigns over those to whom God hath annointed him King) must be imputed to that obedience, for which he is anointed with the oil of gladnesse above his fellows. The like is to be said of the conquest of Christ, and the conflict whereby it is obtained, Psal. CX. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my
right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool here is Christ anointed. But, when it follows by and by; He shall judge among the Gentiles, he shall fill all with corpses, he shal wound the head over a great land: He shal drink of the brook in the way, there∣fore shall he lift up the head; It must needs be understood, that he fights Gods bat∣tales in all this, and that therefore he is exalted to the right hand of God, till his enemies be made his footstool. But there is nothing more manifest then that of Isa. LI. 10▪ 11, 13. When thou shalt make him a trespasse offering, he shall see a seed, he shall prolong his daies, and the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper under his hnd. He shall see and be satisfied of the travail of his soul, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant make many righteous: For he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a share among the great ones, and he shall part the spoile with the strong: Because he poured forth his soul to death, and was numbred among rebells, and bare the sins of many, and made intercession for the rebels. This, as it is the clearest Prophesie of the Crosse of Christ in all the Od Testament, so▪ it speakes most expresly of the Christian Church to be raised and gathered, in consideration of the sufferings of Christ, and the help of that grace, which, they have purchased at Gods hands, that he should give. And, they who believe all the deliverances of Gods ancient people to have been figures hereof, and read their bringing out of Egypt into the land of Promise, and the maintainance of them in the inheritance thereof (notwithstanding their enemies, yea, notwithstanding their frequent transgressing of it) imputed to the Covenant with their Fathers; (believing with S. Paul, that all Gods pro∣mises are yea and amen in Christ) they cannot, consequently, make doubt to believe, not onely that they are spiritually made good to Christians, but also were spiitually made good to them who lived the life of Christians, under the faith of Christ to come, during the Law, in consideration of his merits and suf∣ferings. And therefore, it is not for nothing that I insist upon this; that, not onely the giving of the Law, but the ambassages by which God dealt with the Fathers and Prophets of old time, were performed by the same Word of God, which afterwards becoming incarnate, is now our Lord Christ, assuming for the time, the ministery of an Angel, that represented and bore the person of God in the likenesse of man; As prefaces and preludes to his coming in our flesh not to leave it any more. For if it pleased God to use this ministery in or∣der to that, which was to purchase of him that grace which should build the Church; is it marvail, if in consideration of his Sonne, by whom this inter∣course between God and man was managed, he should grant those helps at that time, which, (by the meanes of that knowledge which that intercourse maintained) were effectuall to reduce them to that spirituall obedience to God, which made them friends to God at that time? And therefore I marvaile not, that the ancient Church, according to that which I said afore, should make use of those bookes which now we call Apocrypha, for the instruction of those whom by the name of Catechumeni they prepared for baptisme. For, in as much as we have in them those expresse testimonies, which I have quoted, of the Wisdome of God dealing with manknd, from the fall of Adam, to reduce them to the knowledge of God, and to maintaine them in it; insomuch it afford∣eth a necessary instruction to informe all that desire to be Christians, by what means the world was saved before and after the Law, and yet no salvation but by Christianity; Which they that neglect, will sooner betray the cause of our common Christianity, then give a good account of so great a difficulty: The Socinians for certaine will want footing against the Jews, either in shewing how the Fathers were saved, or, why they are rejected. It remaineth that I give a reason, why the position of Socinus, or of Pelagi∣us, in denying the grace of Christ as the cure of Originall sinne, is not con∣sistent with the grounds of Christianity; which is to say, that the account which they are able to give, for the coming of our Lord Christ, is not sufficient not reasonable, because they deny this grace. Socinus liberally granteth the grace of God in sending Christ to publish his Gospel, and to assure all man∣kind, that he is ready to pardon the sinnes of all that receive it, and to give
them eternall life, living here as Christians undertake to do: That, having provided, that our Lord Christ should be born of a Virgine by the holy Ghost, of his free grace he hath exalted him to the power and honour of God under himself, thereby, both rewarding his undertaking and performing this am∣bassage above merit, and assuring us both of the truth of the Gospel, and of the performance of it, to them that live conformable to Christs Crosse; who have a man of our own kind, indowed with Gods own power, to deliver us from all enemies, of our own free will believing his Gospel so tendered, and living as it requireth. But in all this, neither he nor Pelagius (who, as I said in the be∣ginning, as freely acknowledgeth that grace of God which consisteth in giving the Gospel, besides that free will which we come into the world with) ten∣ders us any account at all, how it comes to passe that all mankind i become enemy to God, and subject to his wrath; Which, untill it be supposed to be true, there is no cause, why the Apostles and the Church after them, should invite the world, to undertake so much hardship as Christianity importeth; And therefore S. Paul hath had care to set it forth, as the ground of Christiani∣ty, in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romanes. For it will not serve the turn to have recourse to the examples of their predecessors, and the nature of man apt to imitate them, as a sufficient reason hereof; seeing this reason can go no higher then Adam, and that there is evidence, that, through the grace of God, good examples of his posterity, such as walked with God, (if not of himself, as the book of Wisdome affirms, X. 1. and we have no cause to doubt) were performed before the eyes of them, who, notwithstanding, imitated the apostasy which he disclaimed. How then shall we imagine, supposing a good and an evil branch in his posterity, that the bad example should so be followed, that all the world should runne after strange Gods; Onely a few Fathers, by that entercourse which God granted them of grace, and the doctrine which came from their Fathers (but to their Fathers by grace) being preserved intire to God? How comes the same to passe after the floud, in the posterity of so just a man as Noe, after such a horrible warning as the deluge? Had the light of reason been such, in discerning the difference between good and bad, as the Law of Nature, and, by consequence, the state of mans creation requireth; had mans inclination been without any bias contrary to that which the light of rea∣son▪ such as it is, shewes, how could this have been? How comes it to passe, that the excellence of mans nature, and the reason that he is endowed with, serves for a reproach to all mankind, that now follows it? That those who see the difference of good and bad, when they are alone without witnesse, when they are under publick ingagements, commit those oppressions upon men, whereof they have no example even from beasts? Doth not all the learning, all the experience of the world thus farre give testimony to Christianity; and shall we think fit, to advantage our selves upon this plea, against those that are not Christians, and straight to deny the consequence of it to Christians? Espe∣cially, having the fall of Adam, so evident a beginning of it, set forth by Moses, and the comming of Christ by S. Paul for the cure of it▪ Thus farre then we plead from the motives of our common faith. But, when we come to measure the grace of Christ, which is the cure, by the person of Christ; I sup∣pose I have right to demand for true, that which I have proved, that he is God and man, not by grace, no by reward, but by birth: And, give notice to Pelagius, that Socinus, in a more cunning age of disputing, found it requisite for the maintenance of no necessity of grace, because no originall sinne, to de∣ny Christ to be God incarnate; that so, the grace of God, which the Covenant of Grace pretendeth, may consist in Gods sending it, not in Christs purchasing those helps whereby it is received and observed. Which, had Pelagius seen how consequent it is to his saying, he who held the true faith of the holy Tri∣nity would, probably, never have proceeded to deny the grace of Christ. For, would they have the Son of God born into the world and suffer death up∣on the Crosse, on purpose to testifie the Gospel to be Gods message? As if the Law had not been received before without it, being recommended by such
miraculous works of God, that the Jews think, there cannot be the like mo∣tives to believe, that it is abrogated by Christianity. Be their belief false, sure we are, Gods arme was not shortned, to have no meanes in store to verify his Gospel, but the death of his Sonne, that he might rise againe to witnesse it. For, that it should be done, to assure them, who are perswaded that the Gos∣pel is Gods message, of the performance thereof on Gods part, is rather a blas∣phemy then a reason; In as much as he who doubts, whether God will perform what he doubts not that he hath tied himself to by Covenant, believes not God to be God. And, that we should be better assured of Christs protection, be∣cause God hath freely bestowed upon him the honour and power of God, then, because he brought it in time into our flesh, which he had from everlasting, is a reason which no man can comprehend to be reasonable. For, whatsoever Grace comes to us by Christ, the more originally and inseparably that it be∣longs to him, the better it is assured upon us. But, one thing I demand of Pe∣lagius aswell as of Socinus. For, as Socinus expresly grants the habituall grace of the holy Ghost, to true Christians, as necessary to inable them in performing what they undertake by their Christianity; so I suppose Pelagius, had the que∣stion been put to him, would not have refused it. I demand then, whether a man in reason, be more able to do the office of a Christian, having undertaken it, or to undertake it, to wit sincerely, while he is free from the ingagement of it. That is, whether a mans will be able inwardly to resolve, without any help of Gods Spirit, to do that, which, without the help of Gods Spirit he can∣not performe. I suppose, the inward act, according to all Divines and Philo∣sophers amounts to one and the same in esteem, with the outward, and the be∣ginning most difficult of all, when the proposition of Christianity is most strange. For, a resolution upon mature debate of reason, as in such a case, and, an engagement upon profession thereof, is a meanes powerfull enough, to carry a man to undergoe as much hardship as Christianity requires, in a thing neither profitable nor pleasant. If therefore, to the performance of Christi∣anity the assistance of Gods Spirit is requisite, then, because our nature is averse, then, much more to resolve us to it. Whereby it appears, that the same gift of the holy Ghost, which, being purchased by the obedience of Christ, inabled the Apostles to do those things, and say those words, by which the world stands convict of the necessity of Christianity; the same it is that effects the convicti∣on of those who imbrace it, and dwelling with them, inables them to live in it, according to the promise of God to his ancient people Esay LVIII. 20. And as for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord; My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor thy seeds mouth, nor thy seeds seeds mouth from this time for ever∣more. With the like brevity will I plead the Tradition of the Church, concerning the Grace of Christ, evidencing the same by three particulars: The first where∣of shall be of the Baptisme of Infants; which as there can be no reason for, ulesse we believe originall sinne; So, I do challenge, that it could not have come to be a Law to the Church, had not the Faith of the Church, from the Apostles time supposed originall sinne: First, negatively, from the proceeding of Pelagius; He first a Monk in Britaine, and traveling thence along to Rome, afterwards, either by himself or by his agent Coelestius, to Constantinople, and Carthage, through Asia the lesse and Affrick, the East, Egypt and Palestine, and not finding in all this vast compasse, any Church, in which it had not been accustomed to baptize infants; shall any man be now so madde as to imagine, that this can be discovered, to have been taken up upon misprision or abuse, the custome of the Church, having been otherwise afore? It is time that the mindes of men, that are possest of their senses, should be imployed about things within the compasse of reason; and not to perswade themselves, that they see what cannot be, because they cannot answer all arguments, that may be made against that which is, and is to be seen. Could Pelagius have found any footing to deny it, he was not such an Idiot, as to suffer himself, at every turn,
to be choked by the Catholicks, objecting the baptisme of Infants, every where received in the Church; who might easily have put them to silence, by saying it was not an originall Catholick practise of the whole Church, but the mistake that of some men, which had prevailed by faction, in some times and parts of the Church; as I pretend, hereby, to maintaine the Reformation against the pre∣sent Church of Rome. Since that ingenious and learned heretick, nor any of his complices, hath been found to use this plea; all men, that intend not to re∣nounce their common sense, will justify me, if I challenge positively S. Austines Rule, in a particular of such moment as this is: That, seeing it is manifest, that it was a law to the whole Church, that Infants should be Baptized; and that there can be assigned no originall of it, from any expresse act of the Church, in Councill or otherwise, it is therby evident, that it comes from the order of the Apostles. The reason is, the unity of the Church, the principle upon which all this proceeds; whereby it appeares that it is utterly impossible, that a point of such importance to Christianity could have been admitted over all the world where Christians were, without any opposition or faction to overcome the same, had it not from the beginning, been acknowledged to proceed from the common principle from which all Ecclesiasticall Law is derived; to wit, from the authority of our Lords Apostles, the founders of the Church. It is not my intent hereby to say, that the Apostles order was that all should be baptized Infants, whose parents were Christians afore: Against which I find reasons alledged, in Tertullianes book de Baptismo, which I cannot deny to be considerable: But, that no infant should go out of the World unbapti∣zed; that is it, which, the great solicitude of Christians, that no such thing should come to passe, the provision that a Lay man might baptize in case of necessity, which admitted not the solemnity of ministers of the Church, the grief and astonishment which followed, if at any time it came to passe, will in∣able me, not onely to affirm, but to inferre, both the reason of originall sinne, which the baptisme of Infants cureth, and the authority of the Apostles, which it proclaimeth. It may be sayd, that Pelagius himself allowed and maintained the Baptisme of Infants, to bring them to the kingdom of heaven, not to everlasting life. But this was but to make his own cause the more desperate. For, had any intimation of the Scripture, any Tradition or custome of the Church justified any ground of difference, between the kingdome of heaven and everlasting life, he might have escaped by pleading it. But being disowned in it, he hath left a desperate plea for those that come after him, to question the Baptisme of Infants, and by consequence original sinne; which if he, so many hundred years agoe, could have found ground for, he need not have stood in the list of hereticks. The visible ceremonies of Baptisme, which are so resolutely pleaded by his adver∣saries for evidence of the same are effectual to the same purpose. For, if it was thought requisite, on behalf of infants, to renounce Satan and all his Pompe, and angels, and instruments of this world, adhering to God; I it were solemn, by huffing and exorcizing, to use the power which God hath given his Church over unclean Spirits, for the chasing of them out of Infants that were baptized; Certainly, those that did, it were so farre from thinking, that man as he is born, can be capable of that good Spirit which Baptisme promiseth, that they thought him to be liable to the contrary. To this argument I will adde the matter of that catechizing, which the ancient Church prepared those for Baptism who pretended to it, as I begun to shew you in the first book; for it is in a great part repeated in divers of these ancient forms of celebrating the Eucharist, which are yet extant under the names of the Liturgies of Apostles and Fathers, which I have named in my book of the publick service of God. The ancientest of them is that which is recorded in the Constitutions of the Apostles, VIII. 11. But you find also there VII. 40. the order of Cate∣chizing those that are to be baptized, providing, that they be instructed in the mercy of God, that suffered not mankind, being turned from him, to perish, but in all ages provided meanes to recall them from sinne and error to truth and
righteousnesse, by the Fathers first, and by the Law and Prophets afterwards, untill, all this proving ineffectuall, he spared not at length to send his Sonne. And the same is the argument of that Thanksgiving which is premised to the consecration of the Eucharist, in the place quoted, as also in the same work afore II. 55. and in the Liturgies to which I referre you. An evidence, in my opinion, very considerable, to shew this point to belong to the substance of Christianity, as the subject mater, both of that instruction which is requisite to make a man a Christiane, and of both Sacraments wherein the exercise there∣of consisteth. In the second place, I alledge such an evidence for the grace of Christ, as no point of Christianity can produce better▪ from the practice of the Church. For I alledge the prayers of the Church, all over, and from the beginning, that they have alwaies contained three things; The first is, of thanksgivings for our Christianity; that is, for the coming of Christ, the preaching of his Gospel, and the effect thereof in converting us to be Christians: The second, of prayers, that we may be able to persevere in that to which we are so converted, and, to perform what we undertake by professing our selves Christians, notwithstand∣ing the temptations of our ghostly enemies to depart from it. The third and last, in that, these thanks and prayers are tendered to God in Christ, for his sake signifying the acknowledgment of his grace, in bringing us to be Christians, and the expectation of those helps by which we must persevere, from the con∣sideration of his merits and suffering. For▪ as for Prayers and thanksgivings in generall, it cannot be said that the offering of them can argue either the decay of our nature, or the repairing of the same by Christ; because those that acknowledge not Christ; (Jews and Mahumetans) must and do use them, if they pretend Religion and the service of God, yea even Pagans according to their sense. But to pray and give thanks to God to make men, or because he hath made men Christians, or, for the helps of salvation, which, by being Christians, that i, by Christ we attaine to, as by him we attaine to be Christians; must needs appear utterly groundlesse, unlesse we suppose, that there was no other way left for our salvation, which cannot be understood, by any meanes, but by the fall of Adam, and the consequences thereof, to come to passe. In the last place, I alledge the decrees of the whole Church against Pelagius, together with the consent of those parts of the Church which other∣wise cannot be understood to be concluded by those decrees. For it is manifest, there was no decree of the whole Church against Pelagius as against Arius; The Councils of Carthage, and of Numidia, that of Palestine, and in aftertimes that of Orange, being but particular Councils, not containing the consent of the whole. But this consideration, in another regard, turns to the advantage of the Churches cause. For, when those parts of the Church, which are not obliged by the decrees, do voluntarily and freely joyne in giving effect to them, (as it is manifest, they did at that time, by the concurrence of the Bishops of Constantinople and Alexandria, and the great Council of Ephesus, in Vossius, Hist. Pel. I. 38, 39, 47. and do since by owning the acts done a∣gainst them) there can be no pretense of faction, to sway them to go along with those whom they are loth to offend; but all must be imputed to the sense of that Christianity, which hitherto they found themselves perswaded of, and therefore agreed, not to admit to their Communion, those who acknowledg∣ed it not, which is the effect of all such decrees of the Church. In the mean time, I forget not the records of the Church in writing, that is, the testimonies of those writers, who, going before Pelagius, and giving testimonie against him, cannot be thought to joyne in faction, to oppresse any truth which he preach∣ed. And upon this evidence, I challenge, both the belief of originall sinne to be necessary to the acknowledgement of the grace of Christ, which Christi∣anity professeth; and also, that the grace of Christ is that which inables us, to begin, continue, and finish the good work of our Christianity; (and there∣fore to every part of it) and by consequence, that this grace is not given
us in consideration of any thing that we are able to do, towards the obliging of God to bestow it upon us. But I will not take upon me to inflame this abridgment with rehearsal of the testimonies of Church Writers that went afore Pelagius, in both these points. The testimonies of Fathers that went afore him, which S. Augustine hath pro∣duced, are enough to put those to silence, which would have originall sin to be a devise of his. But, Vossius in his History of the Pelagians, having comprised as well these as the rest; concerning originall sin, libro 11. parte 1. Thes. VI. and those which concern the necessity of Grace, libro III. parte I. Thes. I. & II. it will not be to the purpose to do any part of that which hath been sufficiently done already, over again. To me indeed it seems very considerable, that Pelagius, acknowledging for Grace; first, free Will, and the Law which teacheth the dif∣ference between good and bad; after that, for the Grace of Christ, his doctrine and example first, then, the illumination of the mind by the Holy Ghost; Yet alwaies maintained, that man, without the help of Grace, is able to love God above all, to keep his Commandments, and resist the greatest temptations to the contrary; And in all these points was condemned by the Church, as you may see there, libro. III. parte II. Thes. I-VIII. For certainly, there is a vast dif∣ference between the doctrine of Gods Laws (absolutely necessary to the do∣ing of his Will, even for Adam in the state of innocency) and the preaching of the Gospell, convincing mankind, that they are under Gods wrath by sin, ten∣dering pardon to them that imbrace it, assuring of everlasting life or death, according as they observe the profession of it, and shewing the way by our Lords example: All which, the Scriptures ascribe to the coming of Christ, as granted in consideration of it. How much more, when he granteth the illumi∣nation of the Holy Ghost, to shew what is to be done, must he needs transgress his own position, which saith, that there is no difference between that state in which we are born, and that which Adam was made (saving his example) but the difference between a man and a Babe? For, were we born as Adam was made; what needed Christ to have purchased by his death, the gift of the Holy Ghost to enlighten us inwardly in doing that, which without it, man is born able to do? And, having granted, the reasons and motives upon which Chri∣stians act as Christians, to be shewed them, both outwardly and inwardly, by the Grace of Christ; to deny the necessity of the sayd Grace, to the acts which proceed from the same, can have no excuse▪ but one, that Christ came only to evidence the truth of his message, leaving the embracing or rejecting of it to every mans choyce. Which to maintain, if Socinus was fain to make our Lord Christ a meer man, that there might be no more in his rising after death, then a miracle to assure it; Pelagius, acknwledging the Trinity, will be streightned by S. Pauls consequence: If righteousnesse come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain; supposing the death of Christ to bring that help of Grace, which a miracle, by evidencing the truth of the Gospel, doth not. And, seeing God could not be moved by any thing that man could do, to give our Lord Christ, and the helps which his coming bringeth with it, there will be no more left for Pela∣gius to say; But, that these helps are not granted of Grace, but received by the works which men prevent it with. The foundation therefore of the Christian Faith, consisting, in Gods-sending our Lord Christ of his pure free grace, by vertue whereof, all the effects of it are works of the same Grace: Necessary it was, that Pelagius should be condemned for the denying of the necessity of Grace, to all acts of Christianity, and for affirming that Grace is given accor∣ding to mans merits, as you see there, Thesi. IX. & XI. that he was. Both upon the doctrine of S. Paul premised afore, that God was not moved by the works either of Jews or Gentiles, to send them those helpes to salvation, which the Gospel tendreth. Nevertheless, the preaching of the Gospel, and all the help which it bringeth toward the imbracing of it, is no less the Grace of Christ, because Pelagius was forced, for the better colouring of his Heresie, to acknowledge it. Onely, it is not therefore to be sayd, that it is all the help which the Grace of God by
Christ furnisheth, toward that salvation which Christianity tendreth: But, to be left to further dispute, what further help is granted by God, before, and without any consideration of mans merit, to bring to effect those acts, in which the discharge of our Christianity consisteth. Excluding therefore the pretense of Pelagius, that, Moses before the godly Fathers pleased God by the meer strength of nature, and that salvation was to be had under the Law, by the same; Besides the good works of the Gentiles, wherewith God was pleased, according to Pe∣lagius, whom the Church condemned in this Article also, as you may see there, Thes. X. And truly, Pelagius, acknowledging the Gospel to be no more then the declaration of that Will of God by which man is to be saved after Christ, as the Law before Christ; utterly overthroweth the plea of the Church derived from the Apostles, that the Fathers were saved by faith, before and under the Law, that the New Testament was in force under the Old, by vertue of that commerce, which God, by his word, (which afterwards being incarnate, was our Lord Christ) held with the Fathers; His Spirit, as naturally planted in the word, going along to procure the efficacy of it. Whereas Socinus, though he acknowledgeth the difference between the literal and mystical sense of the Law, yet, making our Lord Christ a meer man, the vertue of whose death could not ex∣tend to the salvation of those who lived afore his coming, destroyeth the ground of that which he acknowledgeth; This supposition, that Christianity is more ancient then Judasme, being necessary to the maintaining of the Church a∣gainst the Synago ue. Which is verified, by Gods designing of a Church for the spouse of his Sonne, before the Fall, figured by the marriage between Adam and Eve, according to S. Paul, Ephes. V. 22-33. But, presently af∣ter the Fall, that Word, which being incarnate in our Lord Christ, having declared enmity betwen the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, saying; It shall break thy head, and thou shalt bruise the heel of it; The first Adam be∣came the figure of the second, according to the same S. Paul, Rom. V. 14. Whereupon, the Spirit of the second Adam, in those Preachers of righteous∣nesse, to whom the Word of God came, in that Angel whom the Fathers worshipped for God, strove form thence forth, to recover man from the labor of sinne, (to which, when he became mortall, he was condemned) to Para∣dise, from whence he had been expulsed. And therefore our Lord Christ, ac∣cording to S. Peter, 1 Pet. IV. 18, 19, 20. going out of the world, by that Spirit whereby he was made alive when he had been put to death in the flesh, to wit, speaking in his Apostles, preached to the Spirits in prison, that had been dis∣obedient in the days of Noe; Converting the Gentiles, by the gift of his Spirit granted upon his sufferings, who had refused the same in Noe the Preacher of righteousnesse. 1 Pet. II. 5. When God said, My Spirit shall no more strive with man. Gen VI. 2. For, the pilgrimage of the Patriarchs, the Promise of the Land of Canaan, the Law given by Moses, was all but the further limitati∣on, and rule of that outward and civile conversation, under which, the traffique of Christianity was then driven by Prophets, who spake by Gods Spirit. This Reason Socinus being obliged to miskenne, by making our Lord Christ a meer man, cannot give that account of the grace of Christ, before his coming, which the Church doth. Acquiting thereby my position; That the Law covenant∣eth expresly onely for the Land of Promise, of all suspicion of compliance with his intentions. By this you see, that Pelagius and Socinus both are carried out of the way of Christianity, because they will not acknowledge the decay of mankind by the fall of Adam, and the coming of Christ to repair it. But, those of Marseilles, and the parts adjoyning in France, that formalized themselves against S. Au∣gustines doctrine of Predestination and effectuall Grace, freely and heartily ac∣knowledging Originall sin; seem to have justified only upon the true interest of Christianity, in that free will, which the Covenant of Grace necessarily suppo∣seth, though, mistaking their way, out of humane frailty, they failed of the truth, though they parted with Pelagius. They made faith, or at least the be∣ginning of faith, and of will to beleive, to repent, and to turn unto God, the
work of free will, in consideration whereof, God, though no way tied so to do, grants the help of his Grace and Spirit, to performe the race of faith. Most truly maintaining, (according to that vvhich hath been professed in the begin∣ning of this book) that the act of true Faith, is an act of mans free will which God rewardeth with his free Grace; To wit, with the habituall gift of his spirit, inabling true believers to go through with that Faith, which thereby they undertake, as I have shewed you both these elsewhere; Most expresly acknow∣ledging the preaching of the Gospel going before, in which, whatsoever help the coming of our Lord Chirst hath furnished to move and winne the world to believe, is involved: But, miskenning the grace of the Gospel granted by God in consideration of his obedience, to make him a Church that might honour him for it. If Pelagius acknowledged no more in the coming of Christ, then to make his message appear to be true, so that the imbracing of it might oblige God to grant his grace, by preventing it with an act of free will complying with it: The reason was not, because this very tender, being the purchase of our Lord Christs free obedience, could be subject to any merit of man; But, because he was engaged to maintaine, that we are borne in the same estate in which Adam was made, needing nothing but Gods declaration of his will and plea∣sure, towards the fulfilling of it. But, for them who acknowledge the decay of our nature, by the fall of Adam, and the coming of our Lord to repair the breaches of it, to ascribe the grace which God furnisheth those that believe with, for the performing of that which by believing they undertake, to the act of freewill in believing, which themselves acknowledge to be prevented by so many effects of Christs coming, as the preaching of his Gospel necessarily involveth; and which the Scriptures so openly acknowledge, to be prevented by the Grace of his Spirit, purchased by his sufferings; must needs argue a great deal of diffi∣culty in the question, which, the worse divines they appear, must needs justifie them to be much the better Christians. And indeed, there is great cause to excuse them, as farre as reason will give leave, in a case wherein the Fathers that went afore Pelagius seem to be ingaged with them. For it is ordinary enough to read them exhorting, to lay out the indeavovrs of free will, expect∣ing the assistance of Gods Grace, to the accomplishment of that which a man purposes. And, besides S. Augustine, who acknowledges, that▪ before the con∣test with Pelagius, he did think faith to be the act of free will, which God blesseth with Grace to do as he professeth; It cannot be denied that S. Jerome, so great an enemy to the Pelagians, with some others, have expressed that which amounts to it. But it is true on the other side, that the same Fathers do frequently acknowledge the beginning, as well as the accomplishment of our salvation, to the grace of God. Which is not onely an obligation, so to ex∣pound their sayings, when they set free will before grace, as supposing the cure thereof begunne by Grace; But also a presumption, that, those who expresse not the like caution, are no otherwise to be understood: Especially, supposing expresly, the motives of faith provided by the holy Ghost, granted in conside∣ration of our Lords sufferings; in virtue whereof, the resolution which is taken for the best, must of necessity proceed, though, by the operation of the same Spirit, whereby they are advanced and furnished. It is therefore, no doubt, a commendable thing, to excuse the writings of that excellent person John Casiane, so farre as the common Faith will give leave, as you may see the learn∣ed Vossius doth, as speaking ambiguously, in setting grace before free will some∣times, as well as other whiles free will before Grace. For Faustus his book De libero arbitrio, I cannot say the same, though I must needs have that respect for his Christian qualities which the commendations that I read of him in Sidoius Apollinaris deserve. For, besides that the stile of it is generally such as seems to make free will the umpire between the motions of grace and of sinne, (which ascribes the ability of well doing to God, but the act to our selves) that the Fathers under the Law of nature, were saved by free will, he delivers expresly with Pelagius. An oversight grosse enough in any man that shall have considered, upon what terms Christianity is to be justified against
the Jews, out of the Old Testament. There is therefore appearance enough, that the II Council of Orange, which finally decreed against the heresie of Pe∣lagius, was held expresly, to remove the offenses which that book had made. And evidence enough, that the articles of it are justified by the tradition of the whole Church. For, those prayers of the Church, that way and subject of Catechising which the Church tendered those who stood for Baptisme, the sub∣ject of that Thanksgiving which the Eucharist was consecrated with, do more effectually evidence the common sense of Christians, in the mater of our com∣mon Christianity, then the sayings of divines, being solicitous, so to maintaine the grace of God, that the free will of man, (which the interest of our com∣mon Christianity equally obligeth us justly to maintaine) may suffer no pre∣judice. How much more, when it is to be justified, that those sayings of di∣vines, expounded by other sayings of their owne, and principles evidently ac∣knowledged by themselves, can create no other sense then the necessity of pre∣venting grace; might the Church be able, and obliged to proceed to those de∣crees? Though, as for the persons (whom we do not find involved in any further censure, then the mark set upon their writings by the See of Rome) as there is cause to think, that respect was had to them, because their principles did not really ingage them in any contradiction to the faith of the Church; So is there cause to think, that, being better informed in it by the treaty of that Council, they surceased, for the future, all opposition to the decrees of it. For the evi∣dence of that which hath been said, in the point of fact, I remit the reader to my author so oft named, with these considerations▪ pointing out the con∣sequence of each particular: His ingenuity, learning and diligence, is such, that I have neither found my self obliged to quarrel at any thing that he hath deli∣vered in point of historicall truth, nor to seek for more then he hath laid forth. And, by that which hath been said, we presume, not that the preaching of the Gospel is not the grace of Christ, which Pelagius acknowledged necessary to salvation; but that the determination of the will to imbrace that grace, which the grace of the gospel tendereth, is not effected by the will alone, without those helps of grace which are granted in consideration of Christ, though de∣pending upon the preaching of the Gospel, and the reasons and motives which it tendereth, to imbrace it. Here then, you see I might have made a great book, to set forh those things which are commonly alledged, by those that write of the great dispute between grace and free will now on foot, to show what the Church insisted upon, and what reasons it did proceed upon against Pelagius: But, because there is no question made of all this, by those that deny the conse∣quences of it; it shall serve my turne to have pointed out the reasons of those consequences, and now to take notice of this great dispute, which is come in my way so crosse, that it is not possible for me to voide the difficulties which I have undertaken, concerning the Covenant of Grace, without voiding of it. For having first shewed, that the condition, which the Covenant of Grace re∣quires, on our part▪ consists in an act of mans free will, to imbrace and persevere in Christianity till death; And now, that man is not able to perform this conditi∣on without the help of Gods grace by Christ; The question is at the height, how the act of free will depends upon Gods free grace, and a man becomes intitled to the promise, for doing that, which, without the help of Gods grace, he can∣not do. And this the greater, because, if the help of grace determine the free will of them that imbrace and persevere in Christianity, so to do, then it seems, the sinne and damnation of those that do not so, is to be imputed to the want of those helps, and Gods appointment, of not giving them to those that have them not.
CHAP. XX. Wherein Originall sinne consisteth; What opinions are on foot. That it is not Adams sinne imputed to his posterity. Whether man were at the first created to a supernaturall end, or not. An estate of meer nature, but innocent, pos∣sible. Originall sinne is Concupiscence. How Baptisme voids it. Concern∣ing the late novelty in the Church of England about Originall sinne. THIS inquiry must begin with the question about originall sinne, where∣in it consists; because thereupon depends the question of the effect and consequence thereof, which is to say, what is the estate wherein the Gospel of Christ overtakes the naturall man. For, it is well enough known, that there is a question yet on foot in the Church; Whether Originall sinne do consist in Concupiscence, or in the want of Originall righteousnesse, which, having been planted in our first parents, their posterity ought to have. And whosoever thinks there can be little difficulty in this dispute, little considers the difficulty that S. Augustine found in satisfying the Pelagians, how Concupiscence can be taken away by Baptisme, which all Christians find to remaine in the regenerate; Seeing there can be no question made, that Originall sin is taken away by Bap∣tisme: Christianity pretending to take away all sinne, and Baptisme being the solemn execution of Christianity, that is, the solemn profession of the Christi∣an faith. This is, evidently, the onely difficulty that driveth so many of the Schoole Doctors to have recourse, not onely, to S. Anselms devise, of the want of originall righteousnesse, but to another more extravagant speculation of a state of pure nature, which God might have created man in, had he not thought more fit, of his goodnesse, to create him in a state of supernaturall grace; that is to say, indowed with those gifts and graces, that might inable him, to at∣taine that happinesse of the world to come, which is now promised to Christi∣ans. This state of pure nature they hold to be liable to concupiscence, as the product, by consequence, of the principles of mans nature, compounded of a materiall and spirituall, a mortall and immortall substance, and originally in∣clined, the one to the sensual good of the body, the other to the spiritual good of the soul here, which the eternal good of it is consequent to, in the world to come. The nature of man, liable to this condition, they say, was prevented by supernaturall grace, as a bridle, to rule and moderate the inclination of na∣ture, not to come into effect so long as so over-ruled; But so, that▪ this grace being forfeited by the rebellion of Adam, consequently it came into effect with∣out more adoe; and that, by consequence, originall sinne cannot consist in this opposition between the inclinations to sensuall and spirituall good which man hath, but in the want of that grace from whence it proceedeth. This contro∣versie, Doctor Field in his learned work of the Church, counteth to be of such consequence, that he maintaineth, all the difference which the Reformation hath with the Churche of Rome about Justification, free will, the merit of good works, and the fulfilling of the Law, and the like, to be grounded upon it, so that there can be no cause of difference supposing it to be set aside. His reason is, because the opinion of Justification by inherent righteousnesse, supposes, that the reluctation of our sensuall principles, to spirituall good, can no way im∣peach it, as coming from the constitution of our nature, supposing the orna∣ments and additions of grace to be removed. The opinion of the fulfilling of Gods Law by Christians, supposes, that the remaines of concupiscence in the re∣generate, and the immediate effects thereof, in the first motions to sinne, which cannot be prevented, are not against Gods Law, but onely besides it. From whence it will follow, that he, who of his free will imbraces Christianity, and perseveres in the good works which it injoyneth, meriteth of justice the
reward of the Life to come. And truly, for my part, I cannot deny that all this is justly pleaded against those that are of this opinion, and cannot by them just∣ly be answered. But, that this opinion is injoyned by the Church of Rome, I cannot understand, seeing divers learned Doctors of the Schools alledged by Doctor Field, for the opposition which he maketh to this opinion, and that very truly and justly, shewing infallibly, that the contrary opinion is allowed to be maintained in the communion of the Church of Rome, And, that nothing hath been done since the authors whom he alledgeth, to make this unlawfull to be▪ held amongst them; I suppose it will be enough to produce the decree of the Council of Trent, since which it is evident, that it is lawfull among them to maintaine, that concupiscence is originall sinne. For, though the decree de∣clareth, that the Church never understood concupiscence in the regenerate to be truly and properly sinne, but to be so called, as proceeding from sinne, and inclining to sinne; Yet, in as much as it is one thing to speak of concupiscence, in the regenerate, another in the unregenerate; and, in as much as it is one thing to declare the sense of the Church, according to the opinion of the Synode, another, to condemn the contrary sense as opposite to the Faith; it is manifest, that this declaration condemns not those that hold origi∣nall concupiscence to be originall sinne, but onely shewes that they could not answer the difficulty of originall sinne in the regene∣rate. On the other side, it cannot be justly said, so farre as I understand, that those of the Reformation do affirme, that the grace given to Adam at his creation was due to his nature, in this sense and to this effect, as if they did intend to de∣ny that he was created in such an estate, and to such a condition of happinesse, as the principles and constitution of his nature do not necessarily require: But onely this; That the gifts which by his creation he stood indowed with, were necessary to the purchase of that happinesse which he, that is to say his na∣ture, was created to, whereupon they are justly called the indowments of nature. Here I must not omit the opinion of Catharinus in the Council of Trent; That Adam received originall righteousnesse of God, in his own name, and the name of his posterity, to be continued to them, he obeying God: Whereupon his disobedience, i, in Law, their disobedience, though in nature onely his, and the act of his transgression, imputed to them, is their originall sinne, as perso∣nall as the penalties of it: No otherwise then Lev paid Tithes in Abraham. Many passages of S. Augustine he had to alledge for this, as also a Text of the Prophet Osee, and another of Ecclesiasticus. But especially the expresse words of S. Paul; That, by the inobedience of one man many are made sinner: And, That, by sinne death came into the world; which surely came into the world by the actuall transgression of Gods commandment. Alledging; that Eve found not her self naked till Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit; Nor had originall sin been, had the matter rested there. And, by this reason, he thought he avoided a difficulty not to be overcome otherwise, how the lust of generation can give a spirituall staine to the soul, which must needs be carnall, if it come from the flesh. And, by this meanes, nothing but an action which transgresseth Gods Law shall be sinne, which all men understand by that name. This opinion, the History saith, was the more plausible among the Prelates there, as not bred Divines, but Canonists, or versed in businesse, and so best relishing that which they best understood; to wit, the conceit of a civile contract with Adam, in be∣halfe of his posterity, as well as himself. To give a judgement of this opinion, I shall do no more, but remit the reader to those Scriptures which I have produced, to shew that there is such a thing as originall sinne; concluding, that the nature of it, wherein it consists, must be valued by the evidence of it, whereby it appeares that it is. It will then be unavoidable, that, when death is the effect of sinne, because righteousnese is the cause of life, as Adams sinne is the cause of his death, so the death of his posterity depends upon their own unrighteousnesse. Why else should Christi∣anity
free us from death, as hath been shewed? Why should S. Paul complain of the Law that he found in his members, opposing the Law of righteousnesse? why should the flesh fight with the Spirit, and the fruits of the flesh be opposite to the fruits of the Spirit, but that the same opposition of sinne to righteous∣nesse is to be acknowldged in the habituall principles, as in the actuall effects which proceed from the same▪ As for that onely text of S. Paul, in which he could find any impression of his meaning; if the reader observe the deduction, whereby, I have shewed, that S. Pauls discourse obliged him, to set forth the ground, whereupon, the coming of Christ and his Gospel became necessary to the salvation both of the Jews and Gentiles; he will easily find, that the question is, of the effective, not of the formall cause, that S. Paul is not inga∣ged to shew wherein that source of sinne which our Lord Christ came to cure, consisteth, but from whence it proceedeth. True it is, when the posterity suf∣fers losse of estate and honour for the Fathers treason, it may properly be said, that the Fathers crime is imputed to the posterity: Not because any reason can indure, that what is done by one man should be thought to be done by another; but because the effect of what one man does may justly be either granted to, or inflicted upon another, whether for the better or for the worse. As in a civile state: suppose the Laws make treason to forfeit lands and honours, which eve∣ry man sees are held by virtue of the Lawes; that posterity, which hath no right to them but from predecessors, and the obligation which they had to main∣taine the state, should forfeit them by the act of predecessors, is a thing not strange but reasonable: Though so, that the forfeiture may transgresse the bounds of reason and humanity, if the Law should not allow posterity or kind∣red, to live in that state to which predecessors have forfeited, when there is so much cause to believe, that the forfeiture may be an instruction to them, if once they believe that it was by just Law. This justice then, and the ground of it, is the onely reason why the predecessors fault is truly said to be imputed to his posterity. But, between God and mankind in the forfeit of Adam, by the precept given him, there cannot be understood any contract, by virtue whereof, posterity, that did not the act, can be liable to the punishment of it. And therefore we must distinguish between the imputing of one mans sinne to another formally, so as to punish a man for another mans sin, which, if he con∣curred to the act, may be just, otherwise not; And effectively, in the nature of a meritorious cause, (which reduceth it self to the effective) when, in considera∣tion of one mans sinne, another is made subject to that evil which he should have been free from otherwise. And according to this distinction, though the posterity of Adam is liable to much evill in consideration of his sin, yet is not this evil properly the punishment of it, but the effect of the same will of God in propagating mankind with the staine of concupiscence, which takes place in maintaining understanding creatures to do all that sinne, which God might have hindred them from doing, had he not thought it better to draw good out of evil, then utterly to prevent it. And this is no more, then the corre∣spondence between the first and second Adam, which S. Paul proceeds upon Rom. V. inferreth. For, I have shewed already, that the righteousnesse of Christ is not imputed to any man formally and immediately, so as to say; that any man is justified by Gods deputing our Lord Christ, for his benefit perso∣nally, excluding those for whom he was not deputed: And I have shewed againe, that the righteousnesse of Christ is imputed to all Christians effectively, and in the nature of a meritorious cause; In as much as have shewed, that those helps of grace, without which no man is able to imbrace Christianity as it is to be imbraced, are granted by God in consideration of his merits and sufferings, laid out to that purpose. And that which remaineth for me to shew in due place is this; That, that disposition which qualifieth for the promises of the Gospel, being brought to passe in any man by those helps, obliges not God, to grant those promises which the Gospel rewards it with, by any worth in it self, but by virtue of Gods grace, in consideration of Christs merits and sufferings, laid out to that purpose. By which correspondence it may appear, that those who can perswade
themselves, that the posterity of Adam are bound to answer for the sin of his fall, as their own act, cannot stand bound to acknowledge a Christian (to whom the merits of the sufferings of Christ are imputed upon the same terms) obliged to any condition, upon which his right to the promises of the Gospel can de∣pend, being once due to him by virtue of Christs merits and sufferings, de∣puted to be personally his. As, on the contrary, those that acknowledge the merits and sufferings of Christ to be justly imputed to the persons of those, whom he was sent to redeem, cannot stand bound to acknowledge the posterity of the first Adam to be liable to concupiscence by his fall; seeing the coming of Christ, for the redemption of those, whom God thereby should please to ex∣empt from the common imputation thereof, would be no lesse effectuall to the voiding of that condemnation which it contracted, then supposing, what ever disease of our nature, concupiscence, coming in by his fall, may signifie. So that supposing, the immediate and personall imputation of the fall of Adam to all his posterity, of the merits and suffering of Christ to all those for whom they are appointed; the evil which mankind suffereth by the meanes of Adams fall, is properly the punishment of his sinne, the good which it receiveth by the meanes of Christs sufferings is the reward of it; nor can have any depen∣dance upon any act of his free will; Otherwise, then as that which God work∣eth by him, not as that which he requireth at his hands. But, supposing the meritorious imputation of Adams fall and Christs righteousnesse, the evil which his posterity lies under by meanes of it, will not be properly the punishment of sinne (because, not the recompense of the evill which a man does, by the evil which he suffers) though properly a penalty, because an evil inflicted in consideration of sinne. Now, supposing that Adam understood the precept; In the day thou eatest thereof shalt thou die the death; to condemn his posterity as well as himself; it is manifest notwithstanding, that the obligation thereof was not by virtue of his accepting of it, and contracting upon it, but originall, by virtue of that be∣ing which God had bestowed, and therefore taking hold of all his posterity, on whom he meant to bestow it. Wherefore, though it is handsomly called, by S. Augustine and others, a Covenant of God with mankind, which, being trans∣gressed by Adam forfeited the benefit thereof to his posterity; Yet to speak properly, it was the meer appointment of God, in that which lay in his power and right to appoint, that the uprightnesse wherein Adam was created should descend to his posterity, he continuing in it, otherwise, the pro∣pagation thereof should be maintained, the uprightnesse failing. Nor can any man think strange, that Christianity should oblige us to be∣lieve this, if we consider the many and strange extravagances, which those, who either acknowledge not Christianity, or have fallen from it, do runne into by not resting in it. The Epicureans, and as some think the Peripateticks deny∣ing Providence, the Stoicks Free-will, and so the same providences. The Py∣thagoreans, (whom the Platonicks are intangled with, and the ancient Gno∣sticks, Marcionites, and Manichees, manifestly imitate) setting up two Gods, one, the author of evil, the other of good; the Heathen worshipping in effect the devil, whom those Sects set up under the Name of author of evil; the Jews and Mahumetanes, (if they have any thing to say to the originall of evil in mankind, to whose use God hath commended the world) being obliged to say, that it comes from the fall of Adam: Pelagians and Socinians not con∣fessing what Jewes and Mahumetanes cannot deny, but not able to give any account, why the noble creature of mankind should be so overspread with evil, coming from a good God, and accountable for his own actions. The question thus stated, and Christianity tendring, first, the fall of bad angels, and the se∣ducing of Adam by their malice, and in consequence thereunto, of the great∣est part of mankind, to the worship of evil angels by whom they were seduced; (excepting those, whom God dealt with by his word ministred by angels first, then by his Sonne whose Gospel now is preached) I suppose there is nothing wanting, to evidence either the truth or obligation of it, though those that
preach it are not inabled to evidence, why God pleased to suspend the upright∣nesse of Adams posterity upon the condition of his obedience, when as it is evident enough that it was in his power to have done otherwise. And this account being rendred, it will be easie to say, why Eve found not the effect of her transgression, before Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit. To wit; Not because she should never have found any, had not he sinned: But because the effects of it do not necessarily follow instantly at all times, and in all things, and that, in tempting Adam, which was the next thing she did, they did in∣stantly appear. As for the great difficulty, how the spirituall substance of the soul should receive a taint from the carnall concupiscence, whereby it cometh to be united to the body; I will here challenge the benefit of that principle which I have once established; That which once was not matter of Faith can never by processe of time, or, any act the Church can do, become matter of Faith; Though we may become more obliged to believe it, not by the generall obligation of Christianity, but by having studied the reasons by which it is de∣duced from the principles of Faith; Besides that light of reason which Faith presupposeth: And, by the same reason, the Church may justly injoyne it to be received, hat is to say not openly contradicted▪ For, such is the matter of the propagation of mans soul, whether by transplanting, as part of the Fathers hold, or by immediate existence from God, in the body which nature prepareth for it: Which, having been manifestly disputable in S. Augustines time, I hold it very consequent to that which I have done in the point of the Trinity, whether it may be made evident to reason or not, to leave it without producing any mans reason, by which I pretend to maintaine, that it is either trauced or created, A wayes supposing, that no reason can be receivable, which provid∣eth not for the immortality of it, which no man questions. Lastly, it is ma∣nifest, that actuall sinne s first called by the name of sinne, because first sub∣ject to sense; but so, that the displeasure of God, and by consequence, the name of sinne, is no lesse reall against habituall sinnes: So I will confesse fur∣ther, (as afore of the terms of essence and person in the mystery of the blessed Trinity, that they were brought into the Church to prevent the malice of he∣reticks, and to settle a right understanding in that which was necessary to be received by Christians) So now, that the terme of Original sinne was first brought in by S. Augustine▪ and the Church of his time, to expresse that ground upon which the Church had from the beginning maintained the grace of our Lord Christ, and the necessity of it. But, that ths ground is not to be maintain∣ed, unlesse we acknowledge, besides those habits of sinne which we contract, an habituall inclination to sinne bred in our nature from the fall of Adam, which may be called sinne, in regard of the likenesse and correspondence of it to and with other inclinations to sinne contracted by custome. Having thus set aside this opinion, before I come to decide the difficulty proposed, I hold it necessary to debate that which both parts seem to take for granted, neither of them having expressed any reason, to oblige us so to take it: That is; whether Adam were created to supernaturall happinesse (which is that which Christians now expect, in the presence of God for everlasting) and therefore, indowed with those graces, which might make him capable of it: Or onely in a state of naturall happinesse, consisting in the content of this life onely, and supposing perfect obedience to God in the course of it. Were it but for the the repute I have of Grotius, for his skill in the Scriptures, (who, in one of his Annotations upon Cassander, hath declared this opinion for part of his judgement, I should count it worth the debating. But I have found it further maintained by reasons, which seem to me considerable, and no way prejudiciall to the Faith. Which notwithstanding, I do not intend to propose for mine own, ingaging my self to maintaine this; but, to confront with the reasons brought for it, what I find reasonable to be said on the other side, that in a nice and obscure point, the discreet reader may chuse, what he shall think most fit to allow. Now, all the argument, that can be drawn into consequence on either side, arising from the relation of Moses compared
with such texts of the New Testament as may give light to it; It is first argued, That seeing God first framed man of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him the breath of life, and man became a living soule; It seemeth evident that he was made in a state of naturall life onely: S. Paul having said, in comparing him with Christ, 1 Cor. XV. 45. So also it is written; The first man Adam became a living soul; The last Adam became a quickning Spirit. Meaning to say; That as Moses saith, that Adam became a living soul; So, (not that Moses saith, but that Christians may say; that) Christ is become a quickning Spirit. For, hereupon it followes in S. Paul, that, as that which is spirituall was to follow, so that which is naturall or animall was to go before. But to this, on behalf of the other part, me thinks it may be said; That Moses, as all the Old Testa∣ment, speakes onely of the state of our naturall life, but intends by the corre∣spondence between materiall and spiritual things, as the figure and that which it figures, to signify to us, that which belongs to that spirituall life, which the Gospel introduces: Of which intent, all that I have produced, to settle that difference between the litterall and mysticall sense of the Old Testament, is evi∣dence. So that, Gods breathing the breath of life into mans nostrills is the figure of his breathing the spirituall life of Grace into the soul, which divers ancient Fathers of the Church have understood to be signified by the same words; and that, according to the true ground and rule of expounding the Scripture, if they suppose the breath of naturall life, signified first by the same words to be inspired, as a figure of the spirituall life of grace. To which agrees well enough that which followes; That man became a living soul; in cor∣respondence to the second Adam, who is become a quickning Spirit, according to S. Paul. For, Christ is become a quickning Spirit, because he shall raise the mortall bodies of those in whom his Spirit dwelt here: But Adam, though we suppose him to be made a living soul in respect of the life of Grace, yet had that life from the Spirit of Grace, the fullnesse whereof dwelt in Christ. On the other side it is argued, that seeing man was made in the image of God, and his likenesse, Gen. I. 26, 27. IX. 6. and, that the image of God consists in that righteousnesse and true holinesse to which Christians are regenerated by grace, Ephes. IV. 24. Col. III. 9, 10. Therefore, man was first created in that righteousnesse and true holinesse to which Christians are renewed, which renewing is called therefore the new man by S. Paul. To this it may be an∣swered on behalf of the other part; That the dominion over the creatures be∣longes to the image of God in man, according to the words of Moses: Let us make man after our image and likenesse, and let him bear rule over the fishes of the Sea—and, therefore God requireth a mans bloud of his brother, and of beasts, because he was made in the image of God, Gen. IX. 6. So that, the image of God re∣maineth, true righteousnes and holines being lost. And therefore it seemeth, that, according to the natural state of man, he is made according to Gods image, in re∣gard of this dominion over the creatures: But, according to that spirituall estate which the Gospel calleth us to, much more, in regard of the dominion over sin and concupiscence, which the spirit of righteousnesse and true holinesse bringeth with it: Though both derivative from the image of God in Christ, to whom the Apostle Heb. II. 6-9. ascribeth that dominion, as to the second Adam, which the Psalmist setteth forth in the first; Psal. VIII. 5-8. And if it be said, as I said it may be, that the precept given to them, forbidding the fruit of the tree of knowledge, is manifestly carnall, and concerning their nature, it is easie to say on the other side, that the garden, and those trees, and therefore the precept concerning them, are not understood, if they be not taken as Sym∣bolicall, and mysticall, to signifie that, which S. Augustine, in two words of free will and Christ, comprehendeth; That, as the source of death is, to satisfie the appetite of our owne particular profit or pleasure, so, to satisfie the appetite of that true goodnesse, which that Word or Wisdome of God, which now incar∣nate is our Lord Christ, teacheth, is the fountain of Life. Not as if there were not two such fruits, one granted to preserve life, the other forbidden on paine
of death; But because they not onely did signifie, (which the other opinion may grant) but also were understood by Adam to signify more, as I have said. As for the giving of names to living creatures, which is commonly made an argument of more then humane wisdome in Adam, to wit, from Gods Spirit; I conceive the other side may say; That no names can signify the natures of things, but some sensible properties, by which they are known and discerned: So that, to give names ingeniously, argues no more then taking due notice of those things, which sense discovers, to be most remarkable in each kinde. And that not above the pitch of nature. But when Adam saies; This is bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh; And; Therefore shall a man leave father and mother and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh; And S. Paul thereupon, Ephes. V. 30. This mystery is great, but I mean, as to Christ and the Church; There is appearance, that the Fathers have reason to suppose Adam a Prophet, not onely to say the words which foretell the coming of Christ, and the effect of it, but also to understand the meaning which they contained. Not as if he foresaw the incarnation of Christ, which supposed his own fall: But because, by that word of God which spoke to him in his transe, he understood, that his posterity should be united and maried to God. And yet, on the other side it may be said without prejudice to Christianity; that, though this is certainly the mysticall sense of these words, yet it is no more necessary that Adam, when he spoke them, should understand it, then, that the rest of those who were figures of Christ, by their actions in the Old Testament, did understand that they were so, much lesse wherein that figure consisted. Last of all, it seems strange, that Adam should so easily be cast down, with so slight a temptation, supposing that he was indowed with that divine wisdome which Gods Spirit giveth; which will be no such marvaile, if we suppose him to know no more, then the conduct of his naturall life in Paradise might require. Which notwithstand∣ing, this is no such advantage as it may seem. For, as the description of Para∣dise, and the two trees, and the precept concerning them, so is also the temp∣tation delivered in Symbolicall terms, under the figure of that which concern∣ed the preservation of their life, representing all that may move the Sons of the first Adam to fall away from God. And whatsoever be the reason that it is cal∣led the tree of knowledge; to be like unto God, and that by a way of such knowledge as should not depend on Gods will, but their own choice, may easily be understood to be the most dangerous temptation, that an estate of so much advantage was capeable of, how difficult so ever it be to understand by the words, how they might believe it to depend upon eating the forbidden fruit. And, as the state of meer nature, (requiring the knowledge of so few things as the leading of such a life in obedience to God required) must needs inferre that simplicity and innocence, that made them more liable to be tempted; So, a state of supernaturall knowledge by the Spirit of God withdrawing their con∣sideration from inferior things of this world, to be conversant about the mat∣ters of God, they might be exposed to temptation as well by not attending, as by not apprehending the things of the world. As, on the other side, they were fortified against it, no lesse by that innocence and simplicity which made them not sensible of that which provoketh it, then by that resolution of Gods Spirit which set them above it. These being the considerations which appear to me, in those things which the Scriptures propose unto us of this estate, I will not stick to say, that I hold the common opinion to be the more probable, for two reasons: The first, Because it seemeth to me farre more consequent to the effect of mans fall, (which is the losse and want of spirituall grace, necessary to the conduct of him in his spirituall life here, to eternall life in the world to come) that he should have transgressed and forfeited the meanes thereof, then onely that in∣nocence that should have inabled him to yeeld God obedience onely in an estate of meer nature, and to the purpose of it. Secondly, because I find it to be received by the Fathers of the Church after S. Irenaeus, who seemeth to have
delivered it in expresse and clear terms. And yet I must say, on the other side, that I find it no reason to count it a matter of Faith, but onely the more rea∣sonable supposition among divines; So that, the matter of Faith, concerning originall sinne, is more easily understood to depend upon it, and more reason∣ably inferred from it, and maintained by it. Not onely, because you see the reasons out of the Scriptures so ballanced; But chiefly, because I see the sub∣ject of the dispute to be all upon the literall and mysticall sense of these Scrip∣tures: Without the knowledge whereof, I am confident the Faith of a Christi∣an is intire, though the skill of a divine is nothing. And, for the consent of the Fathers, how generall soever it be after Irenaeus, I have the authority of the same Irenaeus, backed by his reason, (in that excellent Chapter, where he distinguishes between the Tradition of Faith, and the skill of the Scriptures) to resolve me, that neither this point, nor any other point which depends upon the agreement between the Old Testament and the New, as this does, can be∣long to the Faith of a Christian, but onely to the skill of a divine. But now this being premised and setled, it will be easie for me to inferre, that a state of meer nature is a thing very possible, had it pleased God to appoint it, by proposing no higher end then naturall happinesse, no harder meanes then Originall innocence, to man whom he had made. The reasons premised sufficiently serving to shew, that there is no con∣tradiction in the being of that, which there is so much appearance that it was indeed. But I must advise you withall, that I mean it, upon a farre other suppositi∣on, then that of the Schoole Doctors; They, supposing that man was created to that estate of supernaturall happinesse to which the Gospel pretendeth to rege∣nerate Christians, hold that it was Gods meer free grace, that he was not created with that contradiction between the reason and appetite, which the principles of his nature are of themselves apt to produce. Whereupon it foloweth, that con∣cupiscence is Gods creature, that is, the indowment of it; signifying by concu∣piscence, that contrariety to reason, which the disorder of sensuall appetite pro∣duceth. A saying that hath fallen from the pen of S. Augustine, and that after his businesse with Pelagius, Retract. I. 9. allowing what he had writ to that purpose against the Manichees, in his third book de libero arbitrio, which he mentioneth againe, and no way disalloweth, in his book de Dono perseverantiae, cap. XI. and XII. but seemeth utterly inconsistent with the grounds which he stands upon against Pelagius. For, supposing contrariety and disorder in the motions of mans soul, what is there in this confusion which it hath created in the doings of mankind, that might not have come to passe without the fall? Unlesse we suppose, that a man can be reasonably madde, or, that concupiscence which reason boundeth not, could be contained within any rule or measure, not supposing any gift of God, inabling reason to give bounds to it, or pre∣venting the effect of it, which the supposition of pure nature alloweth us not to suppose. For, the very state of mortality, supposing the immortality of the soul, either requireth in man the conscience of integrity before God, or infer∣reth upon him a bad expectation for the world to come. And therefore, though the sorrows that bring death might serve for advantage to happinesse, were reasonable to govern passion in using them; yet not being able, they can be nothing but essayes of that displeasure of God which he is to expect in the world to come. And therefore this escape of S. Augustine may seem to abate the zeale of those, who would make his opinion the rule of our common Faith. That which my resolution inferreth is no more then this; That, supposing God did not create man in an estate capable to attaine the said supernaturall happinesse, he might neverthelesse, had he pleased, have created him in an estate of immortality without impeachment of trouble or of sorrow; but not ca∣pable of further happinesse, then his then life in Paradise upon earth import∣eth. Not that I intend to say, that God had been without any purpose of calling man whom he had created in this state unto the state of supernaturall
grace, whereby he might become capable of everlasting glory in the world to come, as Christians believe themselves to be. For, the meaning of those that suppose this, is, that God purposed to exercise man first in this lower estate, and having proved him and found him faithfull in it, (supposing Adam had not fallen) to have called him afterwards to a higher condition, of that immortality which we expect in the world to come, upon trial of fidelity, in that obedience here, which is correspondent to it. Whereupon, it is reasonably, though not ne∣cessarily consequent, that, this calling being to be performed by the Word of God, which, being afterwards incarnate is our Lord Christ, and the Spirit which dwelt in him without measure, our Lord Christ should have come in our flesh, though Adam had not fallen, to do this. And this is alledged for a reason, why, afterwards, the Law that was given to Moses covenanted expresly for no more then the happinnesse of this present life; though covertly, being joyned with that discipline of godlinesse, which the people of God had received by tradition from their Fathers, it afforded sufficient argument of the happi∣nesse of the world to come, for those who should imbrace the worship of God in spirit and truth, though under the paedagogie and figures of the Law. For, they say it is suitable to the proceeding of God in restoring mankind, that we understand him first to intend the recovering of that naturall integrity in which man was created, by calling his people to that uprightnesse of civile conversa∣tion, in the service of the onely true God, which might be a protection to as many, as, under the shelter of such civile Lawes, should take upon them the profession of true righteousnesse to God; Intending afterwards, by our Lord Christ, to set on foot a treaty of the said righteousnesse, upon terms of happi∣nesse in the world to come. But thes things, though containing nothing pre∣judiciall to Christianity, yet, not being grounded upon expresse scripture, but collected by reasoning the ground and rule of Gods purpose, which concerns not the truth of the Gospel whether so or not; I am neither obliged to admit nor refuse; So much of Gods counsel remaining alwaies visibly true; That he pleased to proceed by degrees, in setting his Gospel on foot; (by preparing his people for it by the discipline of the Law, and the insufficience thereof, vi∣sible, by that time which he intended for the coming of our Lord Christ) though we say that man was at first created in a state of supernaturall grace, and capable of everlasting happinesse: For still, the reason of Gods proceed∣ing by degrees will be, that first, there might be a time to try how great the disease was, by the failing of the cure thereof by the Law, be∣fore so great a Physitian as the Sonne of God came in person to visite it. This onely I must adde, because all this discourse proceeds upon supposition, that man might have been created in an estate of meer nature, if indowed with uprightnesse capable to attaine that happinesse which that estate required; That therefore, supposing man created to supernaturall happinesse, the sup∣position of pure nature, with that concupiscence, which, the principles there∣of, not prevented by any provision of Gods to the contrary, would produce, is no way allowable. For who shall take upon him to charge God, with lay∣ing an obligation of attaining supernaturall happinesse upon him, whom, by inbred concupiscence, he should make utterly unable to attain it? This being said, for the fuller understanding of the said opinion, I may now further take upon me, not onely, that, by the resolution premised, that end∣lesse dispute about the indowments which Adam was first created with, is easi∣ly determinable; but also there is a firme ground laid, upon which the differ∣ence between naturall and supernaturall may be setled among divines. For alwayes, a state of meer nature being understood to be possible, (whether we believe that man was actually setled in it or not) it is no hard matter to say, that whatsoever was requisite to inable man to live in obedience to God, for the attaining of immortality in it, all this and nothing else, is to be understood to be naturall; As requisite to the indowment of man, supposed to be set in that state: That supernaturall, which is requisite to the advancement of him
to supernaturall happinesse, by inabling him, to tender unto God that spiritu∣all obedience of righteousnesse and true holinesse, to which he stands obliged by so high a calling. Whereupon, as, supposing that man was created to this happinesse, it cannot be doubted, that he stood indowed with capacities proportionable to that obedience which it requires; So, in as much as those capacities were not absolutely due to his nature, (which might have been crea∣ted in another estate) they are absolutely to be counted supernaturall and of grace. But, in as much as they depend upon a former grace of God, which is, that gracious purpose of advancing man to a capacity of supernaturall happi∣nesse, they may be counted due to his nature, not as necessary consequences of the constitution thereof, but of that estate, which the free and gracious purpose of God designed for it. In the mean time, the contradiction between reason and sense being so consequent to the constitution of mans nature, that it was notwithstanding, in Gods appointment, to prevent the coming of it to effect; and, the obedience of God requiring that it should be prevented, (man be∣ing otherwise unable perfectly to performe it, whether in the state of meer na∣ture of grace) requisite it is, that the rebellion of the sensuall appetite against the reason be accounted the consequence of his fall, not the condition in which he was created. And, upon these terms, it is easy to assigne the difference be∣tween originall uprightnesse and supernaturall grace in Adam, supposing that he was created to supernaturall happinesse, and therefore in supernaturall grace. For, seeing man might have been created in an estate of meer nature, in which, though destitute of grace, yet he had not been destitute of righteous∣nesse; Though we suppose, that he was indeed created in the state of grace, yet may we easily distinguish, between that uprightnesse, which his nature ne∣cessarily required, and that spiritual holinesse whereby it stood advanced to that capacity of true happinesse, which Gods free Grace designed for it. And howsoever these termes may have been used among divines; yet, the occasion of misunderstanding them being thus cleared, nothing hinders, the free gift by which it was advanced to be signified by the name of grace, the necessary up∣rightnesse of nature, by the terme of originall righteousnesse. These things premised, it will be no difficult thing to resolve, that it is all one, whether we say, that originall sinne is concupiscence, or, that it is the want of originall righteousnesse with concupiscence. For, as in all actuall or habituall sinnes (which, as more subject to sensible experience, are much bet∣ter known to us) there is a want of straightnesse or uprightnesse, wherein their being sinne consisteth, because the Law of God traces us a straight way to walk, which they transgresse; But there is also some action or habit wherein this crookednesse is understood to subsist, though indeed, consisting in the meer want of uprightnesse, it subsisteth not at all, but is meer nothing; So it is ne∣cessary to conceive something positive, to which the want of originall righte∣ousnesse may be attributed, neither can the nature of sinne be understood in the state which we are born to, otherwise. And, seeing the nature of originall sin is necessarily habituall (because we have excluded the imputation of Adams first sinne) it remaines, that the appetite, or inclination of nature to that which appeareth to be good, be the subject to which this perverseesse is attributed, as subsisting in it. Now, the appetite or inclination which we have, to that which appeares to be good, is not called concupiscence at large, unlesse we un∣derstand further, that it tendeth to injoy that which of it self is good, out of order, and without measure. For, this inclination of the appetite, as no man will deny to be against Gods Law, that supposes it to be a straight rule, no more will e deny, that, upon these suppositions, it is properly called concupiscence. So that this one terme of concupiscence expresseth as much, as the want of ori∣ginall uprightnesse with concupiscence, and giveth not that occasion of mistake which the using of more words doth; In asmuch as, he that hears of the want of originall righteousnsse with concupiscence, hath occasion to understand the want of uprightnesse and concupiscence to be two things, whereas indeed, as hath been said, there can be no more in the matter, but onely a positive incli∣nation
to things that appeare good, deprived and destitue of that order and measure which the Law of God requireth. And herewith agrees that descrip∣tion of Originall sinne in the confession of Ausburg, which hath been the sub∣ject of so much debate among the Divines of the Empire; That this want of originall righteousnesse is an horrible blindnesse and disobedience; Which is, to be destitute of that light and knowledge of God which should have been in mans na∣ture remaining intire, to be destitute of that uprightnesse, which consists in perpe∣tuall obedience, in true, pure and soveraigne love of God, and the like gifts of intire nature. For, let no man think them so simple as to imagine, that Originall sinne consists in actuall ignorance, and actuall hatred and disobedience to God, which are themselves no ways original, but acknowledge a source from whence they proceed. But, desiring to make their meaning more palpable to gross understandings, they were not afraid to incurre an exception, which the capti∣ous might make; as if they understood no difference, between those consequen∣ces and productions, whereby it becomes visible, and the sourse of them, which the question properly concerns. For, as concerning ignorance, and, being destitute of that light and knowledge of God, which the state of uprightnesse must have injoyed; I find no necessity to think, that Adam, upon his fall, was actually deprived of the habituall knowledge of those truths which were setled in his minde, concerning God, or of those images in the minde, or conceptions of the mind, wherein that knowledge did consist, as all knowledge doth. It is enough, and more then enough, that the poison wherewith his inclinations and appetites stood now so perverted, suffered not that truth which enlighten∣ed his mind to have effect in his actions; according to that which Christians, being by the grace of God restored to the like light, do find in themselves by sad experience. And when, in processe of time, his posterity, notwithstanding the instruction which they received of him for above nine hundred years to∣gether, and, notwithstanding the preaching of the godly Fathers, (which S. Jude in his Epistle exemplifieth, of Encch, and S. Peter of Noe 2 Pet. II. 5.) fell away, not onely to oppression and wickednesse, but to the worship of false Gods; Then it appeared, how naturall this blindnesse is to the posterity of Adam having departed from God, concupiscence prevailing, to make such strange and horrible ignorance take place in the mindes of them, who had such certain and evident information from their predecessors, of God that made them, and all the world for their benefit, of his severe judgement upon the fall of Adam, and mercy promised, and judgement preached against them that should refuse it. To the difficulty, then, which causeth this whole dispute, I will answer otherwise then they which have not been able to take it away have done; That, all sinne being a transgression of Gods Law, if there be severall Lawes by which God deales with mankind, there must be also severall rules and severall measures, by which, that, which is sinne according to the Originall Law, may not be sinne according to the latter Law, which necessarily deroga∣teth from that which went afore. The originall rule of righteousnesse, which, the light which man was created in obliged him to, must needs detect and con∣vince all habituall inclination of concupiscence, and much more, the very first motions of the same, to be sinne against God. And, seeing the very same mo∣tions are seen, in that conflict between the flesh and the Spirit, which the most regenerate find in themselves, though by the grace of Gods Spirit in them they prevaile not; (so that there is no difference for nature and kind, but onely for efficacy and strength, between the concupiscence which remaines in the regene∣rate, and that which rules in the unregenerate) there can no controversie re∣maine among Christians, that there is an original Law of God, which this defect of original righteousnesse violateth. And, seeing Christianity obligeth to mor∣tifie concupiscence, and to prevent rather then to suppresse the first motions of it; of necessity, the rule of our conversation is grounded upon that upright∣nesse, in which, or to which Adam was created. But not therefore the rule of Gods proceeding with us, whose salvation his mercy designeth, supposing concupiscence. And if there be a latter Law of God, derogatory to that
originall Law, according to which he dealeth with those that are under it, by imbracing the Covenant of Grace; it cannot be said, that the transgression of Gods Originall Law, is any sinne against it, being tendered to those, whom God knows, that, so long as they live in the world, they cannot be void of con∣cupiscence. So that, by virtue of that Law, according to which God by his Gospel, declares that he will del with those that imbrace Christianity, well may it be said, that originall sinne is utterly defaced by Baptisme: Though in relation to that originall rule of righteousnesse, which mans uprightness obligeth him to, it is most truly said, that concupiscence is originall sinne. And though, supposing this answer, it seems to me evidently unnecessary, if not evi∣dently contradictory to it self, and, to the justice, goodnesse, and holinesse of God; to have recourse to a state of meer nature, as if man might have been created in it, supposing him designed by God to a state of supernaturall happi∣nesse; Yet it is as evident to me, that it is no error of the foundation of faith, but onely in the knowledge of the Scriptures, and the skill of divines. For, sup∣posing the belief of originall sinne on the one side; on the other side, remission of sinne by the profession of Christianity, which Baptisme executeth and so∣lemnizeth; he that failes in giving account how these things may stand together, and be both true at once, cannot be thought to faile of that faith, which he maintaines not with good successe. There may be as great a failur on the other side, in not believing the efficacy of Christianity, in the remission of sinne. Neither can the decree of the Council of Trent, couched in the proper and formall terms of S. Augustine (that concupiscence in the regenerate is not truly and properly sinne, but so called, because proceeding from sinne, and ten∣ding to sinne) be condemned as absolutely false, so long as there is a new Law of God, which is the Covenant of Grace, against which it is no sinne, being tendred, and made after it, and supposing it. Nor could the mouth of Pelagi∣us have been stopped, when the efficacy of Baptisme in the remission of sinne was received among all Christians, according to the Primitive and originall truth of Christianity; were there not some true and just ground, upon which it may be said, that the opposition of concupiscence after Baptisme to the Law of God remaineth no more. And yet that is no lesse true, which the same Au∣gustine in divers other places affirmeth, either expresly, or by good conse∣quence, that concupiscence, which remaines after Baptisme is originall sinne; To wit, according to the originall Law of God, tendred to the originall in∣stitution of mans nature. If therefore that be true which Doctor Field saith, that all the errors of the Church of Rome, concerning the Covenant of Grace, have their originall from this error concerning the state of pure nature, (as perhaps, they may better be said to proceed from not distinguishing the se∣verall consequences of Gods severall Lawes) it will neverthelesse be very fit to be considered, whether those errors which are grounded upon a mistake in divinity, do amount to any deniall of the Foundation of Faith. For, supposing for the present, though not granting the supposition of meer nature, (that is, that God might have made man, though instituted to super∣naturall happinesse, with concupiscence) to be possible; it may be neverthe∣lesse, and is, without doubt, utterly uselesse, for a reason, why the righteous∣nesse of a Christian is accepted by God, as the fulfilling of his Law, towards the reward of everlasting happinesse, notwithstanding concupiscence; For which, it would be very impertinent to alledge, that God might have made man with concupiscence, and therefore accepts the obedience of those that are un∣der it: Because it is manifest, that, the perfection to which Christianity call∣eth, is that to which Adam was instituted in Paradise. It is therefore, by con∣sequence, no lesse impertinent to the nature of Originall sin, that God might have made man from the beginning with concupiscence. For Originall sinne must, of necessity, be that evil which we are born with in consideration of Adams sinne. And therefore whatsoever we might have been born
with seeing that actually, and de facto, we are born with concupiscence in consideration of Adams sinne, who otherwise should have been born with that uprightnesse in which he was made; Originall sinne must needs be that which we are now born with, though supposing that we had been originally made with it, it had not been Originall sinne. For, the absurdity of this con∣sequence tends to shew, that the supposition of meer nature is impossible, and presses not me, which believe it so to be. And now, to that novelty in the doctrine of the Church of England that hath caused so much offense, (because, allowing some points of it not to pre∣judice the common aith, it is requisite, that I freely distinguish my self from that which I allow not) I say briefly; That, if that excellent doctor, and those who finde themselves offended at his doctrine, will give me leave to in∣terpret one point, to distinguish one term of his opinion, I shall heartily wish that the offense thereof may cease. It is in that he saith, that concupiscence was before the fall, though much increased by it; And I would have it said, that all the inclinations of the sensuall appetite were before the fall, but the disorder of them, seeking satisfaction without rule or measure, by it; The word Concupiscence being capable of both significations. For it is manifest that Adam, as we do, consisted of flesh and Spirit, (taking flesh, for the sub∣stance, not the perverse inclination of the flesh, and Spirit, for the substance of his own, not the grace of Gods Spirit) of soul and body, of a spirituall and carnal substance; The appetite of the principal part tending to that wch is excel∣lent by nature, but the baser part having an appetite proper to the nature of it, whereof reason, from which all order rule and measure proceeds, is no ingredi∣ent. But it is necessary to say, that God, who requires the sensual appetite to be subject to the principal part of the soul, as the reason to God, had provided such an estate for such a creature, wherein it might be in the power of reason, to give order rule and measure to the motions of the sensuall appetite. Otherwise, the mortifying of concupiscence being the work of Christianity, it will necessa∣rily follow, that the coming of Christ was to furnish that grace, by which Christians may mortify that which God had created, which our common faith admitteth not. And therefore it is no otherwise to be admitted, that concupi∣scence is increased by the fall of Adam, then, as that may be said to be in∣creased, which, being moderate afore, is since become immoderate. For, seeing that concupiscence, being once free of the command of reason, and the rule and measure which it might have from thence, can have no other bounds then those, which in this estate, it acknowledgeth; (which is, to be utterly boundlesse, so farre as it is consistent with it self, and, as the satisfaction of severall passions appears not incompetible) there is no reason why it should be ascribed to the fall, once granting it to be the condition of Gods creature; Which, without the fall, must needs have profited to that horrible confusion in humane affaires, the contrariety whereof to the excellence of mans nature reason discerns; and therefore, religion reasonably introduces the fall, to give a reason for it. If the supposition of pure nature would indure, that man, though created liable to concupiscence, by virtue of some contrary indowment might be preserved from the effect of it; And that the effect of Adams fall were to make that frustrate and void; I should not think that supposition any way prejudicial to the Christian Faith. But▪ in regard that the supposition admitteth no such in∣dowment, (because it must be a gift of grace, which would destroy the sup∣position of meer nature) therefore it is denyed, that God, supposing that in∣tegrity in Adam which the Christian faith requireth, could create him in this state of meer nature. If this Doctor had said, or could have said; That con∣cupiscence, being a naturall consequence of mans composition, was prevent∣ed of coming to act and effect, by eating the fruit of the tree of life, ordained to that purpose; That the leaves thereof were, in this regard, healing to the nations; And that the grace of Christ was dispensed by that meanes, in that estate, as now by the Sacrament of the Eucharist; I might say, this were a no∣velty among divines, but I could not say that it were destructive to the Faith.
But if the coming of Christ be not to repaire the fall of the first Adam, I can∣not see how the Faith is secure. As for the term of sin, when he denieth that this concupiscence can be pro∣perly sin, which is neither the act of sin, nor any propensity created by custome of sinning, but bred in our nature, whereof there is no other instance but it self; I confesse, when the question comes to the signification of words, and the property of it (which may alwaies be endlesse, because the question is only, whether my sense shall give Law to your language or your sense to mine, which it is not necessary to insist upon, when the faith is secured on both sides) I count it alwaies hard, to charge an error in the substance of Faith. Now, whether we say this concupiscence is sin or not, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ his coming, and the end of it remains alwaies the same, and so, the necessi∣ty of his grace is settled upon the right bottome. And truly, if we recollect the language which is used by the Greek Fathers, and those that lived before Pela∣gius▪ comparing it with that which hath been used since S. Austine, we shall not find the term of Originall sin so frequent as the ground of it. For, not only death and the sorrows that bring it, but, even the inclination of our nature to actuall sin, is by them ascribed to the fall, who use not the terme of O∣riginall sin. As every one, that peruseth but the termes of those passages of the Fathers, which this Doctor hath produced, may easily perceive. Upon these terms Clemens Alexandrinus is no interruption to the Tradition of Originall sin, in that difficult place Strom. III. that made Vossius say, he un∣derstood it not. He speaks against those that condemned Marriage. . Let them test us where the Child that is borne com∣mitted whoredome, or how it fell under the curse of Adam that had done nothing? It remains, as it seems, that they say, that the Generation is evill, not onely of the body, bt of the Soul, for which the body is. And when David saith, I was concei∣ved in sins, and in iniquities did my Mother lust with me; like a Prophet he calls Eve his Mother, But Eve was the Mother of the living: And though conceived in sin, yet was not be in sin, or sinfull. But, whether every one that turns from sin to Faith, turn from sinfull custome, as from his Mother, to life, one of the twelve Prophets will be my witnesse, saying; shall I give my first-born for impiety, the fruit of my belly for the sin of my Soul? He traduceth not him that said, Increase and multiply; but he calleth the first inclinations from our birth, by which we are ignorant of God, impieties. He saith, most truly, that they cannot render a reason how we are born under Adams curse, but by charging God. He grant∣eth actuall sin in conception, but that, not the sin of the Child that is conceived. He saith, the custome of sin may be our Mother Eve, in the mysticall sense of David; But he ascribeth it to those first motions from our birth, which make mankind ignorant of God, till they turn to Christianity. Whether this be my plea or no, let him that hath perused the Premises judge. This same is to be said of S. Chrysostome in his Homily ad Neophytos; denying that Infants are baptized, because they are polluted with sin. To wit, that he appropriateth the name of sin to actuall sin. But, as Clemens acknowledges the first motions that we have from our birth to tend to ignorance of God; So S. Chrysostome, Hom. XI. in VI. ad Rom. Hom. XIII. in VII. ad Rom. cleerly ascribes the com∣ing in of concupiscence to Adams sin, or rather to the sentence of mortality inflicted by God upon it, wherein he is followed by Theodoret in V. ad Rom. ob∣serving, that the want of things necessary to the sustenance of our mortality
provokes excesses, and that sins. If this reason can generally hold, so that all concupiscence may be said to be the consequence of mortality, Christianity will be sound, the necessity of Christs coming for the repair of Adams fall, remaining the same. But this is the reason why the same S. Chrysostome, Hom. X. in VI. ad Rom. when S. Paul saith; By one mans disobedience many are made sinners, understandeth by sinners, liable to death; Concupiscence, wherein Originall sinne consisteth, as I have shewed, being the consequence of mortality, according to S. Chrysostome. As for those that censure books at Ox∣ford, if they like not this, I demand but one thing, what they think of Zuinglius his Writings. For I suppose, none of them believes, that Zuinglius holds ori∣ginall sinne to be properly sinne, or that infants are damned for it; (though, whether they come to everlasting life or no, notwithstanding their concupi∣scence which they are born with, I find not that he saith) Let them therefore choose whether they will censure Zuinglius his bookes, or professe, that they have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons. And therefore, I do not understand why I should make any more of this difference of language, then of that which was on foot in the ancient Church, about the terms of hypostasis, in the blessed Trinity, among those, who hatily adhered to the Faith of the Church. And, I conceive, I may compare it with the difference between the Latine and the Greek Church about the procession of the Holy Ghost, whether from the Fa∣ther and the Sonne, o from the Father by the Sonne. For, though I do believe with the Western Church, that he proceedeth from both; Yet, the Eastern Church acknowledging as it doth, from the Father by the Sonne, If it had been in me, the matter should never have come to a breach in the Church about that difference. Even so, the terme of Originall sinne being received in the Western Church, to exclude the he∣resie of Pelagius; I do not intend to take offence at the using, or give offence by the refusing of it. But I shall not therefore condemn those times or persons of the Church that used it not, as unsound or defective in the Faith, the Tradition whereof is not to be derived, but by that which all parts agree in professing. As for the punishment of everlasting torments upon infants that de∣part with it, it is a thing utterly past my capacity to understand, how it concerns the necessity of Christs coming, that those infants, who are not cured by it, should be thought liable to them. Would his death be in vaine, would the Grace which it purchaseth be unnecessary, unlesse those infants that have committed no actuall sinne go into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels? Shall the corruption of our nature by the fall of Adam be counted a fable, unlesse I be able to main∣taine, that infants are there, or shew where they are if not there? Or will any man undertake to shew me that consent of the whole Church in this point, which is visible, by the premises, as concerning that cor∣ruption of nature▪ which I challenge to be mater of Faith? It is not to be denied that S. Augustine, and enow after him, have maintained it, and per∣haps thought, that the Faith cannot be maintained otherwise. But can that therefore be the Tradition of the whole Church, which Doctors allowed by the Church do not believe? In this, as in other instances, we see a difference between maters of Faith and Ecclesiasticall doctrines, of which you have a Book of Gernadius intituled d dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis. For, such positions as passe without offense, when they are held and professed by such as injoy the communion of the Church, (or more then so, rank of authority in it) must necessarily be counted doctrines of the Church. And yet, if it appear, that the contrary hath been held other whiles and else where, they do not ob∣lige our belief as matters of Faith. As for the article of the Church of England, which ascribeth the desert of Gods wrath and damnation to Originall sinne;  conceive it is alwaies the duty of every sonne of the Church, so to interpret, so
to limit or to extend the acts of the Church of England, that is, the sense of them, that it may agree with the Faith of the Catholick Church: Because all such acts serve, and are to serve, onely to maintaine the Church of England a member thereof, by maintaining the Faith of it. How much more at this time; that unity and communion, which these acts tendred to maintain amongst our selves, being irrecoverably violated, by men equally concerned in the che∣rishing of it? For, admitting the Faith and the Laws of the primitive Church, what can any Church allege, why they are not one with us? Not admitting them, what can we alledge why we are not one with others? It followeth therefore of necessity, that the wrath of God and damnation, which Originall sin deserveth, according to the Article of the Church of England, be confined to the losse and coming short of that salvation, to which the first Adam being appointed, the second Adam hath restored us; There being no more to be had, either by necessary consequence from the Scripture, or by Tradition from the whole Church. For, to require me to believe them to be in the torments prepared for the devil and his angels, because I cannot say where they are, were a reason too unreasonable for a Christian.
CHAP. XXI. The opinion that maks the Predetermination of mans will by God the sourse of his freedom; And wherein Jansenius differs from it. Of necessity upon supposition & absolute. The necessity of the Will following the last dictate of the understanding is onely upon supposition, As also that which Gods foresight creates. The diffe∣rence between indifferent and undetermined. These things thus premised, as concerning that estate wherein the Gospell overtaketh the will of man to whom Christ is tendered, being under original sin, I say that it findes him not void of that freedome of choice, in doing or not doing this or that, which stands in opposition to necessity; But, that which stands in opposition to the bondage and servitude of sin. This position is inten∣ded to contradict an opinion, which seemeth to be very ordinary among Divines, as well of the Reformation as the Church of Rome, though more inge∣niously professed and maintained by these; Who, pretending to derive the efficacy of Gods Predestination, and the grace which it provideth, from that de∣cree of his Will, whereby he determineth the will of his creature to do or not to doe watsoever is indeed, don or not don, in order of nature before it deter∣mine it selfe; do consequently professe, that, notwithstanding this Predetermi∣nation of the will is no lesse effectuall then Gods omnipotence, (whereof it is the immediate and indefeasible consequence and effect) yet, there is no free∣dome in the creature, no contingence in the effects of it, but that which follow∣eth upon this will of God, determining understanding Creatures to do that which they do freely, as it determining understanding Creatures to do that which they do necessarily. This position, though I intend not to admit, yet I count it a point of ingenuity in them, who think they free themselves of great dificulties by supposing it, expressely to maintaine the truth of that supposition, whereof they make so much advantage. For they, who, not daring to incounter the difficulties wherewith it is chargeable, do claime the consequences of it, without premising the expresse supposition of it, do as good as say nothing, where they advise not the reader of those difficulties, which the prime principle that they proceed upon is burthened with. But he that sees, how particular instances depend upon generall principles, shall not stick to judge of their positions, by the dependance they have upon this supposition so soon as they are informed of the credit which it deserves. Now this predetermination▪ Being the immediate effect of Gods omnipotency, as for the cause of it; as for the nature of it, troubles very much those that maintaine it to say wherein it consists: as in∣deed it may very well trouble any man to say of what colour a Chimaera is, being, in rerum natura, just nothing. For, if they say it is a principle infused by the immediate worke of grace into the Will, it is straightwaies evident, that the having of it is not to make the Will able, which all habituall indow∣ments tend to, but to make it actually to worke. It must therefore consist in a certain motion or impulse, immediately wrought by God in the Will▪ which though it is not in the will to have, depending meerely upon the Will of God yet, that neither good nor ill can be don without it, being necessary, as they think, to the effectuall determining of the will upon two accounts; First, as the will is a secondary cause, that cannot worke unlesse moved by the first cause: Secondly, as the Will, not being determined of it selfe, cannot be determined to any act but by the same first cause. But these two accompts seem to me both one, For, nothing can determine the will to act, speaking of that which determines it formally, or in the nature of a formall cause, but the act of it. For, supposing the will to act, and excluding whatsoever else might be considered, the will remaines determined: Not suposing that, it may further
be questioned what determines it, The question then being onely what it is that determines the will in the nature of the effective cause, the difficulty that cau∣seth the question is but one, because it is presumed that the second cause can not act, if not acted, that is determined to act, by the first. The nature then of this motion, received & lodged in the Will, is imagined neverthelesse to be suc∣cessive, such as is the being of colours in the aire, when they goe to the eye, or that impulse which a handicraft-man moves his tooll with. And the necessity of it standeth upon a generall account, not of originall sine, but of Gods crea∣ture (such as the will in all estates is requisite to the acts of the will) because no∣thing can be don by the creature, but that which God shall determine it to do. But there is of late an other opinion started in the Church of Rome by Jansenius, in his Augustinus, which maintaines, that the Will, in all actions that are god according to Christianity, is determined by grace, effectually incli∣ning the will by the love of true good, preventing not expecting the motion thereof, and producing that influence of the will whereby formally it acteth. The nature of it then, consists in that very act of life, whereby the reasonable creature exerciseth its choice no waies requisite to the actions of nature, which man is able to do under originall sin but meerely upon that account, as the cure of it, restoring the due command over that concupiscence wherein ori∣ginall sin consisteth, and not extending to the state of innocence. Which not∣withstanding the will is no lesse naturally determined by it, then by that prin∣ciple which the other opinion advanceth. For they say both, that the will is not determined by the object, howsoever proposed, but morally, as he that out∣wardly adviseth or perswadeth determines him that resolves, upon that conside∣ration which he advanceth, to that which he proposeth, And therefore this de∣termination, both agree, satisfies not that efficacy of grace, which the scrip∣tures proposed in the premises require. Therefore, as the former opinion de∣termineth the will naturally, by a principle really lodged in the nature of the wil so this, by the very vitall act of vvilling, really subsistng in the nature of the Will, though produced by God a cause above nature, which when the de∣light in good which it importeth is so great as to swallow up all contradiction, it determineth to the same, preventing the determination of it selfe; when other∣wise acknowledging, that, though of the same nature with that which overcom∣eth, it is never the lesse defeasible. From this ground there flowes an other difference between these two opinions, we goe further from the foun∣taine head, still more visible. For the former, admitting free will to be a fa∣culty, able to act, or not to act, supposing all that is requisite to inable it, in particular the helps of Gods grace; assoiles all dificulties, by distinguisting the compound sense of those sayings, which expresse contradiction between predetermination and freedome, from the divided sense of the same. For ex∣ample, if it be said; That to which the Will is predetermined must needs come to passe; Therefore the will cannot be free to choose whether it shall be done or not; the answer is; That the will is able to do otherwise, in snsu diviso non in sensu composito, dividing it from the determination of it, that is, not be∣ing determined, but not putting it and the determination of it together, that is, being determined. So the will hath as they say, simultatem potentiae, not potentiam simultatis; That is, in their barbarous latine; a power of doing this as well as that, at one & the same time, not a povver of chusing or acting both this and that, at one & the same time; For, the ability of doing may well stand with the actuall choice of not doing, but, actually at the same time to choose to do and not to doe, are terms inconsistent; as it may be truely said, that a white wall may be black, though not, supposing it continue white. This distinction I cannot see how Jansenius can imploy, though he think he may, whe∣ther it serve or the other opinion to any purpose not. For, or that in difference wherein the first opinion maintaineth the very nature of freewill to consist, at least in words, (whether they signifie any thing or not) the second main∣taineth to be so far from the nature of it. that the freedome of the Will is not to be had and obtayned, without either abating or extinguishing all indiffe∣rence in it; The will being free from sin and slave to righteousnesse, (which
is an addition making the slavery of the will no slavery, but the freedome thereof perfect freedome) or else free from righteousnesse and slave to sin, (which slavery is perfect slavery, but imaginary freedome) according as it growes, of in different, determined to righteousnesse or to sin▪ which he preten∣deth to be the onely freedome whereof it is capable. And how then should Jan∣senius imploy the distinction premised, to salve that in difference of the will which he disavoweth? And therefore, in consequence hereunto, they can neither admit, that any help of grace is sufficient that is not effectuall; (and so, that he who keeps not the covenant of grace was ever able: to keep it) Nor that our L. Christ shed his blood for any but them who are and shall be actually saved by it. As for those of the Reformation (amongst whom it is manifest that this great question of the agreement between Grace and freewill is as hotly disputed as in the Ch. of Rome) upon the whether of these opinions they ground them∣selves who reject Arminius and the Lutherans, it is not so easy to say, as it may clerly be said, that they must chuse the one or the other, if they wil speake things consequent to their own principles. It is manifest, that Doctor Twisse hath imbraced the former; which he that should say that any of the rest have for∣borne to imploy, either because they could not make it popular to the capacity of vulgar understandings, or because they found not themselves able to manage it, perhaps should not conjecture much amisse. But we have of lae a work of one Doctor Strang, late of Glascowe, De voluntate & actionibus Dei circa pecca∣tum, wherein he maintaines at large, against Doctor Tuisse in particular, that it makes God the author of all sin, and by consequence plucks up all Christianity by the roots. For the rest, professing to imbrace the opinion of Jansenius, as concerning the predetermination of mans will to all works of supernaturall Grace, though, not undertaking to maintaine it, he hath added unto it that wherein it is certainely defective; To wit, an account how evill can be fore∣knowne by God, not determining the will of the creature to act it. For, this being done, the same account will serve to reconcile the freewil of the creature, both to the activity of providence in generall, and to the efficacy of predestina∣tion in matters concerning the world to come. Which how securely soever Jansenius passe by; he may think that he hath secured the point of faith concer∣ning the grace of Christ, but he cannot think that he hath satisfied any divine, that the rest of the question can be resolved according to his opinion, as the reason of Christianity requireth. I am much in feare that our Puritan Preachers when they swagger over the Arminians in their pulpits, do neither inform them, how great a part of the reformation as all the Lutherans make is on their side (neither the Church of England nor that of Rome having given sentence in the whole question) nor what difficulties their own opinion is liable to; which it would make theire hearts ake to overcome. For my part, finding the determination of the Synod of Dort against Arminius not to reach the whole question, (concerning the reconciling of mans freedome, as well to Gods foreknowledg and providence, as to his predestination and grace) I have thought best to propose the opinion of predetermination (which pretends to do it, but does it not, as I suppose) together with that wherein Jansenius va∣ries from it, to make such a resolution as I am able to propose in so difficult a businesse, the better to be understood. Now, for that which I propose, that the will of man, though under Origi∣nall sin, is free from necessity, though not free from bondage (which is to say, that, neither as a second cause, nor upon the account of Adams fall, it is determined to do or not to doe that which indeed it doth) I must distinguish, that, necessity upon supposition, is not that necessity which the will of man is free from, and which the contingence of the effects thereof is opposite to. For, if any thing be said to be necessary, upon supposition, not of the cause which necessarily produceth it, but of it selfe which is supposed to be, well may it be said necessarily to be, because it is upon necessity, as every thing that is must needs be, because that you suppose that it is. In like maner, if you suppose any thing which implyeth the being of another thing, (as if a man
see London-stone, because no man sees that which isnot) this supposition inferres not that necessity which destroyes freedom because it imports the being of that wch you suppose that it is. That necessity that destroieth freedom & contingence is antecedent to the being of contingencies, in the nature of an effective cause, though not alwaies absolute. For he which will speak properly and safely must not call any thing absolutely necessary but God alone, and his perfections, from whose freewill, all the necessity that is found in his creatures proceedeth. But, in regard that we see the Sun rise and set alwaies in one constant order, the fire alwaies burn, & the earth alwaies keep the place, truly we distinguish these things as necessary, from those that come to passe either so or otherwise, as having a presumption, from so much experience of the wil of God, which all things must obey, already part upon the course of their nature, bythe cau∣ses, which, being thereby produced, cannot, but by the same will, be defeated. But of this, I do not see what question can remaine. One kind of determination, I shall grant upon the premises, that the will of man is liable to that necessity which it inferreth, not prejudicing the freedom of it. I grant that the will necessarily followeth the last and ultimate dictate of the practick understanding; setting this grant aside, as impertinent to the question in dispute imports more then a judgement that it is best to doe or not to doe this or that: For the last dictate of the understanding that advises about doing or not doing this or that, or, that it ought to be done, or not don, by him that will do as he ought. For it is manifest, that a man many times does not doe that which he is resolved that he ought to do. And so it may fall out, that such a dictate or sentence shall not be the last or ultimate dictate of the understanding▪ because, falling to advise anew after that sentence, it may find some new consideration, whereupon it may resolve to proceed o∣therwise then afore. Therefore, the last or ultimate dictate of the understan∣ding cannot be understood to be any other then that which is effectuall, that is to say, when it is supposed, that the effects followe upon it. And upon these terms I grant, that the will is necessarily determined, by the last dictate of the understanding; in as much as it is supposed to be, necessary, that the will be determined by some judgement of the understanding, either expressely pro∣nouncing, or implicitly resolving, that this or that is for the best to be done or not done. So that he that saies, that the will is necessarily determined by the last judgement of the understanding, saies no more but this, that the will is necessa∣rily determined by that judgement which determines it. For, supposing it is the last, you suppose that the will proceeds to action upon it: So that the ne∣cessity which all this inferrs is no prejudice to freedome or contingence, being only the necessity of that which must needs be, because you suppose that it is. The like is to be said of the foreknowledge or foresight which God hath, of whatsoever shall at any time come to passe, and the necessity, which though it causeth not, yet it inferreth. For no man can know that which is not true, nor see that which is not in being; neither can that be foreseen, which is not to have being at that time when it is foreseene to come to passe: And therefore all foresight necessarily implies a supposition of the future being of that which is foreseen. A thing necessarily true, howsoever we suppose the will to be deter∣mined to do whatsoever it doth; that is to say, whatsoever we suppose to bee the ground of Gods foresight. For, supposing that God from everlasting fore∣saw that S. Paul. should be converted at such a moment of time, because he had a purpose from everlasting, to determine his will, freely to imbrace Christ at that moment of time; yet was not S. Paul converted because God foresaw that he should be converted, but, because he was to be converted, therefore God foresaw that he should be converted. Indeed we are to distinguish three instances, in the knowledg of God concerning future contingencies. In the first he sees what may come to passe; In the second what shall come to passe; In the third, what is come to passe. The first by the perfection of his nature, The second by the decree of his will, giving stedy order to things of themselves moveable, as Boethius says, that is, to contingencies. For, we suppose contingence to
stand with providence, and we inquire how that consistence may appeare. The third by the act of freedome, seene from everlasting, before the will that doth it have being, in those very decrees, in the execution whereof providence con∣sists. There is in an architect, or survayor of buildings, a certain knowledg of that which he designeth, before he goe to work, consisting in a certaine Idea or form, which his businesse is to copy out of his mind into the materialls. But when his worke is done, he sees that in being before his eyes, which he saw in his own designe afore. The wisdome of God is that soverain art which directed him in making heaven and earth. and ordaining whatsoever comes to passe in both. The decree of his will, (whether immediate or mediate) distinguishes between that which may be, and that which is at the present, and therefore in the same sort, between that which may be and that which shall be for the future. But, though his knowledge increase not when he sees that in being which former∣ly he saw was to be, because he goes not beyond himselfe for the knowledge of it; yet to see that it supposeth the act of the freedome which doth it, past, to see that it shall be, to come. In like maner, therefore, whilst the act of the creature appeareth to God as to come, he seeth what shall be. But, if all future contingencies be present to God from everlasting, then consequently, he sees also from everlasting the act of that freedome which produceth them, as don in the due time of it; and in this sight consisteth the effect of the same presence of future contingencies in and to Gods eternity, from everlasting. There is therefore in God a certaine kind of knowledge of that which is to come, which Divines call scientiam visionis, whereby God sees from everlasting thegreatest contingencies to come to passe at that moment of time, when we see them come to passe; which, whatsoever is the ground of it, whether it be posi∣ble for us to say how it is possible or not, yet this we must say of it, that it presupposeth the future being of that which it foreseeth, and therefore is no way the cause of it; Though the future being thereof presupposeth also that knowledg in God, which directeth that freedome which bringeth it to passe. So that the Fathers of the Church had cause to insist (against those Heretickes that derived the ourse and originall of sin in the world from some other cause then the freewill of the creature, and the abuse of it) that future contingen∣cies come not to passe because God foretells that they will come to passe; But, that God foretells that they will come to passe, because they are future con∣tingencies, that is, things which, though contingent, yet, shall come to passe; & therefore, that Gods foresight infers no necessity in those things which he fore∣sees shall come to passe by the free choice of the creature. For, though there remaineth yet a further question, concerning the ground of this foresight, how that can be other then necessary which is certaine, because the knowledg of God that foreteis it cannot be uncertaine; yet would it be no lesse evident, that the foresight of God which supposeth the future being of that which it eviden∣ceth, causeth no necessity in that which it supposeth, though I could give no ac∣count, how the future being of that which is contingent can be certaine. And, as it is not requisite to the maintenance of Christianity, to be able to answer all questions that the enemies of it may make; So were it very impertinent, not to allege that which is evident in behalfe thereof, because there hangs an other question at the end of it which I cannot so evidently resolve. And up∣on these terms, I set aside that necessity which Gods foresight of future contin∣gencies infers, as impertinent to the question in hand; being meerely, the neces∣sity of that which must needs be, because you suppose that it is; all foresight necessarily supposing the future being of that which is foreseen, as all sight supposeth the present being of that which is seen. Further when I say; That, the freedom which the Covenant of Grace sup∣poseth, in man to whom it is tendred, requireth, that his will be not determined by God before it determine it selfe, to wit, in order of nature; I do not there∣fore require that it be alwaies indifferent, that is, no more inclined to doe then not to do this or that. I have learned out of Aristotles Moralls, that a drunkard may chuse whether he will be drunk or not, though it is not possible,
that he should in an instant, change that inclination to which he is habituated, and that, as the world is, it cannot in discretion seeme possible to come to passe, that some opportunity of bringing that inclination to effect shall not come to passe, before the inclination of his habit be changed into the contrary, by fre∣quence of practice. But this I say; That, in this latitude and variety of mans in∣clination, he is not determined by any of them, presently to satisfie and exe∣cute it, having so many to please besides; And that God, without determinnig immediately, by his omnipotence, the will which remaines not determined by its owne inclination, is able to bring to passe whatsoever his providence shal order, by wils of men left at large to their own choise, though not in a state of actu∣all indifference, (without biasse inclining them to do rather then not to do this rather then that) yet in a capacity of becoming actually indifferent, by change of judgement (and, by consequence, of inclinations) which frequent acting accor∣ding to another judgement shall produce; In the meane time not determined by God, otherwise then, as they determine themselves. It is not therefore my meaning to say, that the will proceeds immediately from a state of in∣difference, to determine it selfe, by chusing that whereon the mans happinesse depends. For it is manifest, that all choice is determined by the appearance of good in the object, to reason that sees it, nor can proceed without it. It is ma∣nifest, that all vertues and vices are meere determinations of indifference in the Will, to some thing chosen for a cheife good. It is manifest by experience, that the proposing of an object determines many times the Will to chuse it. It is received in Philosophy, that, from that which is indifferent, as indifferent, no action can proceed: That the same remaining the same can never do but the same: That nothing can come to be anew of it selfe, without some cause. And how shall the will, from meere indifference, proceed immediately to do this rather then that? How shall indifference prefer doing this, before doing that, or not doing this? My meaning is this; That, without appearance of reason sufficient to convict the mind what is good to be don, there is no freedome in the Will that can determine to chuse it: That, when there is no appearance of reason to the contrary, (as in the generall nature of good) there is no freedome to refuse: That all habit of vertue or vice tends to determine indifference to the object and act of it, and effecteth so much in this life, that morally, and, speaking of that with experience and discretion will allow, it is as impossible that some man should do any thing that is good, as some other revolt from all goodnesse. And therefore do allow a kinde of freedome in the blessed, as well as in the damned, who are arrived at the full determination of the will, for the better or for the worse, & are past deliberating any more, to which side they shall adhere for everlasting, But their estate I account im∣pertinent to the question in hand, concerning that freedome in this life, the use whereof is every mans title to the world to come, and his owne share in it. As also the estate of the blessed Angels & Devils whom all allow to be as effec∣tually derermined to evill or to good, upon their fall or settlement, as men are upon the performing their race here. But as I have granted, that no man can desire that in which he sees no reason why it is good for him▪ So, seeing sufficient reason, he is not thereby immediately determined to act, but onely inabled to act according to it. The coherence of true good with the utmost happinesse of mankind is so darke, the coherence of counterfeit good with his utmost misery so remote, that, as the apperance of counterfeit good may interpose, to defeate the prosecution of that which sufficient reason convinceth to be true, so may the appearance of true good interpose, to deseate the prosecution of that which is counterfeite. So that the race of this life is a continuall deliberation about the necessity of the meanes, even in them that have made choise of their end. It may be disputed indeed, that when, after resolution and choise, we have ex∣perience of great debate within us what to do, it is not the will, the subject of freedome, that is the seate of this debate, but it is the sensuall appetite, that makes opposition to the resolution of reason; and that this opposition is meere violence to the naturall exercise of freedome, not pretending to introduce a
contrary resolution, standing the first, but hindring execution, by degrees, up∣on contrary information, to reverse the sentence. But the determination which we suppose sufficient reason had produced remaines alwaies ineffectuall; and therefore the question must needs have recourse, what determines the Will, till answer be made, that it proceeds effectually, inwardly to chuse and outwardly to act, by that choice, determining all capacity of indifference in it selfe, which, redounding to every mans account at the generall judgement, must needs be the act of the will, that is, of the person that doth it. By that which hath been said, I conceive, I give account, why, having hi∣therto established the necessity of Grace upon the account of Originall sin, I now advance a proposition tending to reconcile, aswell the activity of Gods providence generally in all things, as the efficacie of his predestination and grace in supernaturall actions, leading to the happinesse of the world to come, wiith our common freedome. For it is manifest, that this opinion of prede∣termination proceeds not upon any supposition of originall sin, but meerly of the nature and state of a creature; and intends to affirme, that, whether Adam had sinned or not, the will of man must have been determined by God, to do whatsoever it should do, as unable to determine it selfe, other∣wise then as every creature moves, when God moves it. And therefore I am here to acknowledg, the answer is lrger then the question, at least then the occasion of it, and the resolution then the ground of the doubt: The necessity of the grace of Christ being grounded only upon the fall of Adam, and that bringing on the dispute, what freewill hath to do where the freegrace of God cannot be spared, and herefore what freewill it is▪ that remaines to be freed from the bondage of sin by grace. But, as the generall comprises necessarily all particulars, it is no esse destructive to the covenant of grace, that the free∣dome of the will should be denyed upon the account of the constitution of nature, then of depravation by sin. And therefore I find my selfe bound to answer, in what estate the covenant of Grace overtakes man borne in origi∣nall sin, whether upon the account of Originall sin, or meerly of Gods crea∣ture. But I do purposely observe this, to all them of the Reformation, that I believe their own consciences will tell them all, if passion or faction give leave; that all the controversy advanced against the Church of Rome about freewill in the works of Salvation, was grounded upon the supposition of the nece∣ssity of grace occasioned by Originall sin, from which so much is derogated as is arrogated to freewill without i; and therefore the controversy never nee∣ded about all kind of works but those only that tend to salvation, the meanes whereof became necessary upon the account of Originall sin. Which if it be true, then cannot the Interest of the Reformation consist in any opinion, concerning all maner of human actions without difference, whether in the state of uprightnesse or sin; Nor can any thing but the spirit of slander, impute the maintaining of Gods grace without or against such opinions, to any inclination towards the abuses of the Church of Rome, but to the conscience of Gods truth, without respect of persons. For further evidence vvhereof, I shall make good use of the evill of faction, if not of division, now on foot upon occasion of this dispute, as vvell among those of the reformation as in the Church of Rome. For, seeing that both parties are divided about it, though in the Refor∣mation only the mater hath proceeded to a breach, first, between Lutherans and Calvinists in the Empire, then in Holland between these and Armi∣nians; he that goes about to cast the aspersion of Popery, upon that opinion which the Papacy injoyneth not, though it aloweth, must first answer, whether the popery of the Dominicans & the rest of them that hold predeter∣mination, whether the Popery of Jansenius & his followers be Popery or not. With all, I shall think the way made towards the proof of my position, by observing, that the ground upon which I shall proceed to make evidence of freedome from necessity under originall sin, will necessarily take place, against the predetermination of the Will by God, whether under Originall sin, or in the state of uprightnesie. And, upon that ground, I shall freely affirme, that
this position is not onely intended to contradict, but also effectually contra∣dicteth the opinion of the predetermination of the will by the immediate op∣eration of God. CHAP. XXII. The Gospel findeth man free from necessity, though not from bondage. Of the Antecedent and Consequent Will of God. Praedetermination not the root, but the rooting up of Freedome and of Christianity. Against the opinion of Jansenius. THE ground which I speak of may be branched out into particulars, as large as you please. But it shall be enough for me to say; That, whatsoever is read from one end of the Bible to the other, concerning a treaty tendred by God to man, concerning an alliance or covenant contracted upon it, concern∣ing an inheritance, or assurance of an inheritance upon that alliance, concern∣ing exhortations, reproofes, promises, threats, inducing to observe that con∣tract and not to transgresse it; all this, and whatsoever else may be reduced to this nature, evidenceth that, neither freedom from necessity is lost by originall sinne, nor the will of man determined by the immediate operation of God, to do, or not to do this or that. I must further mention here, that difference be∣tween the antecedent and the consequent, the conditionall and the absolute will of God; (the first, suspended upon some act of mans free will, the se∣cond resolute, as supposing the same past, or not requiring it) not because the divines, as well of the Eastern as of the Western Church have imbraced it, but because they all found, that they could not discharge their account of the Scriptures without it. But I must not forget to mention withall, the rewards and punishments, expressed in the Scriptures, to be brought upon the compli∣ance with, or resistance of those helps, which the antecedent and conditionall will of God requireth, whether he choose it or not. In the Old Testament, you have the contestations of Moses in Deuteronomy, often warning Gods people, that he had set before them the good and the bad for them to make choice; You have the Prophet Esay V. 3-6. contesting with Gods vineyard, that he had done what he could do for it, and that, having born wild grapes in stead of good fruit, it was therefore just with him to destroy it. You have the Psalmist protesting, the cause why he gave over his people to their enemies and to famine to be their disobedience, Psal. LXXXII. 9-17. You have the Pro∣phet Ezekiel XVIII. 30, 31, 32. thus reclaiming them; Return and repent of your transgressions, and wickednesse shall not be to you a stumbling block: Cast from you all your transgressions which you have transgressed with, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why should ye dye ye house of Israel? For I delight not in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God; but repent ye and live. For, is not this to say, of my self I desire not your death, but because of your obstinacy in rejecting my Prophets? By whom he so often protesteth, that he had risen betimes to send them from age to age, if by any meanes he might re∣claim them to his Law, and so preserve them in the inheritance of the Land of Promise. In like manner our Lord in the Gospels Mat. XXIII. 37, 38. Luke XIII. 34, 35. Jerusalem Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent thee, how often would I have gathered thy children as a henne gathers her chickens under her wings and ye would not? Behold your house is left unto you desolate. And S. Steven, Acts VII. 51. Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, you do alwaies crosse the holy Ghost, as did your Fathers. And the Scribes and Pharisees in the Gospel, made void the counsel and purpose of God towards them, Luke VII. 30. But, above all, you have the purpose of God manifested by the Gospel, of sending our Lord Christ for the salvation of
the World as John the Baptist sayes, John I. 29. Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sinne of the World. And our Lord to Nicodemus John III. 16, 17. God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son, that whosoever belie∣veth in him may not perish but have life everlasting. For, God sen not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the world by him might be saved. And S. Paul commandeth Timothy, that prayers be made by the Church for all men, even for the Powers of the World, then their enemies, as a thing pleasing to God, Who, saith he, would have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself an expiation for all to be witnessed in his own time, 1 Tim. II. 4, 5, 6. And if there be any other passages of the New Testament, as others there are, to witnesse that Christ is given by God for the reconcilia∣tion and salvation of all mankind. One I will not omit, because the mistake which is alledged to divert the sense of it is remarkable, 2 Pet. III. 9. God slacketh not his promise, as some men count slacknesse, but is slow to wrath in our regard, not willing that any should pe∣rish, but all come to repentance. Which they will have to signify, that he would have none of us, that is, of the elect to perish, because it is said, , he is patient towards us the elect. They might have seen that this is not the meaning of the words, by Luke XVIII. 7. Shall not God avenge his elect that cry to him day and night, though slow to wrath in regard of them? I tell you he shall avenge them speedily. , though slow to take vengeance in regard of them, upon their oppressors; Is here, , slow to take vengeance upon our oppressors for us, which he hath promised to take.  in Syriack, , in the Greek of the New Testament; signifying, the delaying of vengeance, (due to them that oppresse Christians, as you see by S. Luke) the Apostle attributes to the desire of saving those whom he spares. Nor will I stop here to shew you the insufficience of those expositions, which, in despite of the words, are fastned upon these texts, to avoid the difficulties which they create to prejudicate opi∣nions. For it is manifest, that the consequence of them is no more, but the very same that arises from any Scripture, that testifies, the meanes which God uses for the good of any man to become frustrate through his fault; In considera∣tion whereof, that God shall call them to account at the last day, who either being convict of the truth of his Gospel, or having meanes offered to be informed of the same, imbrace it not, or having imbraced it, notwithstanding persevere not in it, by living as Christ requireth. Or on the contraty, that he shall reward them who imbrace it, and persevere in it. Which being so ma∣ny that they are not to be avoided, without setting a great part of the Scrip∣ture upon the rack; I count it not worth the while to insist here, that S. Pauls meaning is not, that God would have some of all estates to be saved, or, that he would have many to be saved, or, those that are saved to be saved, or, upon any other of those lame expedients, which have been applied, to plaister the wound which these plain texts do make: But I insist upon this, that the meaning of them cannot be; That God would have those onely to be saved that shall be saved; Having such a swarm of Scriptures to evidence, how many things there are which God would have done and are not done; having all the impor∣tunities and complaints which God useth by his Prophets to assure us, that he would have found that obedience at the handes of his ancient people which he found not, all the preachng of his Gospel, all the motives of believing, all the exhortations to accept and perform the Covenant of Grace in the New Testament, ready to witnesse, what men are to give account for at the day of judgement. All which must be satisfied, before there can be cause to balk the plain meaning of S. Pauls words, which cannot seem inconvenient in any other regard, but because they make God to will that which comes to passe, all the Scripture witnessing. that all that shall be condemned shall be condemned for not doing that which God would have them do. For, where∣soever Gods justice punishes, there is it of necessity, that man had sufficient
meanes to do otherwise; Where it rewardes, there was possibility of trans∣gressing, there was a capacity of indifference, and a will actually undetermined to do or not to do this or that, notwithstanding originall sinne. But, first to declare what I understand this antecedent will of God to be, I must distinguish, with some divines, that God must not be said to will this be∣cause of that, or for that, but may be said to will that this be because of that, or for that, Deus non vult hoc propter hoc, sed vult hoc esse propter hoc. When I say, because of that, or for that, I extend the observation to two kindes of causes; To the finall cause, for which a thing is said to be done, and to the mo∣tive or impulsive cause, because of which a thing is said to be done, when we speak of the doings of understanding and free causes. For, these having some∣thing in consideration to move them to do what they do, this motive which they consider, holds on the side of the effective cause, in as much as there had been no proceeding without the consideration of it. Though it is also true, that the motion which consideration produces, (being so called, but out of that resemblance which it holdeth, with the motions which naturall things are visibly transported with) importeth no more, then the appetite of some good thing, the want whereof they apprehend, which is nothing else but the effect of the finall cause. So that the motive cause is no other then the finall cause in respect of that effect, which it hath indeed moved the effective cause to pro∣duce. So then, when I say, that God willeth not this for that, or because of that, I say, that God can have no ends upon his creatures, being from everlasting possessed of all that he can desire, and therefore, not to be moved with the de∣sire of any thing which he hath not, to procure it. But when I say, God will have this to be for that, I say, that God hath appointed not onely his crea∣tures, but, whatsoever he bestowes upon his creatures for that, as for their end; which therefore if it faile, it is not God that failes of his end, but the creature that failes of the end that God appoints it. And indeed the doubt is vaine, though to many it seems difficult, that God should faile of his end, if we should say, that he would have any thing come to passe which indeed comes not to passe. For, if God would have it come to passe immediately by his own operation, and absolutely, it were indeed a faile∣ure of his omnipotence, if it should not come to pass: But, that he would have it to come to passe by the operation of his creature, and reserving a condition, if it do as it should do, supposeth his omni∣potence, in making the creature able to do or not to do, this or that, but destroyes it not, by the faileure of that which it is not imployed about. So also, when I say, God does this because of that, to wit, in the nature of a motive or impulsive cause, I say no more but this, that God from everlasting determined that it should come to passe, in consideration of that, because of which it is truly said to come to passe. Which no way signifies any moti∣on of desire impressed in his own excellence, but that he orders the reason of all things that come to passe. The antecedent then or conditional will of God, con∣sists in appointing all that he bestowes upon his creature, or acts towards it, for several and proper ends; But, supposes a possibility in those ends to be brought to passe▪ grounded upon an ability in the creature to bring them to passe; In so much as God, otherwise, cannot be said to treat wth men as men, nor they ground a conscience of duty, from themselves to God, but supposing him to mean that which his words signify from them by whom they come, and that, whoso grants promises, commands, threatens any thing, upon an impossible condition, nei∣ther grants, threatens, promises, or commands it, but says right nothing. I will give you my daughter in marriage if you touch the starrs with your little finger; That is, saith the Civilian in the Romane Law, I will not give you my daughter in marriage. I say not so much: But, that God under an impossible condition, signifies no part of his own intentions. This antecedent will of God, they that understand not in S. Pauls words, when he sayes, Christ gave himself a ransom for all, do think it enough to distin∣guish, between sufficient and effectuall, and that, granting the blood of Christ to
be a sufficient ransom for mankind, it will be true that he gave it for all, though no way intending it for any but those who are saved: Which is farre other∣wise. For, that which is not true without an addition abating the proper signification of the words, is absolutely untrue, unlesse the addition, not being expressed, may, by due construction of reason be found to be implied. Now, to say; That Christs blood is onely sufficient to redeem all, but intended to redeem onely some, is to say; that it was not given for all, as S. Paul affirm∣eth, though being a price sufficient to redeem all, it might have been given for all; which is not enough to make good, that he gave it for all, as S. Paul af∣firmeth. And, that it might have been given for all, being sufficient to redeem all, is no sufficient reason to inferre S. Pauls injunction of praying for all men, even for Princes, and the Powers under them, then no friends to Christianity; so that, whether for them or not, was more questionable then whether for others or not. For, it followeth not, because Christs blood is sufficient to ran∣som all mankind, therefore we are to pray for the salvation of all mankind, not supposing it given for their ransome. Therefore, this addition of abatement can by no construction of reason be found to be implied in the words; But we must have recourse to that antecedent will of God, by which Christ intended to pay that which was sufficient for all mankind: though, not intending to ob∣lige God to do the utmost of that which his justice will allow, to bring all to salvation in consideration of it; but onely what his own wisdome should think fit to be done, in that consideration, for that purpose. Which alloweth, not onely a possibillity of salvation, but also a sufficience of meanes to bring all mankind to it, provided by God, as purchased by Christ; whatsoever may in∣terpose to defeat the effect thereof, which God, not being obliged to hinder, thinks fit in his secret wisdome to permit. Neither can this secret will of God be any way reconciled to his declared will, (that is, neither can this declared will of God which comes not to effect, be ever maintained to be the will of God, as the Word of God calleth it, or to be truly declared) upon those terms; But onely, to be a declaration or signe that God would have that come to passe, which indeed he would not have come to passe, as not coming to passe because he would not have it come to passe. But if God have put no barre to the salvation of any man, antecedent to the death of Christ, but hath, by Christs death, provided all meanes sufficient to save all, then it is truly said John III. 16. So God loved the World, that he gave his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have life everlasting; though God doeth not what he might do, but what he thinks fit to do, to make the ransom which Christ gave for all effectuall to the salvation of all. Nor is this infringed by saying; that the conditionall will of God is not absolutely the will of God, but with a term of abatement, his will upon condition which, without that addition, abating the proper sense of Gods will, it were not. A thing which I have professed already, by premising, that God wills not any of those things which come not to passe, as his own end, but as the end of those meanes which he provides to bring them to passe. For, the question is not about the act, but the object of Gods will, (which the Apostle also means when he saith; This is the will of God, even your holinesse. 1 Thes. IV 3.) when it is disputed whether all signify some, and the world the elect, when the Scripture saith, that Christ gave himself for all, and for the World, and therefore that God would have all to be saved and none to perish. The act of Gods antecedent will is as properly expressed by that which God would have done, as, of his consequent will, by, that which God will do. Nor is there any figure in saying; That God would have that done, which he will not do, because he knowes sufficient reason to the contrary, whether he declare it or not, but, setting that reason aside, would have done; Or, that he would have that done, which he provideth sufficient meanes to bring to passe. But, that all should signify some, and the world the elect, because God will not do all he can to save those whom he would have to be saved, is a figure in Rhetorick called Mendacium, when a man denies the Scripture to be true. The same is the difficulty, when our Lord Christ, who
saith to the Father, John XVII. 9. I ask for them, I ask not for the world, but for them whom thou hast given me, for they are thine; prayes upon the Crosse; Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. For, though he ask not that for the world which he askes for his disciples, yet he would not have prayed for that, which he knew not that God would have done; His prayer being the reason moving God, to grant meanes effectuall to bring to passe that which it desireth. But, had there been in God▪ a purpose to exclude the Jews from the benefit of Christs death, considering them as not having yet refused the grace which Christ prayed for, it could not have been said, that he would have our Lord Christ dy, or pray for them, and therefore, that he would have them to be saved. This is then my argument, that the will of man, is, neither by the originall constitution of God, determinable by his immediate operation, nor by mans originall sinne, subject to a necessity of doing or not doing this or that. Be∣cause God treats with the posterity of Adam, concerning the Covenant of the Law first, and since, concerning the Covenant of grace, no otherwise, then originally he treated with Adam, about not eating the forbidden fruit. For, in conscience, were it for the credit of Christianity, that infidels, whom we would perswade to be Christians, should say; True, if you could shew me that God, by his immediate act determines me to do as you require me, with∣out which, you tell me, I cannot do it, and with which, I cannot but do it: Or, that, by the sinne of Adam, I am not become subject to the necessity of doing or not doing this or that; But, supposing either of these, if you move me to do what you professe I cannot do, you are either a mad man your self, or take me for one. Do they take their hearers for men and Christians, or for beasts, who, having first taught, that man can do nothing but what God de∣termines him to do, inferre thereupon, that they must indeavour themselves to do what God commands, and what their Christianity requires? Or, that they are obliged by their Christianity to do that, which their corruption from Adam necessitates them not to do? Is it for the honour of Gods justice that it should be said, that he intends to damne the most part of men, for that, which, by their originall corruption, they were utterly unable to do, without giving them sufficient help to do it; no help being sufficient, which, the deter∣mination of the will by the immediate operation of God makes not effectuall, as they think? Do they not make the Gospel of Christ a mockery, that make it to require a condition impossible to be performed, by any whom God de∣termines not to perform it, having resolved not to determine the greatest part of them that know it, to performe it? Certainly, this is not to make the se∣cret will of God contradict the declared will of God, but to make the declared will of God a meer falshood, unlesse the declaring will make contradictions true: For to will, that this be done for an end, which God that willeth will not have come to pass, makes contradictions the object of that will and that, for the same consideration, & at the same time God from everlasting determining meer∣ly in consideration of his own will, that the condition of that which he would have to come to passe conditionally, will not come to passe. What is it then, to declare all this to the posterity of Adam already lapsed, without tendring help sufficient to inable them to imbrace what he tendereth? For, it is mani∣fest, that Adam had sufficient grace to doe what God commanded, and it is as manifest, that God tenders, both the Law to the Israelite, and the Gospell to the World, in the same form as he tendred Adam the prohibition of eating the forbidden fruit: Nor can it be denied, that this prohibition contained in the force of it, all the perswasions, all the exhortations, all the promises, all the threatnings, which either the Law or the Gospell, to their respective ends and purposes can be inforced with? It must therefore be concluded, not that they suppose in Adams posterity an ability to do what they require, as did the origi∣ginall prohibition of eating the forbidden fruit, but that they bring with them sufficient help to perform it, not supposing any thing that may barre the
efficacy thereof, till the will of him to whom it is tendered makes it void. And truly, speaking of that which the naturall indowment of freedom neces∣sarily imports, in the reasonable creature, it is utterly impossible that any thing should determine the will of man to do or not to do this or that, but his own action formally, or in the nature of a formal cause, which therefore, in the will, cannot be the action of God, nor be attributed, imputed or ascribed to him, to whom it were blasphemy to impute that, which his creature is honoured with. That God should immediately act upon the soul of man, or his will, is no inconvenience; Because that act must end in the will or soul, and not at∣taine that effect which the imperfection of the creature bringeth to passe. Ending therefore in the creature, and not in that which the action of the crea∣ture produceth, it leaveth the same, of necessity, in the state wherein God first made it. And, I may well suppose here, and will suppose, that Gods act of creation continues the same for all the time that he maintaines the creature in that perfection of being, (that is to say, in that ability of acting) which from the beginning, he gave it. This discourse, I confesse, extendeth to the voiding of the immediate concur∣rence of God to the actions of his creature, which my purpose necessarily re∣quires me not to maintaine. For, concurrence-supposeth the creature to act without help of God that concurreth, and therefore cannot be requisite on be∣half of the cause, being supposed to act of it self, but on behalf of the effect wherein it endeth; Which having a being, is supposed necessarily to require immediate dependance upon the first being, which is God. A strange subtlety, acknowledging the creature able to act, and supposing it to act of it self, to imagine, that this act can end in nothing, as that which it effecteth, without Gods concurrence. Which, immediately attaining the effect, in which the action of the creature endeth, will enforce, that God is as properly said to give light as the sunne, to burn as the fire, to do that act which is essentially sinne, as the man that sinnes: And therefore at once, not to sinne, because we sup∣pose his concourse tied by the originall Law of creation, to the determination of his creature; And to sinne, as producing immediately whatsoever is in that action, which is essentially sinne. For, unlesse the species or nature of the act, importing generally no sinne, were a thing subsisting by it self, as by the under∣standing it is considered, setting aside the sinne which the particular that is act∣ed implyeth, (as Plato is supposed to have maintained his ideas) it is impos∣sible that he who doth the act which is essentially sinne should be said truly not to sinne. The Law of concurring to the doing of sinne, and producing the act which essentially importeth it, necessarily drawing the imputation thereof upon him that freely tied himself by setling it. Let it once be said therefore, that God made the fire able to burn, the sunne able to shine, the will of man able to make a free choice, as he is a reasonable creature, and it will be very impertinent to require any action, but that of the fire to the consuming of wood, but that of the sunne to the dispelling of darknesse, supposing God to maintaine, or rather to issue every moment, the ability of burning or shining once given his creature, from his own spring head of being, so long as his creature indureth. And therefore, if ever God made the will able to chuse the doing or not doing of this before that, upon the direction, (not of right reason which directeth not to sinne, but alwayes) of reason, (for all choice supposes reason to direct it) it is impertinent to suppose any thing requisite to the ex∣ercise of this freedome of choice, but the maintenance of reason, issuing from the fountaine of Gods Wisdome, so long as the man continues a reasonable creature. If the immediate concurrence of God to the action of his creature make the actions wherein the perfection of his creature consisteth, (much more the im∣perfections and faileurs of it) a staine to his excellence; much more shall the act of determining the choice of his creature, (free before it be determined) im∣pute to God whatsoever it importeth for the worse, the imputation whereof,
or the better, is a staine to his excellency. And is it possible that God, by making the creature capable of such imputations, should depose himself from the Throne of his Godhead, and set up his creature in his stead, in making it able to act that, either naturally, without his immediate concurrence, or mo∣rally also, by determining that freedom (by the use of his own reason and choice) which he in no instance afore determineth? Certainly they consider not what they grant themselves, when they suppose, that God made it able so to do, when they make the abilities which he giveth unable to do their work, till he determine them so to do, so that, being so determined before they deter∣mine themselves, they cannot do otherwise? And, suppose it a contradiction that the will should choose that, which, no reason why it should chuse appear∣eth; certainly, when reason pronounceth the motive that appeareth to be sufficient, the action that insueth cannot be said to proceed from a cause indif∣ferent to act or not, though the determination thereof be not peremptory till the act follow. Now, is there any necessity, why God should interpose to determine the indifference of the cause, otherwise then as inabling it to de∣termine its own indifference? Suppose then a sentence past in the Court of Reason, importing not onely; This is to be done; But, This shall be done; Do we not see every moment protestations made by the sensuall appetite, and acts entered of them by the judge? Indeed, if the matter of them do not bear a plea, the sentence remaines; But is it therefore necessary that execution follow? Witnesse those that act against conscience; Witnesse Aristotels dispute of in∣continence, placing the nature of it in doing the contrary of that, which, the judgement is resolved, ought to be done, as if the one could be absolutely the best, the other the best at this time. Witnesse Medea in Ovid, when she saies, Video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor, I see the better, but I do the worse. For, the mouth of conscience is to be stopped, with a pretense of repentance to come, and so, present satisfaction is clear gaine by the bargaine. If at length it come to execution of the sentence, I demand what it is, that makes the reso∣lution from thenceforth peremptory, but the same reason that determined the choice afore, unlesse we suppose new matter advanced in plea first, and afterwards voided? If that which was sufficient afore prove not effectuall till now▪ it is not because any thing was wanting, without which, the will was not able to proceed, but because reason to the contrary appeared considerable be∣fore. I grant there be those, that have so farre determined the indifference of their own inclinations, that no reason to the contrary appeares considerable, to delay execution of the sentence past long since. But this appears by experi∣ence to take place, as well in those who have degenerated to devils incarnate, as those who have improved to saints upon earth. And therefore cannot be attributed to the force of true good, acting beyond the appearance which it createth in the mind, because Gods immediate act directs it; But, partly to the habituall grace of the holy Ghost, with the resolution of Christianity, presenting true good as lovely and beautifull as indeed it is: Partly to the custome of doing even those acts, which, without the assistance of God Spirit, our nature cannot do. Upon which, as the habituall indowment of the holy Ghost followes by Gods gracious promise; So, there followes naturally a faci∣lity of doing even supernaturall actions which men habituate themselves to, by the meer force of custome, excluding the consideration of all that reason to the contrary, that hath proved abortive and addle long since. Which notwith∣standing, the choice remaines free, by virtue of that originall freedome which determined the indifference of every man to those actions, the frequenting whereof hath created an habit. And this is the ground of that account which we owe, that, God showing sufficient reason why we ought to be Christians, and the world to the contrary, our choice hath followed for the better, or for the worse. For, the efficacy of the said reasons on either side implies, beside the sufficiency of them, onely a supposition of that which comes to passe, which the same reasons determine a man to do, that remaine uneffectuall till the exe∣cution of sentence. But, if the will of God interpose to determine the will be∣fore
it determines, there can be no more ground for any account, why it act∣eth or acteth not, then the earth is to give why it standeth still, or the heavens why they move. For it is not the nature of heaven and earth that makes them stand still or move, but the will of God that made it their nature, and creates all the necessity that followes upon it, as I said afore. If therefore a man can do nothing till God determine him to do it, and cannot but do that which he determines him to do, then is there the same necessity for that which he doth, as for the heavens moving or the earth standing still. Here a difficulty is made in regard of the merits of Jesus Christ, who for the joy set before him, underwent the crosse, despising the shame, and sate down at the right hand of God. Heb. XII. 2. And; Humbled himself, becoming obedient to death, even the death of the Crosse, Wherefore God also hath over-exalted him. Phil. II. 8, 9. As if, because the merits of Christ are the acts of a will, by the hypostaticall union, utterly determined to the will of God, it were not requi∣site that the promises of the Gospel should be obtained by performing the Co∣venant of Grace, when a man might not have performed it. The answer is not to be cleared more then the mystery of the holy Trinity is to be comprehend∣ed; For, of a truth, how should it be understood, how the will of God the Fa∣ther freely tendered, how the same in the Sonne undertook to assume our na∣ture, & to perform the work of our redemption in it? But, upon this freedom de∣pends the consideration which makes the Grace of Christ due, by Gods promise. For, though the will of man in Christ were utterly determined to that which the will of God should choose; yet, because it became so determined by the divine will in Christ, freely assuming our nature, the influence of that free∣dome, into all that he freely did, in virtue of that choice, makes the acts there∣of meritorious of the rewards of his Crosse. Nor is there any use to be made of the distinction between the compound and divided sence of any propositions, but those that speak of that necessity which followes upon a supposition of the being of those things, which are said to be necessary; That necessity, and onely that it reconcileth with contingence. Necesse est praedestinatum salvari; Non necesse est praedestinatum salvari; In English, (for we must suppose the property of each language) it must needs be, or, it is necessary that he who is predestinate should be saved; It is not necessa∣ry, not of necessity, it must not needs be that he who is predestinate should be saved. Compounding, or twisting in your minde the quality of predestinate with sal∣vation, that is, supposing a man to be predestinate, the affirmative is true, ne∣cessity is attributed to the salvation of a man so qualified; dividing them, that is, not supposing the man to be praedestinate, the negative; Because Christianity supposeth praedestination to preserve freedome and contingence. But if you say in Latine; Praedestinatus necessario salvatur; In English▪ He that is praedestinate is saved necessarily, or by necessity; it must be utterly denied for the same cause. The same distinction may be used, when the necessity is not upon supposition of the being of that which is said to be necessary, but to no purpose. For, it is necessary that the fire burne, or the Sunne show us light; if wood be put to it, if it be above our hemisphere; It is not necessary if other∣wise; But this makes not that which is necessary upon such a supposition ever a whit the more contingent: Nay it were ridiculous to expresse it, because a limitation so unnecessary may be understoode. No lesse necessary will that act of the will be to which God determines, though otherwise, the being of it were not onely not necessary, but impossible. Nor will it be true to say, that he who doth what God determines him immediately to do, hath power to do the contrary, at the same time, though not to do it at the same time, simultatem potentiae ad oppositum, not potentiam simultatis; For if the will cannot act still so determined, it were a contradiction to say, that it hath power to do that which you say it cannot doe. Wherefore if God, from the beginning, ever gave the reasonable creature a will actually not determined to do or not to do this or that, the same will by which God does this continuing for all that time that he maintaines it, there
is no more roome left, for a will of determining the same, in God, untill by vir∣tue of his first will, it determine it selfe; then there is roome in God, not to will that which actually and presently he willeth. It is therefore too late to say; That God, determining, as well the maner by which all things come to passe, as, what shall come to passe, can as well determine the acts of his reasonable creatures to be done freely, as the acts of naturall things to be done necessarily; Having supposed afore, that he determines these acts, by determining imme∣diately the will to do them. For though I count it necessary to grant, that God by his providence determines all future contingences, for the reason to be shewed in due time; yet, should he determine the will to doe them without supposing it to determine it selfe, there could remaine, neither contingence in the effect, nor freedome in the cause. And therefore I say, that God deter∣mines those thinges that come to passe freely and contingently, so to come to passe; but he cannot determine this, by destroying freedome and contin∣gence: Therefore, not, by determining immediately the will of man to doe or not to doe this or that. For, this determination produceth not that ne∣cessity which stands upon supposition of an act freely done, (and therefore contingent, as that which neede not have beene done) or, of the foresight of it, or, of effectuall meanes to bring it to pae, (which cannot be defeated because they are supposed to take effect) but, that which stands onely upon supposition of the cause, which being the determination of God, and therefore, indefeasible, the necessity which it produceth, whatsoever it be for the kind, will be stronger then any necessity, that is antecedent to the being of any thing in the creature. And, though I said before, absolutely, that the action of the creature cannot be imputed to God; yet upon an impossible supposition as this, I can and must inferre, that nothing can be imputed to the creature as good or evill, to reward or punishment, but all to God; Which is a conse∣quence that Christian ears must not indure. For I suppose, no Christian ears can indure to heare, that God should infuse any inclination to malice into the heart of his creature; because, when it comes to effect, the effect will be impu∣table to God, and because; before it comes to effect, the work of God must be called evill, as inclined to evill. How then shall we indure to heare it said, that God, by his indefeasible omnipotence, determines the creature to doe all the evill that it does, and, that, without this determination, no evill can be done, with it, no evill can but be done? For, alas the covering will be too short to say, that God produceth onely the positive action of sinne, the malice incident to it (consisting in the meere want of conformity to the rule which it ought to follow) proceeding from the imperfection of the creature. For, the difference, between the action of sinne, and the sinne which it acteth, consisteth meerely in the conceit of mans understanding, not apprehending at once all the particulars, wherein the action consisteth: (No action possibly being so badde, that, in some generall considerations, common to those which are good, it may not be counted good) But, those generall considerations expresse not the particular act, which is supposed to be sinne; So soone as the nature thereof is sufficiently expressed, so soone it will appeare to be essentially sinne. Therefore, if God determine the creature to the act or sinne he determines it to sinne. And though, upon these termes, there can neither be sinne, nor vertue, good nor evill, Law nor Gospel, providence nor judgment to come; yet, upon these termes, the actions of the creature will be imputable to God alone, though not as good or badde, or, as the actions of God, yet, as the actions of him that is supposed to be God in wordes, but denied to be God in effect. As for that which was said, as if otherwise the efficacy of Gods praedestination, and that grace, which by it he appointeth for those that shall be saved could not subsist, or, as if otherwise God could not be maintained to be the first cause, I will say no more now then what I said, of the ground for Gods foreknowledge of future contingences; That, when I come to say how God determines future contingences, I will doe the best I can, to render such a reason, as may maintaine him to be the first cause, and
so to foresee all future contingences, by the same meanes, by which he determines that they shall come to passe; without giving just ground to inferre, that there is neither contingence in the effect nor freedome in the cause, no provi∣dence, no judgment, no Christianity appointed by God. But if I faile of giving such a reason, I disclaime it here before I give it: and will rather allege that I have none to give, and yet beleeve, both Gods effectuall provi∣dence, and the freedome and contingence of mens actions; then beleive, the determination of mans will by the immediate operation of Gods providence to be the sourse of freedome and contingence, which, I have shewed, leaves no roome for contingence, or providence. And now I may freely grant, that Jansenius hath avoided the charge of tel∣ling what it is, that comes between the last instance of deliberation and the first of resolution, by the immediate act of God, to inable a man to do that, which, he that is able to deliberate and act both, is not able to bring to passe. Which is the same Chimaera, with the imagination of infallibility in every sentence of the present Church, when it comes to pronounce; though the premises upon which it proceedeth do not appear, even to them that pronounce, infallible. Nor will I envy him the advantage that he may make, of the distinction be∣tween the sense of that which is said to be necessary including this praedetermi∣nation, and not necessary setting it aside. For, having shewed, that it is to no effect, but to destroy contingence, that is, Christianity, and to multiply con∣tradiction to that common sense which all own, I may well bid much good do it. But I am not therefore bound to believe that it will serve his turn (pro∣ceeding upon the account of indifference in the creature, and the necessary effect of a secondary cause) who standeth upon that necessity of Grace which Originall sinne introduceth. For how shall he say, that, setting aside Gods praedetermination, the Will may have Grace sufficient to do the work of Grace, including the same, it cannot but do it, who makes the will utterly unable to do it, till it be determined to do it? And therefore takes away all difference between effectuall and sufficient Grace, all intent of Christs dying for them that shall not be saved? Indeed, if he extend his opinion to the reconciling of mans free will with Gods Providence, in matters not concerning the work of saving Grace, he may make use of praedetermination in giving ac∣count how sinne is foreknown, and the rest which hitherto he resolveth not. But, grounding himself upon the exigence of Originall sinne, it were not wisdome for him to scandalize his own opinion, by making sinne as necessa∣ry by Gods act, as he makes the work of Grace. There is extant a briefe re∣solution of the whole question, by that learned Gentleman Thomas White, where he concludeth Paragr. X. That God determineth every man so to de∣termine himself in whatsoever he does (by the love of good infused, and the causes which his Providence useth to represent it desirable) that he cannot do otherwise. How he would answer concerning evil, is not so plain by his words. He sayes, indeed, it is not the same thing to determine and cause to determine, as for the Ammonites and David to kill Ʋrias. But, if the mur∣ther be duly imputed to David for procuring meanes towards it that might have failed, would he have God procure meanes that cannot fail? It cannot be allowed, but thus, that, though of themselves they might fail, yet, supposing the foreknowledge of God that imployeth them, that is, supposing them to take effect, (which supposition, all the experience in the world concludeth, cannot be cleared till the effect follow) they cannot fail. And the nature of free∣dome, the ground of the account to come consisteth in this, that, determining a man to act, he might not have acted till the act was done. For certainly it were a contradiction to say, that which determines the will to act, (speaking, not of the thing without, but of the consideration thereof in the minde) may not be extant when a man determines himself in virtue of it. Nay, were this conside∣ration, whereby God determineth, indefeasible of its own nature, (for, as imployed by Gods Providence, that is, supposing the effect to follow, it is)
it were that very predetermination which I have infringed by the premised discourse, coming from God, in order of reason, first, and, in the very next instant, producing that choice wherein the determination of the will formally consisteth. I will therefore conclude, that, whereso∣ever, through the whole Bible, God calls any man, or his ancient people, or by the Gospell all people, to yeild him that inward obedi∣ence and worship in spirit and truth which Christianity requireth, (all this proceeding supposing the corruption of mans nature, by the fall of Adam) there he will take account of his disbursements, by that which the creature shall have done, not finally determined to do it, by any thing preceding the choice. Putting you in mind, to adde to the evi∣dence for this, all that I said in the beginning of this book, to show, that the condition of the covenant of grace implyeth a resolution ge∣nerally to obay all that Christianity injoyneth. For, whatsoever delight in the true good God may prevent and determine the will with, (as prevent it he may and doth, so as to take most certaine effect) it must have in it the force of choice upon deliberation, that makes God, in steade of the world, the utmost end of all a mans actions. And, in virtue of this choice, whatsoever is done in prosecution of it, consist∣eth in the like freedome of preferring it before the difficulties that impeach it; which therefore he that will may follow and faile of his purpose. He that might have transgressed and did not, his goods shall be firme saith Ecclesiasticus, XXXI. 10. 11. Christianity then supposeth free choice as well to doe rather then not to doe, as to doe this rather then that. But Christianity cannot suppose this freedome, till it can suppose, the reason why every thing is to be done, to appeare. For, that is it which must determine the indifference of mans will to proceede. And therefore, if there be any thing, which, without Christianity, a man under Original sinne stands not convinced that it is to be done; though, supposing Christianity, his freedome may extend to it, yet, not suppo∣sing the same it doth not. This is that which I come to in the next place.
CHAP. XXIII. A man is able to doe things truely honest under Originall sin. But not to make God the end of all his doings. How all the actions of the Gentiles are sins. They are accountable onely for the Law of nature. How all men have or have not Grace sufficient to save. NOw, to the second part of my position, I say, that, though, notwithstan∣ding the inclination of Originall concupiscnce, a man is able to do any kinde of act, towards himselfe, towards all other men, or towards God, yet is he not able to doe any, for that reason for which it is indeed to be don; And therefore that he is by his birth slave to sin, and without the grace of Christ, cannot become free of that bondage. The first part of this position stands up∣on the words of S, Paul, Rom. XI. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles, that have not the Law, do by nature the things; of the Law, these, not having the Law, are a Law to themselves; who show the worke of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences bearing witnesse with them, and their thoughts afterwards, interchangeable accusing or excusing. I know, S Augustine, Prosper, and Ful∣gentius, will have this to be said of the Gentiles, that had been converted to Christianity. But having shewed, that the interpretation of the Scripture is not subject to the authority or judgment of particular Doctors; and knowing that the tradition of the Church neither went before them▪ nor hath followed after them, to make the position upon which their interpretation proceeds a point of faith; I follow premptory reason from the processe of S. Paule discourse. Who, having conclued the Gentiles to be liable to Gods judgement in case they imbrace not Christianity, & comeing to doe te like, for the Jewes, upon a supposition, which he takes to be evident upon experience, (as appeal∣ing to their own consciences in it) that they kept not Gods Law, by which they hoped to be saved; Procees to compare with them the Gentiles whom he had convicted afore, that he may prove the Jewes to have as much need of the Gospell, as he had proved the Gentiles to have. He saith then, that the Gentiles have also a law of God, which is, the sense of Gods will which nature workes in their hearts. And that, as the Jewes did many things according to Gods written Law, so did the Gentiles according to the Law of nature: But, if they could say, that the Gentiles kept not the law of nature, as hither∣to he had proved; No lesse might the Gentiles say, that they kept not the Law by which they pretended to be righteous before God. This, you shall easily perceive to be S. Pauls businesse, if you compare that which he writes Rom. XI, 12, 13. 17. 24. concerning the Jewes, with that which went afore from Rom. I. 18. concerning the Gentiles. Indeed, when the Apostle after∣wards, compares the circumcision of the heart which makes a spiritual Jew with the Gentile, who, in his uncircumcision, doth the same righteous things of the Law, which the said spirituall Jew doth, Rom. 11. 25, 29. as I acknowledge, that there is no spirituall Jew by the letter of the law, but by the grace of the Gospell, (which, though covertly, had course and took effect, though in a lesse measure, under the Law:) so I must acknowledg, that none but the Gentiles converted to Christianity can be compared to him. But, it is no prejudice to the Apostels argument, to say, that the Gentile is capable of that, by the Gospell, which, the Jew could not boast of by the Law, but, by the grace of the Gospell under the Law. Whereas, if the apostle do not convict the Jew to have need of the Gospell by showing the Gentile to beere the same fruits by the Law of nature, which the Jew brought forth by the law of Moses; be leaves him utterly unconvicted of the necessity God had, to bring in the gospell, for the salvation of the Jew, aswell as of the Gentile. And therefore when S. Paul names, the things of the Law, he competh as wel hoseduties that concerne
God, as those which concerne our selves and our neighbours. Agreeing herein with the experience of all ages, and nations, whch allowes religion towards God to be a Law of all Nations, as well as the ifference between right and wrong in civill contracts, between honest nd shmefull in mens private actions, to be impressed by God upon their hearts, & from thence expressed in their Lawes and customes. And truly it can by no meanes be denied, that the difference of three sorts of good things, honesta, utilia,  jucunda, things honest, usefull, and pleasura∣ble, is both understood and admitted amongst heathen nations; That is to say, that heathen nations doe acknowledg, that there are some things, which, of themselves agreeing with the dignity of mans nature, are more worthy to be imbraced, then those which present us, either with profit or pleasure, without consideration of what beseemes us otherwise. o which, assuming this, as evident by experience of the world, that▪ the reason of that which is honest or honourable, as sutable with the dignity & worth of mans excellency, is not alwaies contradicted, in occasions of action, either by profit or pleasure; there will be no possible reason for any man to deny, that, notwithstanding Originall concupiscence, a man may be led, by reason of honesty, to do that which it requireth. Whereof we have invincible evidence, not onely in the Philosophy of the Greeks, and the Civility of the Romans, but in the works of mercy and virtue, which every Christian may receive at the hands of the Jews and Mahumetans, so often as they are not overswayed by their passion or interest. But now, for the reason which their actions do or ought to fol∣low, whereas it is certaine, that the reason of all mens actions is derived from the end, which they propose themselves, and, that the end which they ought to propose themselves is the service of God; It is as certaine on the other side, that, through the originall corrupion of nature, a man is not able to resolve, to make God the utmost end of his actions, and, that, not resolving this, he cannot become free of the bondage of sin. This remaines already proved by the neces∣sity of the Grace of Christ demonstrated afore, and stands perfectly verified, by the experience of all ages, and Nations, alleged even now. For, though there is in all men conscience to preferre that which is honest, and more ho∣nourable, before either profit or pleasure; notwithstanding experience shews, that the world is never without occasions, wherein it cannot be obtayned, together with profit or pleasure: And the same experience will shew, that the motives of profit and pleasure, (which Christians therefore call temptations, because they know from whence they proceed) easily prevaile over the con∣science of that, which were, according to the due worth of our manhood, more honorable for us. This, if wee take every man by himselfe, considering him, as not ingaged in society, and communion with others: But, if wee sup∣pose him prevented with such relations, it is admirable to consider, but evident to be observed, that men are more Wolves to men then Woves are to Wolves, and that, by those oppressions and cruelties, whereof there is no example in the wildest of beasts, men mke themselves way to the greatest glory that the world can raise. This is that which Macchiavell observes that the world esteems great things, whether they be good or not and magnifying those that follow them, shewes, that it is not for want of will, but for want of meanes and opportuni∣ties, that the▪ most doe not doe the like. Nay, they that have the best resolu∣tions, when they are alone, when they ingge themselves but in company, doe proceed as if they thought it civility, to offend God, for love of them whom they converse with. These are the temptations of the flesh and the world, that hold men obnoxius to the bondage of sin, notwithstanding that consci∣ence, which prefers honesty before profit or pleasure. And in regard of this bondage our Lord said in the Gospell Iohn VIII. 31, 37. If yee abide in my words ye are truly my disciples, and shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free. And when they answer, that, eing Abrahams Sons, they were never slaves; Every one that committeth sin, is a slave of sin, Now the slave abideth not alwaies in the house, but the son abideth alwaies. If therefore the son set you free, then
shall you be free indeed. And S. Paul hereupon, Rom. VI. 17, 18. thanks be to God, that being slaves to sin, ye obayed from the heart that forme of Doctrin that was delivered you, And, being freed from sin ye became slaves to righteous∣nesse. For, out of the sense of this bondage he cries out againe, Rom. II. 24. Wrt hd man that I am, who shall diliver me from the body of this death? Which if it be said of the unregenerate man, expresseth the estate of all such: If, of S. Paul, concludeth the unregenerate to be in that estate much more. And, indeed, Originall concupisence having brought into the world the igno∣rance of that truth, which the Fathers had received from God, concerning God, as I said afore▪ it cannot be imagind, that men should be induced by that slnder light which remaines, of one God and his providence▪ & that suspi∣cion which was left, that he wil one y take account of mans actions, to balke the temptation of profit and pleasure, out of a resolution, to do all things which the light of nature might conce them to be according to Gods Wil, for no other reason, but to obay him, & to do him service, though otherwise convict, that all is due to him, whatsoever they are able to doe for his service. Hence came the worship of Idols, even among them, whom S. Paul affirmes to have known the majestie of one true God. Rom I. 20. And, hence came those sins, which he hath showed us, in that first Chapter of his Epistle to the Ro∣mans, to have been the native consequences of the worship of Idols. Hence came all counterfei Religion into the world, in as, much, as they that know them∣selves to be lyable to some Religon, are, neverthelesse, unwilling to imbrace that which obliges them to resigne themselves to the service o God▪ so long as any can be shewed them, which may tender them plausible prswasions of pece with God, reserving their own passions and interests: And that ve∣ry Religion, which God had tyed his owne people to, (for a meanes to bring them to understand the difference between the civill obedience and the out∣ward service, to which he had promised the happinesse of the land of promise & that spirituall service of God to which he intimated the promise of the world to come,) became so darkned by the same common corruption of nature▪ that in a manner, the whole body of that people, when they had retired themselves from the worship of Idols, to the observation of the Law, was carried away with an opinion of righteousnesse before God, in consideration of the out∣ward observations thereof, consisting in those works, which by the force of common nature, I have shewd, they were able to doe, without troubling them∣selves with the true reason from which they are to be deriveed, and the right intention to which they are to be levelled, which, here I showe, that only the grace of Christ inableth us to set before us. By that which hath been said, a difficult objection may be answered, which a∣riseth from the consideration of those Philosophers and Hereticks, who have not been▪ or are afraid to lay downe their lives, for the maintenance of their Sect or Religion, by testifying the truth of it; as we reade in S. Chry∣sostom that many of the same Marcionists would do. For, if they can indure this, (which is the utmost that they can indure) without the help of God, who requires it not at their hands, what should hinder other men, to lay down their lives for God, and, by consequence, to overcome lesse difficul∣ties, which hinder them to follow the true goodnesse which God requireth▪ This is answered by the termes▪ of my position, that there is no kind of act which a man o himselfe cannot doe, but the reason of Gods will, and the intent of Gods service, of himselfe he cannot doe it for, though he may think that he doth it for no thing else. For evidence whereof I must have recourse to that which I said afore, in resolving, whether there is any such faith to be ound, as is not the vertue of a Christian. For, accordingly, I will distinguish, that faith is either the beliefe of the gospell and Christianity, or the profession of it, whether sincere or counterfeit. I say then, that, the sincere resolution of professing of▪ Christianity, (being the condition, to which all the promises of the Gosple are due as I have showed▪) is the worke of that grace, which the obedi∣ence of Chath purchased for us. In order whereunto, though the preaching of
the Gospell contayneth sufficient motives to convince the world of the truth of it; yet, seeing the publishing of those motives, by the Apostles of Chrst the purchase of his blood, and seeing, those motives, being, though sufficient, yet, not demonstrative, are resisted by the greater part, it is the worke of Gods grace, wheresoever they become effectuall, to move any man to believe that Christianity is true, in order to the resolution of imbracing it. Notwithstan∣ding, in as much as, the profession of Christianity, when it is proected by the powers of this world, is no disadvantage, but a priviledg, (especialy where there is difference about Christianity, and a man professes what the Secular Power professes) it is easy to see, that there is reason enough in this world, to move a man to professe Christianity for his own sake, and not for Gods. Much more to believe the truth of it, for which he ha sufficient reason besides. But, this Faith not being that which is called Faith absolutely, but with an addition of a∣batement, we are absolutely to conclude, with the council of Orange, that to believe as a man ought, is not the worke of freewill, but of Gods grace; The limitation of, as a man ought, serving to exclude such counterfeit faith as I have described. Now, though this reason of professing Christianity for advantage of this world, be the most ordinary and visible, when Christianity is protected by the Lawes, and Powers of the world; yet may it as well come to passe and effect otherwise, or at least, that which countervailes it. For Aristotle observes unto us in his Morals, that all men are not caried away, either with the profit of this world or the pleasure or honours, there are those that prefer vertue whe∣ther speculative, or active; Though this active vertue, he describes to consist in that meane, which the discretion of the world determines. For, he often repeats this for his principle, in that work, that the difference of good and bad must be taken for granted, from that which the civility of the world accknowled∣ges. But, how easy it is for them, who have addicted themselves to the pro∣fession of that civility, of that knowledg, which the world pretends not to, to imbrace and professe opinions which the world allowes not, and, having made it their businesse in the world, rather part with their lives, then be con∣strained, either to beleive, or, not beleiving, to professe otherwise? How much more, in the knowledge of God, and the hope of happinesse, (which we suppose Christianity truly to promise) may a man, that pursus not the truth of it with that humility which it requires, by the judgement of God, fastning upon false principles, by virtue of them be induced to imbrace those conclusions, which he shall rather part with his life, then refuse, and yet for his owne sake, not for Gods, who teaches them not? And upon these premises we may determine, whether all the actions of the Gentiles, and unregenerate, are sins or not; at least, so far as it is requisite to determine any thing in it. For, on the one side, it is evident, that, seeing it is imposible, that they should, by nature, attaine to a resolution of doing all that they do in obedience to the will of God & with an intent of his service; It is not possible, that their actions should have that utmost end which they ought to have. On the other side, seeing it appeareth, that nothing hinders them to do things for the meere regard of honesty, or of doing good to others, with∣out making themselves positively and expressely the end of what they doe; It is manifest, that the next end which they intend by them may be good, and that the things which they doe are such, as, of their owne nature, may be or∣dered and directed to the service of God, though by them not so intended. And therefore, when it is said, that unregenerat men doe all for themselves as their utmost end, we must distinguish in themselves, the seeds of virtue; which the common notions of difference between good & bad containe▪ from the cor∣tion of orignall concupiscence. For, well may we say, when they are moved with regard of honesty to doe any thing, that they do it for themselves, be∣cause it is the native worth of their man-hood which moves them to doe it. But when it is said; That, adicting themselves to the riches, or honours or plea∣of this world fro which they addict them selves to, love of themselves, they make themselves their utmost end; This must be understood, as in Morall matters,
for the maine part of their doings; The love of riches, honour, or pleasure▪ much lesse of civil vertue, not disabling them, or, so swallowing up all consideration of that, which of it self suits with the worth of mans nature, but that, without any other regard, they may many times chuse to do it▪ And therefore, having made good the grounds aforesaid, I shall leave it to the readers owne judgement, whether he will hold all their actions to be sis, be∣cause they are not positively directed to the utmost end of Gods honour and service, or, those which are don for honesties sake to be vertues, because they are positively directed to that next end that is according to Gods will, and might have been directed to his service: Assuring my selfe, that no interest of Christianiny obliges either me or him, to determine this or that. And now, before I leave this point, I inferr againe here from the reasons which I have used, to prove the capacity of infference in the will of man, excluding the actuall determination of it, before he determine himselfe; That all this is not to say, that indifference is requisite to all freedome, but to the freedome of man alone, in this state of travaile and proficience▪ For, my ground is, Gods enr of a treaty and conditions of peace and reconcilement together with those precepts and prohibitions, those promises and threats, thse exhortations and dehortations which it is inforced with. So that it is ly impertinent, to alleage here the freedome of God and Angels, the freedome of the as in the world to come, the freedome of our Lord Christs humane soule, to prove, that this indifference is not requisite to the freedome of man, because it is not found in that freedome which they are ari∣ved to; to whom no covenant is tendred, no precept requisite, no exhortati∣on usefull, as being either the cause of all rule of goodnesse, or so united to it, h they cannot fail of it. And, though the perfection of their estate admitteth no possibility of failing, yet it is no waies prejudicial to the honour of God, to provide men here of such an estate, as is necessarily capable of failing; His perfection being such, as is necessarily capable of improvement. And therefore, it is no disparagement to God, that he should create a possibility of sinning in that creaure, in which, if there were now not a posibility of sining, there could not be a posibility of attaining happinesse by not sin∣ing. These things thus setled, it remaines that we inquire, whether that suffici∣en grace, wich the difference between the anecedent and consequent will of God settles, be granted indifferently to all mankind or not. And my answer is briefely this▪ That God hath provided for all mankind that grace, which, at a dis∣tnce is sufficient to save all mankind: But, that grace which imediately suffici¦ent to save, he hath not immediatly provided for all mankind, but hath trusted hi Church to provide it for the rest of mankind, having left them meanes suffi∣cent, to doe it. My reason is this, because, where God sendeth immediately meanes sufficient to save by converting to Christianity, there, he will dmand an acount of the neglect of that meanes which hetendreth. For, I suppose from that which I said in the first book against the Leviathan, that, as many as come to the knowledg of Christianity are obliged to receive it. Certainely, he that believes the Christian faith must needs believe, that God hath don e∣nough to oblige all that come to knowe the truth of it, to submit themselves to it otherwise to remain liable, not onely to those sins which they are under when they come to know it, but to the guilt of neglecting so great salvation, provided, & tendred by God. Now, that those who never heard of the gospel of Christ, & remaine destitute of all meanes, to be informed of the truth of Christianity, shall not be juged, either for neglecting, or transgressing that will of God which it publisheth, will appeare, by manifest consequence from the expresse wrs of S Paul concerning the judgement, which, the Jewes & Gentiles, before the osell, remaine subject to, Rom. XI. 12. 16. For, as many as have sinned without  w▪ al perish without the law, & as many as have sinned under the Law, shallbe  by the Law, For the hearers of the law are not just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified, For when the gentiles, not having the Law, doe by na∣ture
the things of the law, these not having the law, are a law to themselves, who shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also witnessing with them, and their thoughts interchangably accusing or excusing, in the day that God shall judge the secrets of man according to my gospell. Some constue these words thus; As many as have sinned without the law shall perish without the law, in the day that God shall judge the secrets of men according to my gospel. If those that sin without the Law shall perish without the Law, it is manifest, that they shall not be condemned for transgressing the law which they never knew: And, if the ground why they perish be the law that is writ∣ten in their hearts, to which their conscience beares witnesse, when their thoughts accuse or excuse them; Whether this be at the day of iudgement or not; it is plaine, the conscience can never accuse a man, (nor, by con∣sequence, God condem him) for transgressing the will of God which he never knew. And if God proceed not with the Gentiles, upon the Law which the Isralites onely knew, but upon the light and law of nature, by which, not knowing the Law, they found themselves obliged to doe that which it com∣manded; Then shall he not proced upon the Gospell, with them who ne∣ver had meanes to know it, but upon the light of nature, and the conscience of what they have don or not don, according to it, or against it. And indeed, the words of our Lord are plaine enough▪ Iohn III. 17-21. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but, that the world through him might be saved. He that believeth on him shall not be condemned but he that beleiveth not on him is condemned already, because he believed not in the name of ▪the onely begotten Son of God. And the condemnation is this; that light is come into the world, and men love darknesse better then light, because their works are evill. For every one that doth evill hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, that his works be not reproved: But he that doth the truth cometh to the light, that his works may be manifest, that they are done in God. For, he tha is con∣demned for not believing, because he hates the light, must first see the light before he hate it, and so, positively refuse to believe, because his works will not endure the light. And no man could doe the truth, and that in God, but he that was under the law of God: Who, if he did not the truth which the Law requireth, would consequently hate the truth which the gospel prea∣cheth. So, he that is condemned for not beleiving, is he that heareth the gospel and receiveth it not. And to this reason we must refer the words of S Paul Act XIV. 16. Who, in by past ages, suffered all Nations to walk in their own waies; And againe, Acts XII. 3. God therefore, who did oversee the times of ig∣norance now injorh all men every where to repent. And, Rom. III. 25. 26. Whom God hath proposed for a propitiatory through faith in his blood, to declare his righ∣teousnesse, because of the passing by of sins that went afore: To declare, I say, his righteousnesse at this present time. For, we cannot imagin, that he will not demand account, of the sins that have beene done from the beginning of the world, of whom Enoch, the seventh from Adam prophesied saying; Behold the Lord is come with the ten thousands of his holy Angels, to doe judgement up∣on all, and to rebuke all the ungodly of them, of all the ungodlinesse which they have committed, and of all the bad words thay have spoken against him, wicked sinners; Jude. 14. 15. And it is not for nothing, that God, when he let the Gentiles alone to walke in their owne waies, no withstanding, left not himself without witnesse, doing good, giving us raine from heaven, and fruitfull seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladnesse, as S. Pa. proceeds Acts XIV. 17. Nor, that he made of one blood all Nations of men to dwell upon the face of the whole Earth determining times appointed before to the bounds of their dwelling, that they might seeke the Lord, if by any meanes they might find him by groping, though not far distant from each one of us; For in him we live, and move, and have our being, as some also of your Posts have said; For wee are his offspring, As the same S. Paul had premised Acts XVII. 26. 27. 28. For, to what serves his witnesse; but to informe the processe of his judgement? But God is said to have let them alone, passing by their sins, because, by tendring them
his gospel, he did not aggravate their judgement in case they should refuse it, nor require of them that obedience which it inferreth: Whereas, by the Gospel, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven upon all ungodlinesse and un∣righteousnes of men that hold the truth in unrighteousnes, as S. Paul saith Rom. . 18. 19. Because, saith he, that which may be knowne of God is manifest in them; for God hath manifested it to them by his works, as it followes there; So that the Gospel, as it declares the judgement of God upon those sins that are done under the light of nature; so it declares so much heavier vengeance, against those, which are done under and against the light which it sheweth. Which is the reason why, so many times, in the Psalmes, the bringing in of the gospel is prophesied, under the figure of Gods coming to Judgement, Psalme L. XCVI. XCVII. XCVIII. And indeed there is necessa∣ry reason for this, if we believe that God will judge every man according to his works at the last day. Which, as I shewed you, in the dispute concerning justifying Faith, that it is a principle of our common Christianity, an Article of our beliefe, which no man can be saved, that holds not; So I may, thereupon further say; That all men that are under the Gospell shall be judged according to that obedience which the gospell and Christianity requireth▪ For, if S. Paul had onely said; Rom. XI. 12▪ 16. As many as have sinned without the Law shall perish without the law: And, as many as have sinned under the law shall be condemned by the law, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men accor∣ding to my gospell▪ by Jesus Christ, As the construction which I spoke of even now requires; He had onely said, that the gospell declareth, that God shall judge the secrets of men by Christ: Which is that which the apostles witnessed, as from our Lord Christ, to move men to imbrace it. But having said also, that, the Law is not given to the righteous, but to the lawlesse and disobedient, to the ungodly and sinfull to—and if there be any thing opposite to the sound doctrine which is according to the glorious Gospell of the blessed God which I am trusted with; 1, Tim. I, 9, 10, 11. He sheweth us also, that those who have been under the preaching of the Gospell, shall be judged according to that obedi∣ence which the Gospell requireth; To wit, according as they have either performed or neglected it. The reason, because, I have shewed, the Gospell not to containe a meere promise of Gods part, but a covenant with man, by which he must stand or fall, as he hath performed the termes of it or not But to neglect the gospell, or to transgresse it, cannot have been any part of their works, that never heard of it; and therefore, they cannot be judged by it, but, by the worke of Gods law which is writen in their hearts by vertue where∣of, their conscience bearing witnesse of the works that they have don or not don, the thoughts thereof shall accuse or excuse them before God, as S. Paul saith of the gentiles during the Law. But, had they been tendred that grace which is sufficient to save, without doubt they must have given ac∣count to God of it, the account being grounded upon that which a man re∣ceives, as our Sauiour shewes by the parable of the Talents. And, that servant which knowes his masters will and prepares not, and does according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; But he that knowes not, and doth things that deserve stripes, shall be beaten with a few; Saith our Lord, Luke XII. 47. 48 Not as i any servant knew nothing of his masters will, as I have shewed, by the light of nature; For, how should he then doe that which deserves stripes? But, because, many know not that will which our Saviour prea∣cheth, and, not knowing it, are not under account for it. Indeed God, for his part, hath provided, that grace, which is sufficient for the salvation of all mankind, by providing our Lord Christ whose obedience & sufferings have purchased the comming of the Holy Ghost upon his disciples, and inabled them, both by the workes which he had given them to doe, and, by the interpretation of the old Testament concerning our Lord Christ, to ten∣der the world sufficient conviction of his rising againe, and of the faith of those promises, which he hath made to all them that take up his Crosse, to be∣come conformable to his sufferings. But, these promises are so great, that
whosoever stands convict that they are true, must needs stand convict, that hee is in reason bound to imbrace the condition upon which they are tendred, un∣lesse he can make a question, whether the world to come is to be preferred before this or not. And this I affirme to be sufficient grace, contained in the preaching of the gospell, which tendreth this conviction to all mankind; supposing that, no immediate act of God is requisite, to determine him that standeth so convict, to imbrace it, but, that it must be the act of his own free choice, that must resolve him to it. And all this of the meere free grace of God, in as much as, nothing but his own free grace could have moved him to provide this meanes, which, only the coming of our Lord Christ could furnish. And, though, for the glory of his goodnesse, this meanes is common to all mankind, in as much as the motives of faith, wherein it consisteth, are of the same force and vertue towards all; yet is it no lesse the grace of Christ, be∣ing the purchase of his obedience and sufferings. For, if it be said, that the worke of imbracing the Christian faith is supernaturall, in as much as it ten∣deth to supernaturall happinesse; It is to be answered, that all the meanes that God uses, to induce us to imbrace the same, are also supernaturall, being pro∣vided by Gods immediate act, beyond all the force of nature, and therefore proportionable to the work which they require. And, if it be said; That the difficulty thereof, in regard of originall concupiscence, is such as no reason can overcome; It is answered; That, as these motives are the productions & instruments of Gods spirit, accompaning his word, whereby it knocks at the hearts of them to whom this conviction is tendred; so they cary with them a promise of the habituall assistance of Gods spirit, to move them that yeeld themselves to it, to performe that which they undertake, notwithstanding O∣riginall concupiscence. In the meane time, these being the grounds of this sufficience, it is manifest, that, as many as are utterly destitute of these meanes, and that by no fault of their own, in neglecting opportunities of being informed, cannot be said to have had that grace, which is immediately ufficient to save them. For, if Christ immediately preached is onely grace immediately sufficient, then have not they, to whom Christ is not immediately preached, that grace which onely is immediately sufficient. So that the motives of Christianity, (the last whereof is the fulfilling of all Prophesies concerning the calling of the gentiles,) being absolutely provided, that grace is provided for all, which is sufficient to save all at a distance. But, the preaching of Christ to all, not being immediately provided by God, but recommended to his Church, under that obligation which he hath laide upon it to that purpose; that grace which is immediately suffici∣ent to save all, is not immediately given all, being given, by that wil of God, the effect whereof he hath trusted to the ministry of his church, &, by consequence, left the gut of making void his counsaile in it, not upon those that never heard of any such counsaile of his, but upon the causers of intestine divisions in the Church, of corruption in the faith, and in the manners of the Church. For, it is utterly impossible, that, without unity in the faith, without living confor∣mably to that which we professe, that Faith which is destroyed by them that professe it, should prevaile over the enemies of it. In particular, let no man think, that I allow, that preaching of the gospell, which I maintaine to be suffi∣cient grace, to consist in never so many declamations, or rather exclamations out of the Pulpits, to return to the waies of Christianity; cautioning, in the meane time, that all the promises of the gospell are due, by the immediate and perso∣nall imputation of the obedience of Christ, unto the elect alone; God, in his time, immediately determining their will to imbrace Christ, as the wills of the reprobate to cast him away. For if the true motives of Christianity, repre∣sented by the Church as they are delivered by the Scriptures, be sufficient grace to save all men; then is it a peremptory barre to the sufficience thereof, to make those motives inconsistent with the common sense of all men, in the con∣viction whereof this sufficience consisteth. And they who preach so, how much soever they call themselves ministers of the gospell, are not the ministers of Gods word but their own.
CHAP. XXIV. Though God determineth not the will immediately, yet he determineth the effect thereof by the meanes of his providence, presenting the object so as he foresees it will chuse, The cases of Pharoah, of Solomon, of Ahab, and of the Jewes that crucified Christ. Of Gods foreknowledg of future conditionalls that come not to passe. The ground of foreknowledg of future contingencies. Difficult objections answered. Now that I may resolve you, what it is that makes this sufficient grace be∣come effectuall, I say that, though God determine not, by his immedi∣ate act, the freewill of man, to doe or not to doe this or that, yet he hath de∣termined from everlasting, the events of all future contingencies, by determin∣ing the objects, whether inward or outward, which all men, in all occasions that shall come to passe, shall meete with; knowing, that the considerat on of them, will move them, effectualiy to resolve upon doing or not doing hat which they shall doe or not doe. Outward objects I call the things themselves, that present themselves to mans senses: Inward, the representations of them laid up in the storehouse of mans mind, (whether for the fansy or understanding) the consideration whereof, may tender him that which comes under deliberati∣on, under the appearance of good, whether true or counterfeit. And my meaning is, that the providence of God, in determining the objects which every man shall meet with, to move him to resolve this or that, proceeds, either upon the originall right of God toward his creature, in presenting it with that, whereupon, he knowes, a man will resolve to doe either good or bad; Or, upon the reason of reward or punishment, which, the foregoing actions of every man and the impressions and inclinations to good or evill which they have left in him, shall discerne: Saving, what his owne free grace shall dis∣burse of meere bounty, over and above that, which his mercifull justice, (that is to say, those promises, which of his free goodnesse he hath made to man.) doth any way require at his hands. For, as it is Gods free grace to enter in∣to covenant with man, so it is a part of Justice in him, according to the scrip∣tures, to make good his promises, even unto them, who by the terms of the cove∣nant, which they so often transgresse, can challenge nothing at his hands. My position is averred, by all those scriptures, which declare, how God brings to passe his counsailes declared a fore. In rendring the sense whereof, I shall not need to suppose that, which, having proved already, I may of right suppose; That God, by his immediate act, determines not the will of man to doe this or that, or not to doe; Because, by the true course, which, the Scriptures expresse God to hold in bringing his purposes to effect, that course will appeare to be false, over and above, what hath been said. I being with Pharaoh. When God intends to deliver the Isralites out of his hands, when God suffered the Magicians to doe the three first plagues, was it because he, that suffered not Balaam to curse Israel, when he sacrifised thrice to his Devils, to put a curse against Israel in his mouth, Num. XXIII. 2-17-34 could not have hindred their acts to take effect? Or, because he had deserved by oppresseing Israel▪ to be given up to their temptations; which, because God knew they would prevaile over him it is truly said, both that God haned Pharaohs heart, and, that Pharoh hardned his heart, or that his heart was hard. Ex. VII. 3. 13. VIII. 10, 15, 28. IX 7. 12. 34. X. 11. 20. There is an other passage of the story very much to be observed, because the sense of it lies in the gh translation of the originall words, which, how unusuall soever it
seem, is very manifest, by the consequence of the text, Ex. IX. 14. 15. 16. For, at this time, I send all my plagues upon thine heart▪ and thy servants, and thy people, that thou mayest know, that there is none Like me in all the earth. For, already had I sent my plague, and struck thee and thy people with the Pestilence (which had destroyed the cattle afore, Ex IX 6) & that hadst been destroyed from the earth▪ Onely for this have I preserved thee, to shew thee my power, that my name mght be spoken of all over the earth. It is manifest tat God meanes to say, that he had destroyed Pharao are, had it not beene to shew a greater work. And, he that considers, that the Hebrew hath nothing but the indi∣cative to signifie all moods and tenses, will mak no quest on of it. The Greek plainely expresseth it, , And the Chaldee of Okelus . Nunc enim aderat mihi t mitterem, For it was now neere me to stretch forth my hand. That is, I was neere doing it; Perhaps signifies neither more nor lesse And if S. Paul translates part of i word for word ; For this cause have I raised thee up, that I might sew my power upon thee; Yet is that nothing to the sense; of that which went afore, nor, to argue any intent in S. aul, to give occasion for those horrible imaginations, that have been framed upon these words, as if God made Pharo, and all in his case, on purpose to shew his power, and get glory, by damning them to everlasting torments. For, it followes a litle after in S. Paul; What if God, wiling to shw his wrath, and make knowne his power, have borne with much long uffering the vessels of wrath, fit for destruc∣tion: And that to make knowne the riches of his Glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had prepared for glory. In which words it is manifest, that God spared the life of Pharao, in the plague of pestilence, though then fit for destruction (For, by this discourse it appeares  here signifis Fit of themselves, not fit∣ted by God,) out of his long suffering, though willing, that is, determining to make his power knowne by destroying him, proving utterly obdurate. But this out of an intent, by the consideration of what they had seen come upon him to win his owne people from the Idolatry of Egypt, to submit to his law. As, when S. Paul writ, by the judgements of God upon the Jews, for rejecting Christianity, he called the gentiles to it. For this is the inference that S. Paul makes in the next words; Which are even we whom he hath called, not onely of the Jews but of the Gentiles. Introducing in the same words, that comparison between the Jews whom he then called to the Law, and the Gentiles whom he was now calling to Christianity, which the correspondence between the Old and New testament importeth, And so, the sense of S. Paul is the same with that which S. eter said in the words quoted afore; that God delaies his wrath in taking vengeance upon the oppressors of his people, because he would have none of them perish, but all come to repentance. The sense which I deliver you have in Grotius his Annotations, &, before the publishing of them in a booke of Miletrius concerning this subject, since, in the late Annota∣tions, and, before any of them came forth many yeares, I had declared it for my sense of these words. By which you may see, that Pharao, seeing himselfe and his people not cut off, when their cattle were destroyed by the pestilence, did not believe that it came from God; And also, when God had declared his purpose in preserving him alive to terrifie him the more, and, when he had caused the plague of Haile to cease, which then he moveth him with, is (by the love of rule over those, whom, by right he had nothing o doe with) perswa∣ded to breake his promise of letting them goe, when it should cease, Moses ha∣ving told him that he would breake it. Ex. IX. 27-35. And because God knew that these temptations would prevaile over Pharao, therefore he had foretold the plagues, and the deliverance of his people upon them Ex. III. 19. VI. 2. an therefore, it is truly said, both, that God hardned Pharos heart, (to wit, by causing him to meet with these considerations, which made him neglect the plague. For, that which, elsewee, is called hardening of his heart, (is called not setting his heart upon the plague, x. VII. 23.) and▪ that
Pharao hardened his heart, or, that his heart was hard, Ex. VII. 3. 13. VIII. 10, 15. IX. 7. 12, 34 X. . v 20. Lastly observe, that, when Pharao had let the people goe, God led them not by the way of the land of the Philistis, which was the neerest, because God said, lest the people repent them when they see war, and returne into Egypt: But made them goe about, by the way of the wildernesse of the Red Sea, Ex XIII. 17. 18. And againe Ex. XIV. 1-5▪ God spake to Moses, saying; speake to the children of Israel, and let them return and incamp against Phahiroth, between Migdol and the Sea, before Baalsephon, even against it shall they incampe, beside the Sea And Pharao will say of the chil∣dren of Israel, they are intangled in the land, the wildernesse hath inclosed them: And I will harden Pharahs heart, and he shall pursue them, and I will get glory upon Pharao and all his host, and the Egyptians shall know, that I am the Lord. And they did so. And it was told the King of Egypt, that the people led. For, it is to be observed, that God had not yet required of Pharo, that he should let them free for ever, though he had made him let them goe, withou any promise of returne. When, therefore, he sees, on the one side that the mea∣ning of God was not that they should return any more, (which made him so unwilling to let them goe, as alwaies supposing it) And, on the other side, that, by their undiscreet march, as he thought, (which God had provided for another cause) there was hope to bring them back  is old thoughts revi∣ved, that all these plagues come not from God, but otherwise, that he might yet bng them under his rule. Whereby, it is most evident. First that the de∣struction of Phara was designed by God, through these meanes, in conside∣ration; First, of oppressing his people, then, his impenitence upon these extra∣ordinary tryals: Then that it appeared to him that they woud take effect, when he saith; Pharao will say they are intangled in the land, and that this is the har∣dening of Pharaos heart by God And, hereupon dependeth that which is said of the Egyptians, Wisdome XIX. 1, 2. But wrath without mercy pursueth the wicked unto the end, because he also had foreseen what they should doe in time to cme. To wit, that, repenting themselves, they would straightway pursue those whom they should have le goe, diligently intreating them to depart. Seeing the impenitene and unbeliefe of their obdurate hearts to have been such, that there by it appeared to God how, upon the first overturne, they would re∣turne to their first hope of reducing the Israelites to their bondage. See the like in the enemies that God raised Solomon, to punish his idol a tries 1 Kings. XI. 14-23-26. Hadad the Edomie having escaped into Egypt, every man knows, that jealousies between neighbouring Princes makes them ready to entertaine their Neighbours Enemies, though under colour o relieving of the oppressed, even when the cause is no cleare. And though adad were never so welome in Egypt, yet, every man knowes, what diffrence there is between rng at home, and couring Pharao in Egypt. And, can there remaine any question, how God raised Hadad for an enemy to Slmon? Hw, but by providing that state of things, which, he knew, would be effectuall to perswade a man▪ in the cae which h knew to be his? By the like meanes, God foreseeing the rebellion of Rezn against his master Hadarzer King of Zobah and the succsse there∣of, in setting up a Kingdome at Damascus, out of a conspiracy of Banditi, might foresee, that he must needs inherit his masters hostility with the Iralites. As for Jeroboam, God, having appnted Aiah the Shlonite to prophesie to him the apostasy oen Tribes to his govrnment, knew▪ that he might doe as David had done, to expect the issu of Gods prpoe from his providence, without any attempt un his Svragne, and he might doe as Hazael did afterwardes, 2. Kings X. 14, 15. To murther his master, that he might reigne  his stad, as Esh. had Prphesid. And, was it not possible for God, that knew Jeroboam heart, to know what he would doe, when the Isra∣lites had prvately perswaded hm to returne from banshment, upon Rho∣am answer to the petition, which it seems he had procured? Certainely, he that believes the Scriptures, can no more doubt, that God designed the pun∣nishment
of Solomons Idolotries by these meanes, then, that he designed the vent it selfe of it, though by the malice of the parties. Consider now the vision of the Phophet Micajah, concerning the enterprize of Ahab upon Ra∣moth Gad, 1. Kings XXII. 23-26. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the host of heaven standing aside him, on his right hand, and on his left: And God said, who shall seduce Ahab, to go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And one said this, and another said that. And a spirit came forth and stood before the Lord, and said, I will seduce him. And the Lord said, wherewith? And he said, I will goe forth, and be a lying spirit in the mouthes of all his Prophets. And he said, thou shalt seduce him, and also prevaile; Goe and doe so. God, who shewed his counsaile to his Prophet in this maner, knew well enough what Prophets Ahab delighted in, and what they were that ought favour at his hands. Shall we imagine▪ that, when he lets the evill spirit loose, (whom he knew to be, of himselfe, officios enough to the ruine of Gods people) and saes, goe and prevaile; that he considers not their inclination to take fire at his temptation, for obtaining favour at Ahabs hands: Or Ahab, to make use of their credit, to win the good King Jehosaphet to his pretenses. If these things were in con∣sideration, as the meanes to bring about Gods designe upon Ahb, (here you must pardon me, if, speaking as a man to men, I can expresse the maters of God no otherwise, then the scripture doth, in the likenesse of an Infinite wise Prince, though ssured, that one act of Gods wisdome, which is God▪ attaines and containes all this) which the text plainely expresseth; did God goe by guesse, or, doth the Scripture, condescending to our infirmitie, speak▪ of him in the stile of the Sons of men, as the Jewes say, and represent to us the order which he designes in those things which he brings to passe, in the fashion of a Prince, taking counsaile with his servants and vassails what course to take? But let us not forget the greatest work of Gods providence, that ever the sun aw, in procuring the redemption of mankind, by the malice of Satan and the Jewes, in putting our Lord Christ to death. The words of S. Peter are very expresse, Acts II. 23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsaile & foreknowledg of God, yee have taken, and, through wicked hands, crucified and killed. And again Acts III. 17. 18. And now, brethren, I know that you did this ignorantly; as also did your rulers; But God hath thus fulfilled those things, which he had fore∣told by the mouth of his holy prophets, that Christ should suffer. What was the ignorance of the Rulers, we learne by the vote of Caiaphas, that swayed the counaile Ioh XI. 49. 50. Ye, knowing nothing, nor argue, that it is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, rather then that the whole Nation perish; Ratifying the reason propounded afore; If we let him alone thus, all will believe on him, and the Romans will come, and take us, and this place, and the Nation away What was the ignorance of the people, we learne by S. Paul, Rom. X 3. Not knowing the righteousnesse of God, and willing to establish their own righteousnesse, they were not subject to the righteousnesse of God. And a∣gaine, 1. Thess. II. 15. 16. he thus qualifieth the Jews; Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and please not God, and oppose all men: Forbid∣ing us to speake to the Gentiles that they may be saved: To the fulfilling of their sins alwaies. For wrath is come upon them to the end. The Scribes & the Pha∣rises had got ossession of the peoples hearts, by perswading them, that God accepted them as righteous for the outward observation of the carnll Law of Moses, given for the condition, by which they held the land of promise. They then perswaded them to demand our Lord to death, for the same reason, for which their predecessors had put their prophets to death▪ because they preach∣ed to them that inward spirituall righteousnesse, which our Lord demandeth, as the condition of obtaining the world to come: And, for the same rea∣son, their successors persecuted the Apostles, because, not intayling his righ∣teousnesse upon them, as the sns of Abraham, they shewed the gentiles how to become as righteous as hey thought themselves. The Priests and Rulers and Elder, who, by the meanes of the Scribes & Pharises, carryed the people, and were not willing to part with their power by receiving Law from our
Lord Christ, (as not believing, that he preached his Gospell, with an intent to establish them in their power▪ but to take it out of their hands, as belonging to the Messias) made it their businesse, to perwade the people, that it would be the ruine of the Nation to acknowledg him for the Messias. If God hath assured us, that these were the inclinations, that brought to passe this godly murther of our Lord, shall we believe, that he himselfe had them not in consi∣deration, when he designed the redemption of mankind, by the meanes of it? Or, that, having them in consideration, he foresaw not what effect they would have in the Jewes? being abandoned to the malice of Satan that procured it, If wee will learne the determinate counsaile, and foreknowledg of God from the Scriptures, we must have recourse to those meanes, by which, the scriptures teach us, that it came to passe; For truely, it was never dsigned, nor did God foresee that it would come to passe, by other meanes, or otherwise then in∣deed it came to passe, It is a coceit that deserves reverence for Ignatius his sake, a disciple of S. Iohn; Wo, in one of his Epistes informs us, that the birth of our Lord, and the manifestation of his Godhead in the flsh was so husbanded, that the deviles themselves, (though, when they were constined to oby him, they cryed him up the Son of God, yet) should not loose the hoe of destroying him. Can we think, that God immediately designed such a stra∣tagem upon Satan, and had not regard to the linations of his ministers, or knew not what effect those considerations wuld have, which should arise in them upon those objects, wich his providence presented them with? By this we may see, why our Lord upbraides the Cities in which he did his greatest miracles, Mat. X. 21, 22. Woe to thee Corasin, woe to thee Bethaida: For, had the mighy works that have been don in thee, been done in Tyre and Si∣don, they had long since repented in sackcloath and ashes: And thou Capernau that art exlted to heaven, shalt be cast down to Hell: For, had the mighty works that have been don in thee, been don in Sdome and Gomorah, they had stood till this day. I do so respect the learning and judgment of Grotius and Jansenis that I will not take upon me to censue them, when they make these words signifie no more, then, that, in probability, Sodom and Gomorah had repented at the sight of suh miracles. But I find no good reason to in∣ferre as our Lord doth, that▪ positively, Corazin Bethsaida and Capernaum shall be tormented more then Tyre and Sydon, then Sodom and Gomorah, because probably. Sodom and Gomorah would have repented at the sight of such mira∣cles. The same I say to others, who would have ou Lord say onely this; That had those miracles been don in Tyre and Sydon, they would have repen∣ted, but not from the heart; Because, miracles are not able to convert any man to God from the heart. For, in conscience, is there reason that Cora∣zin and Bethsaida should fare worse then Sodom and Gomorah, because Tyre & Sydon would have repented as hypocrites, continuing no lesse sinners then they that repented not? But, to say as others doe, that, had God ordained those miracles to be done at Tyre and Sydon, at Sodome and Gomorah, he would have determined their wills, by his immediate act, to be converted; is to say, that our Lord, by a mentall reservation, saies that, whereof he expresseth not the reason, and so cozens them, that satisfie themselves with the reason which he expresseth. I know these answers are brought to avoid the heresy of Pela∣gis, that outward calling, without inward grace, is enough to convert a man. But there is no necessary to grant the consequence. The miracles of Christ, supposing his doctrine, import the inward grace of the spirit to make it pre∣vaile. Why else are they, who said they were don by Belzeub, guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost? And this meanes being sufficient, to convert them▪ had been effectuall, had they found men better dspoed. What was the dif∣ference? They had found men not zealous of theire owne righousnesse by the Law, who, therefore, had not resisted the righteousnesse of God, which Christ teacheth, with mircles ufficient to convict them that he was a true Prophet. Upon these grounds, God, who knew all their hearts, might com∣prehend
the event. The case of David at Keila is so neere this, that I must not mention it any where else, 1. Sam. XXIII. 11. 12, 13. And David said O Lord God of Israell, thy servant heareth for certaine, that Saul is coming to Keilah, to destroy the City for my sake: Will the men of Keilah shut me in his hand? Will Saul come downe as thy servant heareth? O Lord God of Israell shew thy servant. And the Lord said, He will come downe. And David said; Will the msters of Keilah shut me and my men into Sauls hands? And the Lord said, they will. What escape is there here, when God, out of his knowledg of the secrets of their hearts, foretells what they would doe, if Saul should come a∣gainst the City? Nor will I forget that of the wise Hebrew, for he drewe at the founaine head of th Prophets, though he spake not by their spirit: It is thught to be said o Enoch according to that which wee read of him, Gen. V. 24 Heb X ▪5 but the agument is the same, whether so or not Wisdome IV. 10. 11. 14 He pleased and was beloved of him, so that, whereas he lived among sinners, he translated him. He was taken away, least wickednesse should alter his understanding▪ or deeit beguile his mind. For his soule pleased God, therefore hasted he to take him away from wickednesse. For, if God knew such occurrences as would deceive Enoch, or one in his stte, then by those occurrences be fore∣sees the decree. If he knew none, unlesse himselfe determine his will to be decei∣ved, then can it not be aid, that God translated him least wickednesse should deceive him, but least God should appoint him to be deceived by wickednesse. The same author thus commande h the mercy of God in destroying the Ca∣naanies by little and little, Wisdome XII, 10. But, chastising them by little & little thou gavest them roome of repentance, though knowing their prverse disposition to be such, that they could not repent. That is, knowing that this gentle dealing of God would not be effctual, notwithstnding all that he had done to assure his people of the land of promise, o move them to imbrace the true God: Upon which condition, they might have been suffered to live as slaves to the Israelites, if not as strangers among them, as Rahab the harlot was suffered to doe among her kindred, because she alone imbraced those termes. So that, the precept of the Law that commands the seven Nations utterly to be destroy∣ed, stands upon supposiion of this impentence thus foreseen. To the same purpose speake those texts of Scripture in which it is said, that, or such or such a thing be not done, such or such a thing will come to psse. As Gen. XI. 6. Behold the people is one, and their language the same, & having begun this, they will not give over whatsoever, they have thought to doe. Acts XXVII. 31. Vnlesse these remaine in the ship, ye cannot be saved. say. I. 9. Rom X 20. If the Lord of hosts had not left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, we had been lke Gomrah. Mat. XXIV. 22. Had not those daies been shortned, all flesh would perish 'But for the elects sake, those daies shall be shortned. For there is no necessity to say, that God could not have prevented these effects by any other manes; (The buildg of the Tower of Babel, for the purpose, by any other meane but by dividing their language: The saving of the elect at the destruction of Jeualm, but by shortning their time: he saving of S. Pauls fellow travelers, but by the mariners abiding on shipborde) But, that God knew, that they would goe to build the Tower of Babel, that, the time not being shortned even the elect would perish that if the mariners let the ship▪ the rest woul be cast away should not Gd otherwise interpose. As the Prophet say, showing how great a mercy of God it was, that any of the Israelites shoud escape hat vengeance whch he foretelleth, and, alleaged by S Paul, to shew how great a mercy of God it was, that any of them should be saved by the Gopell from the vengeance to come, declare, that God fore∣saw this ruine would come to passe. it he did not interpose. But to say, that God foresaw this, because he foresaw, that himselfe had resolved, by his im∣mediate act to determine the wils of those men by which they were to come to passe, to bring them to passe, is to say, that all those meanes, by which it is signified, that he saw they would come to passe, are alleged by the Scripturs impertinently, and to no purpose. It followeth therefore, of necessity, that
God foresaw that those things should come to passe, by the cases which he saw stated, and the wills of those men whom he saw concerned, in stating the same. And, by the same reason that holdeth which is said, Ex. III. 19. I know that the King of Egypt will not give you leave to depart, but by a mighty arme; Upon which the saying of the wise man alleaged afore is verified; That God knew, that the Egyptians would repent themselves, and attempt to bring them back into bondge, whom they had just afore intreated to be gon. In fine, all the scriptures which say; This or that was don, that such things as had been foretold might be fulfilled, prove the same without answer. Iohn XIX. 24, 36. They said then to one another; let us not rend it, but cast lots for it whose it shall be: That the Scripture might be fulfilled which saith; They sha∣red my garments among them, and for my coat they cast lots. And againe, These things came to passe that the scriptures might be fulfilled; A bone shall not be broken of it. Did God provide that Christs coat should be seamelesse, that, there being losse in sharing it, the reason of casting lots for it may be unan∣swerable Did he provide, that our Lord should have visibly breathed out his last, that there might be no reason to breake his legs, as the legs of the rest; that, ha∣ving provided all this, he might, at length, determine them to doe what they did? which had he intended to doe, it was impertinent whether he provided all this or not. Mat. XI. 17. 18. Then was fulfilled that which was said by Jeremy the Prophet, saying; A cry was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and weeping and great mourning: Rachel, weeping for her children▪ and would not be comforted, because they were not. Herod was become jealous of the King of the Jewes that was borne, and would have taken him away alone: But, when he could not heare of him by the wise men, resolved to take away all under two yeares old, that he might not escape. Did God know, that his bloudy hu∣mour would resolve this wickednesse upon these occurrencs; or did he first pro∣vide the occasion, and then determine him to doe that, which, without provi∣ding the occasion, being so determined, he would have done neverthelesse? All the scriptures in which this is said argue as much. I must not omit that which is said of Abiathar, 1. Kings II, 26. And Solomon drove Abiathar from being high Priest to the Lord. To fulfill the word of the Lord whIch he had spoken against the house of Ely in Shilh. Had God provided all that had befalne Abiathar, and in the end, according, to his unquestionable justice, the occurrences, that resolved him to be of the conspiracy of Adon, that the prophesies against Ely and his house, 1 Sam. II. 30-6. III. 11-14. might come to effect, which, no reason could be given, why so rather then o∣therwise; if after all this, he must interpose his immediate act to determine So∣lomon to fulfill it, by setting Abiathar aside? If God, thus, by his justice & his mercy, in consideration of mans by-past actions, ordaine the occurren∣ces, whereof he knoweth what the issue will be; shall it seeem strang, & that, out of his originall right in his creature, having set Adam in Paradise, with those abilities, that, all agree, he might have stood if he would, he checked not the malice of the rebell Angels, nor taught him that cunning which his simplicity had not needed, had he loved to continue, (as was elegantly said) simplicior quam ut decipi posset, simpler, or more an innocent then to be couse∣ned? Or, can we say, that, He might have stood had he would, who, by Gods im∣mediate act, as we see, was not determined to stand; who could not have stood, had he not been determined by God to stand; &, had he been determined, could not but stand? None of which followes, if we say, that God, seeing the state in which he had placed him a sufficient baite, to resolve the apostate Angells to tempt; seeing the temptation so strong, that Adam would not resist it; for the reasons, which he in his secret counsaill saw best, resolved to maintain both in acting their owne inclinations, and, himselfe to make the best of that which should be done. And, this precedent being resolved, can it seem strange, that he should order all men to come to the yeares of discretion, when first they begin to act to their owne account, with those impressions received from their education, which, he sees how they well incline them to the better or to the
worse? seeing also, that they doe not resolve them either for the better or for the worse, but by the means of their own free choice; can it seem strange, I say, that he should order them to meet with those occurrences, which, suting with the merit of their by passed actions, he sees wil determine their choice for the better or for the worse, in those things, which, he sees that it was in them, though perhapS with much more dificulty, & so, for more advantage, to have determined otherwise. But, to leave the rest of this discourse till I can goe through with it; for the present, the reason of this position seems to me demonstrative, (if any thing in this subject can be demonstrative) supposing that which hath been proved, that God, by his own immediate act, doth not determine the will of man to doe this or that For, seeing that Christian faith presupposeth, that God knoweth from everlasting whatsoever future contingencies shall come to passe, during every moment of time whilst the world shall indure, & that it is evident, that, whatsoever is known must be knowable before it is knowne; (and, therefore, certaine, or determined, not by being knowne, but, by being capable of being known) what ground can we imagine, in contingencies, to make them capable of beingknown? For, of theire owne nature, we transgresse the very notion of contingencies which we suppose, and evidently contradict our selves, if we say there is any thing in them, of themselves, to determine this to coe to passe, rather then that, supposing the cause to be no more determined to doe this then that, which the supposition of free will necessarily requires. Cer∣tainly Aristotles resolution, that they are sure in the alternative, but that, nei∣ther part of it can be certaine; (That is to say, that Peter, being tempted, shall either deny his master or not? but that, being, contingent, it can neither be certaine that he shall, nor that he shall not,) is utterly inconsistent with that particular providence of God over all things, which Chstianty supposeth; & renders that great mastr (as a man too cunning not to see he conequence of his own position) very sususpicious in a point so neerely concerning the belief of Gods providence. Now, future contingencies, in the notion of contingen∣cies that are not yet come to passe, being in themselves nothing, (that is to say, be∣ing onely understood to be posible,) cannot reduce themselves to the nature and state or future contingencies, in the notion of contingencies that shall come to passe; such, as we believe all contingencies that have or shall come to passe to the worlds end, were to God from everlasting. It is therefore a meere contra∣diction to imagin, that contingencies, either by the possibilty of their nature, or by the capacity of the cause, (that is, of it selfe, utterly undetermined to do ra∣ther then not to do, to do this rather then that) can be an object capable of being known, by that knowledg, upon which they may be said to be certaine, & future as things that shal be, not as things that may be, not as  but as , to distinguish with Aristotle. There are indeed those who undertake that, when it is said, Peter shall deny his Lord, Peter shall not deny his Lord; (the one of which sayings must needs come to passe) seeing this necessity must needs be in the object before it be in the saying, (because the saying is true or fals by reason that the matter of it is so or otherwise before) therefore, that part which ap∣peares true in time was true from everlasting: But that, they suppose, cannot be by virtue of any or all causes, least the effects should no more be contingen∣cies; Therefore, by virtue of the things themselves, because, of a contradiction, the one part must needs be true the other false. And this being of future con∣tingencies, they imagin, it is, which the knowledg of God attaining, is therefore called sight, because it reacheth that which is in being, and therefore present to it. But this imagination is a meere contradiction to common reason, which is able to tell any man, that possibilities differ onely in this from nothing, that there are such things as can bring them to passe; And therefore, have no be∣ing at all, but in the ability of their causes. Whereas, suppose them in being before their causes bring them to passe, what remaines for their causes to doe, which would have nothing to doe, if that which they bring to passe were in being before they bring it so to passe? And what contingency could then re∣maine, seeing whatsoever is, must needs be while it is? For, this position prevents
any supposition that may be made, concerning the being of that, which is said to be, before you can suppose, or understand it to be. And, where is the diffe∣rence between the being of God, and that of future contingencies, both being of themselves? Surely, supposing the necessity of this their being, because God could not see them otherwise; they would be not only objects, denomi∣nating that knowledge of God to be sight, which reacheth the present being of them, but causes, on which the sight of God must depend, as our sight depends on the object that causeth it. The future being, therefore, of contingencies, necessarily supposeth the determination of their causes; The contingence of them that ths determination is from their causes themselves, freely determi∣ning themselves: The certainty of them, from the infinite reach of Gods understanding, comprehending the resolution of the Creature, by the present inclination thereof meeting the considerations which it is presented with. Wherefore, as it is impossible, that the will should act unlesse the understand∣ing go before, and, the resolution of the will, to do, or not to do this or that, necessarily depends upon some act of the understanding, shewing, by sufficient reason an end sufficient to move the wil to proceed and resolve; So doth not the will effectually proceed, untill the understanding shews that reason, which ef∣fectually moves it to proceed. Now, these reasons proceeding from those ap∣pearances, which the objects that every man meets with cause in his mind, ei∣ther at the present, or, by comparing that which outwardly appears at the present, with that which is laid up in the storehouse of the mind: And, God ha∣ving provided what objects every man in every moment shall meet with, to re∣solve him what to do, in every case that may come in debate; It cannot be i∣magined, that he provideth this, and knoweth not, by the means which he provieth, what will be the issue, supposing that he knoweth it not by his own resolution, to determine a man by his own immediate act, to do whatsoever he does. And indeed, God comprehending what considerations a man every mo∣ment is moved with▪ and what be his own inclinations that is moved with the same; it cannot seem strange, that by this means (seeing it appears impossible that by any other means) he should comprehend what will so come to pass; though knowing, that he that acteth had, or might have had sufficient reasons to have done otherwise. Wherefore, if any man ask me, whether God know what will come to pass, if any case should be put, which he knoweth shall never be put; which is now called in the Schools Gods middle knowledge, because it hath on the one side, that knowledge whereby he comprehendeth the natures of all things, and the possibilities of all events; on the other side, the view which he hath from everlasting, of all things that have been, are, or shall be, for that tract of time which they endure; (because, I seem to say, that this is it which directs Gods providence, in resolving what course to hold; by which resolution▪ it appears to him what shall come to pass) I shall not answer nevertheless without distinguishing, That God comprehends not the issues of those future possibilities, which men can imagine to themselves; and yet com∣prehends the issues of these future possibilities, whereof we suppose him to de∣termine all the circumstances. For, let a man infinitely endeavour, to limit, by his understanding, all that he can consider in the case of any man left to his free∣dome, he shall never be able to express that consideration, which shall be effe∣ctuall, certainly to determine him that is presented with it: Because it is mani∣fest, that, infinite considerations more may present themselves, to move him to do nothing, or otherwise. But, when the word of God speaks of these means, which, being provided by God, determine effectually the resolution of him that is moved by them, to wit, by the means of his own choice: Though, it is impossible, that, speaking to men, it should express all that God considereth, to ground his fore knowledge; yet by that which it expresseth, it obligeth us, to understand all that appeareth, either to man, to determine his choice, or to God, to ground his fore-knowledge: Which, though proceeding from his ef∣fectuall providence, yet, supposing mans freedome, cannot be understood any way to impeach it. And upon these terms it may be understood, how future
conditionals may be subject to the infinite capacity of Gods understanding, in as much as knowing, what a man with these inclinations, being moved with these considerations will do, he must needs know what he would have done, had either his inclinations, or the consideration presented been other then they are; God comprehending those which might have been, no lesse then those which are. And thus propositions concerning future possibilities may be said to be known to God, whether true or false, supposing the terms of them to inti∣mate whatsoever may appear to God, in the cases whereof they speak, which no termes that man can use can expresse. And therefore, the like cannot be said of possibilities proposed to depend up∣on impertinent conditions: As who should say; If the Turke take Candy the Pope will condemn Iansenius; For what possibility can depend upon a condition that is supposed not to come into the consideraion of him that must effect it? It is alleged, indeed, that Elias saith to Elizeus, 2 Kings II. 20. If thou seest me when I am taken from thee, it shall so come to passe to thee, if not, it shall not. But it is no marvell that Elias, knowing, that, both his Scholers desire, and his seeing of him as he was going up into heaven should come to passe; should seeme to suspend the one upon the other, not because God had appointed any such dependence, but to signifie, that he must be con∣tent to expect for the present, and that, when he saw him part, he might rest assured of it. But▪ it is alleaged also, that Elizeus said to King Jash, 2 Kin. XII. 19. Thou shouldest have stuck, the Earth with thine arrow, five or six times, then shouldest thou have smitten Aram till they had been destroyed. To which I answer, that is a Prophesy; and that God had revealed to his prophets, that the Israelites should overcom the Syrians, as many times as the King should strike the earth. Not meaning that, if more or lesse then three, the number of the victories might be other then three; But, knowing that he would strike thrice, and having intended them so many victories. Therefore the Prophet is angry at the King for strikeing but thrice, because he might have expected, (knowing no more then I have said) that the Israelites should have utterly destroyed the Syrians, knowing that they should overcome them as oft as hee should strike. And this sense agreeth well enough with the Hebrew, (where theindicative servs for all the moods) traslating it▪ Then mighst thou have smitten Aram till he had been destroyed: Because the revelation which he had would have borne it, not because God had suspended the event upon acon∣dition so impertinent. For, in conditionals, neither the truth of the condition, nor of that which is inferred is requisite to make them true, but onely the truth of the inference, consequence or dependence. If the Sun rise not at such an hour, we shall not have day. It is a certaine truth. Not because the Sun will not rise at his hour, or, that rising, we shall not have day; But because the consequence is necessarily true. And therefore he, who, by pronouncing a conditionall affirmeth a dependence between the parts of it, when as indeed there is none, speakes not onely an impertinence but an untruth. If there be a dependence between them, though God onely knew it, he saith true, If none false, If it be requisite, that Dvines may understand one another the better, to call this Gods middle knowledg, be it so called if you please, upon termes, I contend not In the meane time, let me say, that God, not onely seeth from everlasting, those contingencies, which shall come to passe, every one in their severall times, but also foreseeth that they shall come to passe; Which, though all a thing, yet, are grounded upon severall reasons. For, all sight implying the being of that, whereof it expresseth the presence to that which sees; the view which God hath of future contingencies mplyeth, that they are present to him in his in∣divisible eternity, in that difference of time the whole succession whereof, the instant of Gods Eternty, without succession answers Bu when God, by resol∣ving to produce that state of hings which he chuseth, comprehends what will follow; this knowledg▪ being the ground upon which he sees what will come to passe, cannot be that knowledg▪ which, representing it to him as present, must needs presuppose, and not produce the bing of it. And upon these premises
I know what to say to the opinion of some of the Schoole, that the ground of Gods foreknowledg of future contingencies stands, in their being present, to his eternity from everlasting, though in that, difference of time which they hold, in the succession which the world is to indure; which whole succession, the one indivisible moment of Gods eternity, answereth. For, though it is not to be denyed, that God sees all future contingencies, as thus present to him, from everlasting; yet is it still to be demanded, what is the ground of this their pre∣sence, and how they come to be present to God: seeing they nei∣ther could bepresent to him, not first supposing them to have being. nor could have being, of themselves, as capable of notbeing as well as of being, for this is the nature of future contingencies. Seeing then, that, the presence of fuure contingencies to God in his eternity being supposed, were notwith∣standing, forced to inquire how it comes to passe, &, whatsoever proves the true reason of that wil prove the true ground upon which they may be foreseen, it followes necessarily, that, the determination of contingencies which qualifieth them future, (in the notion of that which shall be, not of that which may be) in all the ground, why they are present to the view of God, which presence inferreth, that it is foreknown to God that they shall be, at that time, in regard whereof they are called future. But this opinion, I confesse, is liable to divers great difficulties. Here, in the first place, it may be objected; That, by this meanes, wee make God pick up that knowledg, that goes before his providence to direct it, from his crea∣tures, collecting by the inclination which he sees to be in them, what they will doe, when they come to be in such or such an estate, & accordingly, resolving to bring them or not to bring them to it. To which I answer, that this imagi∣nation is no lesse abusive, then that upon which Epicurus denied providence, for feare God should be troubled with that infinite care which it would require, as men are with a little part of it. But if all the sight, which God hath, of the creature▪ proceed from the knowledg of himselfe, whereby, seeing what he may make, he resolves what he will make; Though I say, the fight of his crea∣ture at present depends upon the decree of producing it in his owne time, yet, seeing I make ths decree to depend onely upon the infinite wisdome and good∣nesse of God, which moves him, to chuse what he thought best to do, I make him to depend upon himselfe alone, not upon his creature. In like maner, though I make the decree of Gods providence to proceed upon consideration of the free inclination of his creature, moved by the consideration of such objects, as he sees are presented to it, and his foresight of future contingencies proceeding from the frewill thereof, to stand upon the said decrees; Yet, since I de∣rive the freewill of the creature, from the knowledg and will of God, and the state of it, from the course of providence, which his own knowledge directs, I cannot be thought to disparage God with the imperfections of his creatures. I do indeed understand, that simple Christians take it with a graine of jealousy upon a mans Christianity, when a man of understanding shews them the order of secondary causes, in effecting the works of Gods providence, as if there∣fore, he did not believe that all comes from God, because he will not have him, at every turne, to transgresse the ordinary course of those causes which his pro∣vidence hath once set on worke, because they understand it not. Bu, though the most understanding know very little of it, yet thus much they know; that it is more for the honour of God, that it should be thought, that God, from the beginning hath elected a certaine order agreeable to his own infinite wis∣dome, justice, goodnesse, so & verainty, but yet of his owne free choice, by which all things come to passe, his creaturs serving the turn of his purpose; Then, that he should, at all turnes, by moving his creatures to that which they are not inclined to by their first naure, but by his present will immediately, attaine his designes. For, that he should transgresse his own order, for the introdu∣cing of those effect which are above nature, the whole book of God requires us to beleive. And, if the glory of God consists in causing naturall things working their owne inclinations, to serve to do what he designeth, much more▪
it is for his glory, that, maintaining mn in the excercise of his freedome, he makes him never the lesse, whether by good or by bad inclinations, an instru∣ment to bring to passe those events, which he in his wisdome determinth. In the second place it may be objected; I hat, supposing all that can be supposed in the nature of future contingencies, they must appeare possible on both sides, they may appeare infinitely more and more probable on the one side, but, so long as they appeare not certain, they cannot be the object of cer∣taine knowledg, as Gods is; And certaine they cannot appere, so long as we suppose them to remaine contingencies. To which I answer, acknowleging, that I▪ who draw my knowledge from that which I see, cannot, by limitng the probabilities of future contingencies, attine to more then probabilty But that it would be against all the reason in the world, thereby to take masure, what God can attaine to, comprehending, not onely the inclinaions of his creatures, and the considerations which they meet with, but also that they shal meet with no other, but what he comprehendeth; And to udrtake that he, by what he sees, cannot discern that to b certain, which I, by tha which I see, cn∣not discerne to be more then probable. I know it may be sai on the other side; that it is onely the weakenesse of our understanding that hnders us to discerne the consistence of our freedome with the immediate determnation thereof, by the act of God, to that which it chuseth And it is usually argued, that the work of saving grace, and the difference which it maketh between those tht are a∣ved, and those that are not, would not remaine such a mystery, as the diffe∣rences on foot about it in the Christian world demonstrate, if the reason of it be resolved into the congruity of that motion, which suffiient reason enders to a reasonable creature. To which I answer in the fist plac; That, if it were not a secret, according to that opinion which I advance, this objection, wherein all the difficulty is couched, would not lie against it. And that, sup∣posing all the diffiultie thereof voided, it would remaine no less a secret, why God should move some providing that congruity, others, waving t, then, wy he should, by his own immediate act determinate som to be Christians, whlst t remains posible that those who are not so determined should b the like. To the other I say; That it is one thige not to know no to be able o demonstrate how God can have certaine knowledge of things▪ that, whst they are knowne, remain contingencies; Another thing to know, that by he knowledg whch he hath, they remaine no contingencies. Christianity supposing them to re∣maine contingencies. For, it is no shame for a Christian or for a Divine, to professe ignorance, when the qustion is how it may b evient, that matters of faith are true; As in the mater of the H. Trinity I have sad. Bu, that, in a mater so subject to common understanding as th determination of the wil by its own choice, reason and experience justifying tht whch faith maketh the ground of Christianity; because I cannot answr an objection, I shall make the whole tenor of the Bible, the tender of Christianity▪ the whole treaty of God with man concerning his happinesse delusory and abusive, as conditionig for that which no man can stirre head or foot toward, till being determined, he cannot doe otherwise; I should denie that which appeares▪ because I cn not evidence that which appeares not, seems to me very unreasonable. Especially, having so many intimations in the Scripture, to signifie▪ that God hath in consideration the circumstance of each mans case, for the ground of hs foresight in each mans proceedings. For, let Gods foreknowledg never so much rquire, that the truth of those things which he foreseeh be determined and certaine it will be no abatement to this cerainety, that I believe it is not grounded up∣on his immediate determing of mans will to doe it, but upon his determining of the meanes, in consideration whereof he seeth that man will certainely pro∣ceed to determine his owne choice. Lastly, it will be said, that▪ by this meanes, all things shall come to passe necessarty▪ being determined by God to come to passe: For, unlesse we suppose, that the purpose of God cn be defeated that which he purposeth to bring to passe must necssaily come to passe. I answer, that I have distinguished beween that sense, in which it may be
said, that a thing comes to passe necessarily, and that sense in which it may be said, that it must necessarily come to passe. For▪ I suppose, that the property of our Eng∣lish will help me▪ here, to distinguish these two senses, to all that consider their mother tongue, and may discerne a severall meanng when a man saies, the fire burnes necessarily, & Peter must necessarily deny our Lord, supposing that our Lord had fore told it. For, when the necessity is understood to be in the cause, which, the nature thereof, though by Gods will, determines; it is proper to say, tha it comes to passe necessarily▪ But, when the necessity is understood to stand upn a supposition of the effect, either being, or knowne to be, (which knowledg presupposeth it to be, being supposd to be true) or the like, it is proper to say, this must needs come to passe, or it must of necessity, come to passe, but not that it comes to passe necessarily, because, then, the necessity must no fall upon the coming of it upon passe, but upon the manner, by which it comes to psse. I say then, if any can inferr upon my saying, that, the necessity which it infers is antecedent to the being of it, I grant, I am faln into the in∣convenience which I would a void, and will disclaime the position upon which it followes; But, if it be onely consequent, upon supposition, either, that it is, or that it is taken to be, it is no more, then that necessity, which is found in all cotigencies, according to all opinions, that must allow all things necessa∣rily to be (hough not to be necessarily) supposing that they are. Now, when I say that God determines the evens of future contingencies, I say not that he doth it▪ by determining their causes to do them, speaking of free causes; (for, the contingcies which come to passe by the concurrence of naturall causes, I grant o be meere necessities, in regard it is necessary, that, when every cause act to the umost of his strength, that must, not onely needs come to passe, but come to passe necessarily, which, the concurrence of severall forces produceth, and must need appear in the causes▪ to any that comprehends the force of them all) bu▪ that this act of his ends, in determining the motives which present themelves to such causes; Which act is consistent with an other act, whereby he mintaines the cause in an ability of doing or not doing that which it is mo∣vd to do. But that, comprehending the inclinations thereof, and the force o the motives which it is presented with, he comprehends thereby, that it will proceed to act, though comprehending, that it might doe other∣wie, shuld it regard those appearances, which either habitually it hath, or actully t ght to have. Now I confesse againe, it is hard for me to show, how it ought actually to have those appearances which habitually it hath: But, seeing tha, supposing this, I show evidently, how the providence of God i unceeasib▪ the will remaining free, and the effects thereof contingent; I will rathr conesse, that I cannot shew, where their freedome might or ought to move when it does not, then destroy the ground of all Christianity. Thus much is evident, supposing my saying; that, the certainty of the event includes the supposition of the will acting freely, & therefore infers no necessity antecedent to it, the knowledge upon which providence decrees, foreseeing that it will freely proceed being so moved.
CHAP. XXV. The grounds of the difference between sufficient and effectuall. How naturall occa∣sions, conduce to supernaturall actions, The insufficience of Jansenius his doctrine. Of sufficient grace under the Law of Moses and Nature. ANd now I shall not use many words, to declare what it is, that makes those helps of grace, which of themselves are sufficient, effectuall. For▪ if all particulars are contayned in their generalls, that which is said of all the works of providence must hold in those helps of supernaturall grace, whereby it conducteth to the happinesse of the world to come. And▪ therefore the effica∣cy of Gods grace, (taking efficacy to imply the effect) consists in the order which providence useth, that the motives of Christianity, (whether to imbrace or performe the profession of it,) be presented in such circumstances, as may render them accepted of the will, to whose judgement, for the preent, they so appeare. So that, the same for nature and kind▪ prove effectall to one, which to an other prove void and frustrate. For, it is manifest, that those helps are the grace of Christ, even, as they are sufficient, and supposing them not to take ef∣fect. And, it ought to be manifest, that the circumstances in which they are present to every particular person, are brought to passe, by the conduct of Gods spirit which filleth the world, and attaineth from the beginning to the end of all things which come to passe. And this spirit, and the coming there∣of being purchased by our Lord Christ, and granted in consideration of his obe∣dience, it is easy to bee seen, how it is the grace of Christ, not onely as suf∣ficient, but also as effectuall. This resolution then, presupposeth two things, as proved, Chap. XVIII. The first; That the preaching of the Gospell is the grace of Christ: That is to say; A Grace granted by God in consideration of Christs merits and suffe∣rings. The second; That the grace of Christ attaineth and reacheth the ve∣ry effect of conversion and new obedience, and resteth not in having inabled man to doe it of himselfe, without the influence of it. To make this part of faith better to be understood among believers, better to be maintained against unbelievers, that which this resolution advanceth is this; That the Grace of the H. Ghost, purchased by the humiliation of Christ, and by his exaltation obtained, as it is the meanes which God hath provided for the publishing of his Gospell, to the conviction of all who understand it, that they ought to sub∣mit to the faith, and live according to it▪ so it is the meanes to make it effectuall to the conversion of the Nations to Christianity, & that conversion effectuall in their lives and conversations, by presenting the reasons and grounds there∣of, (being of themselves sufficient for the worke) to every mans considerati∣on▪ in those circumstances, procured by the providence of God which it execu∣teth, in which, his wisdome oresaw that they would tak effect, and become to the purpose. And truly, when our Lord saith Iohn XVI. 8, 9, 10. And, when he cometh he will convict the world of sin, of righteousnesse & of judgement Of sin because they believe not in mee: Of judgement, because the prince of this world is condemned; we must understand, that the H. Ghost convinced the world of sin, because those miracles which the Apostles did by the holy Ghost, con∣vincing the world that they spoke the word of God shewed the world▪ that they were under sin, and liable to Gods wrath, if they became not Christians: And that he convinced the world of Judgement, because the Prince of theis world is condemned, by the conversion of those who forefook him to become Christians. Therefore S, Steven upbraideth the Jews, saying; Ye stisnecked and uncircum∣cised
in hearts and eares, ye do alwaies resist the Holy Ghost, even you also, as did your fathers, Acts VII. 51. Because, being convicted by the Holy Ghost which spoke in him, that he spoke from God, neverthelesse, they submit not to his me∣ssage. Therefore our Lord Mark III. 28. 29, 30, All sins shall be forgiven the sons of men, and blasphemies which they shall blaspheme: But whoso shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath no remission for ever, but is liable to ever∣lasting damnation; Because they said, he hath an unclean spirit▪ which you have againe Math. XII. 31, 32. Luke XII. 10. Because, being convicted that our Lord spoke & did his miracles by the Holy Ghost, they blasphemed, saying, that he spoke and did them by an uncleane spirit. For, these words and these workes are the meanes by which our Lord accomplished his promise Iohn XIV. 23. If any man love me he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and abide with him. For before the condition; If any man love me; be fulfilled, the case is that which our Lord expresseth Apoc. III. 20. Behold, I stand at the dore and knock. And if any man heare my voice and open the dore, I will come in to him and sup with him, & e with me. But, being fulfilled, the words of our Lord take place. Iohn XVI. 15, 16, 17. If yee love me ye will keep my commandements. And I will aske the Father, and he will give you an other Advocate, to abide with you for ever; even the spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, because they ee it not, nor know it, but you know it, because it abideth with you, and is in you. For, seeing it is manifest by the premises, that the undertaking of Christianity is the condition upon which the Holy Ghost is granted as a gift to abide with Christians; the preaching of Christi∣anity, that is, the proposing of those reasons which God by his word hath shewed us, why wee should be Christians, is the knocking of our Lord Christ by the spirit, at the dore of the heart, that he may enter and dwell in us by the same spirit, according to the words of S. Paul. 2. Cor. II. 16. For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God hath said; To wit, I will dwell and con∣verse among them, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. That which some Philosophers say of the naturall generation of man; That the soule frames its owne dwelling; being fulfilled in the worke of generation by grace, when the Holy Ghost, by his actuall assistance, frameth the man to be fit for the habituall gift, of the Holy Ghost, by becoming a true Christian. If then we believe, that the Holy Ghost was given by God, and obtained by Christ, as well to make the Gospell effectuall, as to move the Apostles to preach it; there can no doubt remaine, that the preaching of the Gospell, that is to say, the meanes which the Holy Ghost provideth to make it either sufficient or e∣ffectual to convince the world of it▪ is the instrument, whereby he frameth him∣self that invisible house of true believers in which he dwelleth. And therefore, the meanes whereby Gods grace becomes effectuall to those who imbrace it, is the same that renders it sufficient for those who refuse it; the difference lying as well in the disposition which it meets with, (for which the man is accounta∣ble) as in the spirit of God that presenteth it, which renders God the praise when it takes effect▪ and leaves men accountable when it does not. If this rea∣son had been in consideration with Socinus, (and perhaps with Pelagius,) he would have found it necessary, acknowledging (as all that read the Scriptures must needs acknowledge that which they find so frequent and so cleare in the Scriptures) that the habituall gift of the Holy Ghost is granted to inable those who undertake Christianity to performe it; to acknowledge also, that the actuall help of it is necessary, to make the motives of Christianity effectuall to subde men to it. And by consequence, that the coming of the second Adam was necessary to restore the breach which the first had made, seeing it was not to be repaired without the same. Nor is it to be marveled at, that naturall meanes, conducted by the grace of Christ, should produce supernaturall effects, such as I have shewed the o∣bedienc of Christianity to be, which, supposing the Covenant of grace, and freedome of mans will, cannot be otherwise; The reasons which appeare to the understanding, and move the will, to act contrary to the inclination
of originall concupscence, in professing Christianity and living according to the same, being sufficient to convict it to give sentence, that so the man ought to doe; And, the circumstances, in which the spirit of Christ conducteth these motives to the heart which it knocketh at by their means being able to re∣present them valuable, to take effect with him, who is moved to the contrary by his originall concupiscence▪ And though meanes naturall, because they▪ move a man to proceed according to right reason, which nature requires him to doe; yet, as they are brought to passe and conducted by a supernaturall cause, nothing hinders the effect to be supernaturall, in such▪ a nature, as is by them made capable of acting above nature. I do much approve the discourse of some, that have indeavoured to shew how this comes to passe, thus; suppo∣sing the covenant of the Law to be the renewing of that which was made with Adam in Paradise, for the maintaining of him in the happnesse of his naturall life: Which we may suppose, though we suppose not, that God covenanted not with him at all for the life to come. For, the dispensation of those blessings of this life, which the covenant of nature, limited by Moses Law to the happinesse of the land of promise, tendreth, may well be the advantage which God taketh, to make the covenant of Grace acceptable, especially to those, who, by Gods blessing, failing of the blessings of the first covenant, &, by that meanes becoming out of love with this present worl, mee with the Covenant of Grace, in such a disposition, as may render it acceptable. For, so long as things goe well with men in this world, it seemes hash, to require them to takeup the Crosse of Christ, that they may obtain the world to come, But, when the comforts of this world faile, it is no marvell, if any condition that tenders hope in the world to come be welcome If it be said that this renders the grace of Christ effectuall onely to the poore, and men o meane condition in the world, who have cause to be weary of their estte in it; It is answered, that it is no marvell, if the meanes that makes the grace of Christ effectuall, addresse it selfe especially to that estate o men▪ in which our Lord Christ, to whom they so become conformable, appeared in the world. And, for that very reason; to figure that estte of mind which the Gospell requires; the people of sraell were, by Gods Law, left ununished of many helps of po∣licy and force, by which other nations maintain themselves free from servtude, that they might remaine obliged to depend upon Gd immediate assistance & providence. But it is to be said further; That, the greatest estates of the world being subject to the greatest crosses, through want of successe, and those great changes to which they are liable; this way of preparation to the kingdome of heaven can no way seeme wanting to any estate, when a begger is seen, no lesse to doe upon this world, then an uncleane person is seen to doe up∣on that whore by whom he is abused. It is moreover to be said▪ That, the remembrance of death which must, and the inconstancy of this world, which may deprive us of all the benefits thereof, being, by Gods judgement, the pu∣nishment of sin, soures all the content of them that drench themselves deepest in the pleasures of this life, and gives them just cause to forsake them all in case they stand not with the hope of the world to come: And the very injoying of them, (being injoyed with that conscience which all Chstians have, of Gods providence, and the sense of his hand from whence they come, is reasonably an advantage to those who injoy the best successe that can be expressd in the course of this world, both to become thankfull to God for it, and also, to pre∣fer ernity before it. Whereby it may appeare, that the course of this world, disposed by God upon the terms of the covenant of nature containes  it those opportunities and advantages▪ which the act of Gods providence by the grace of Christ, knowes easily how to mak effectuall, to the supernaturall purpo∣ses of it. This is the place for the rest of that which I am to say of the opinion of Janse∣nius, setling the efficacy of saving grace upon other grounds then those which I use. The ground of it seems to stand upon the observation of S. Augustin de corrept. & gratia, Chap. XI, XII. Distinguishing between the help of grace,
without which the worke of grace is not don, & that by which it is don, auxili∣um sine quo non, and auxilium quo; and comparing the grace of Christ, which cometh to effect notwithstanding originall concupiscence, with the grace given Adam, which might have come to effect, had he pleased, but came not not∣withstanding his innocene; as more powerfull in our weakenesse, then that in his strength. For, hereupon, he will have the grace of Christ to be onely that which takes effect; confining that help without which the worke of grace cannot be don, to the state of innocence, as ou of date now under oiginall sin. So that▪ the freedome of the will is so far from being rquisite to he effects hereof, that it hath no being but b the meanes of it, consisting, in that free love of that which God commandeth, because he commandeth it, which it inspireth. As on the other side, the counerfeit of it, in them that sin without reluctation, bcause free from righteousnesse, is nothing but the free lve of sin, for the saisfaction of concupiscence. It is therefore, in his opinion, impertinent, how necessarily the grace of Christ determineth the wil to imbrace the true good; seeing it is the love of it, & the delight in it, which grace worketh in the wll, that determines it, willingly and freely to imbrace it. To tke the more distinct view of this plea, let us put the case in him, who, running full speed in a course of sin, is caled by the preaching of the Gospell to become a Christian: Or, to the same purpose, in him who, being a Christian, and run∣nng the same race, is summoned by his profession, and the grounds thereof▪ to reurne to it. In this case, can any man imagine, that the reasons which move us all to be Christians shuld raise no love of true good, no dislike to sin, no feare of vengeance, no desire of everlasting hapiesse, in him that considers them as they deserve? Especially being managed by the spirit of God which knocketh at the dore of the heart by that meanes. Or can any man question, as it is he feare of vengeance that beginneth, so it is the love of good for Gods ske that conummateth the resolution of becoming a true Christi? But, the qustn being put about changing the chief end of a mans whole life and doings, can it be supposed, that any man is prevented with such a delight in true goonesse, as istntly to abandon the lust, which his bsnesse hath been hi∣therto to satisfie, without demurre or regret? I doubt not that God can immediatly crae in any man that appearance of true good▪ that shall with∣out debate or looking back, transport him to the prosecution of it: That, not∣withstanding the Covenant of grace, he may doe it; Which, though a rule to his ordnry proceeding, is no Law to his Soveraigne perogative. But, him that is thus sved, though sved by grace, yet, we cannot count to be saved by the Covenant of grace; Which proposeth a reward to them, who are led by motives thereof, notwithstanding the difficulties to the contrary; though im∣plying the worke of grace in him that overcometh. And, this no man more cearly acknowledgeth then Jansenius de gratia Christi VIII. 2. where  conesseth that the predetermination of the will by the grace of Christ is not indefeasible, but onely when it overcoms; as Gods predetermination, ac∣cording to the Dominicans, is. For, by this difference (whch in statig of this o∣pinion, I have not neglected afore) the efficacy thereof cannot be attribued to e aure of that help which overcometh, a of an other kind then that which poveth frustrate. And therefore, notwithstanding that large and ela∣borat work of his, he hath left us to inquire further, whence the efficacy of it proceedeth; As having, in effect, onely resolved us, wherein the efficacy of Grce consisteth in the nature of the formall cause; Not from whence it pro∣ceedth, in the nature of the effective cause, which the question, indeed, deman∣dth. And truly, the very consideration premised; That, as freedome from sin cosists in the determination of the will to righteousnesse, which the Grace of Chrst effecteth; so, freedome from righteousnesse, in the determination of it to sin, which it acteth; Inorceth an other kind of freedome, common to both estates, not importing praise or dispraise, but a capacity of either, by do∣ing that which no necessity determineth a man to doe. And therefore, that,
though the grace of Christs Crosse be the medecine, yet, till it be freely taken, it worketh not the cure. This is that freedome from necessity, by the present condition of our nature, the use whereof produceth the other freedome from bondage, either to sin or righteousnesse▪ Not that this state of proficience re∣quires actual indifference, which supposeth so great an inclination & biasse as that of inbred concupiscence, Not determining the will to any action or object, but the acts thereof to those taints, which the want of a due end, & right reason (and therefore of just measure) in a mans desire, necessarily inferreth. But because, in passing from the bondage of sin to the love of righteousnesse, it is necessary, that a man, go through an instance of indifference, wherein his resolution shall balance, betweene the love of true good and that which is counterfeit. It is therefore to be acknowledged, that, in the state of innocence, there had needed no other helpe then the knowledge of Gods will, to inable men to performe whatsoever he should require; (Of the spheare of nature, supposing Adam instituted and called, onely to the uprightnesse and hap∣pinesse, of this life; or supernaturall, supposing him instituted and called to the world to come) For, where no immoderate inclination of the sensuall appetite created any difficulty, what should hinder the prosecution of a reason so un∣questionable as the will of God is? But, is not therefore the knowledge of Gods will revealed by the gospell, under reasons convincing man of his ob∣ligation to doe it, upon the account of his utter misery or perfect happinesse, the grace of Christ? Knowing, by the scriptures alleged before, that the means of it are purchased by his crosse, & that where the reason is so convinced, there cannot want motives sufficient to incline the will to make choice. Not, that I think those reasons, not being necessary but onely sufficient, would take place, were they not managed by Gods spirit; Whether for the dificulty of supernatural actions, or for the contrary biasse of inbred concupiscence: But be∣cause, in the nature of a sufficient helpe, they do actually inable a man to make choice; though, in regard of the difficulties which contrary inclinations create, is is most certaine they would prove addle, and void of effect, were they not conducted by the grace of God, which is called effectuall for the event of it. Not that the nature of those helps which prevaile is any other then the nature of those which overcome not, (which I may well affirme, if Jansenius, though to the prejudice of his opinion, can not deny it) but because they are, by the worke of providence, presented in severall circumstances, to severall dispositi∣ons and inclinations, whether of Gods mere will and pleasure, as he is Lord of all things, or upon reason of reward or punishment, in maters wherein he hath declared himself by the Covenant of Grace. So that, the same reasons and motives, which, in some prove void and frustrate, coming to effect, and rea∣ching and attaining to the very doing of the work which they inable a man to doe; it cannot e said, according to this position of mine, that God, by the grace of Christ, onely inableth to do what he requireth, (the will of man making the difference between him that doth it, and him that doth it not) but the very act, as well as the ability of doing, is duely ascribed to the worke of Gods Grace, according to the articles agreed by the Church against Pe∣lagius. And this not onely under the Gospell, but even under the Law. For, though I showed you in the first book, that the law expressely tenders onely the pro∣mise of temporall happinesse in holding the land of Canaan, for the reward of the outward and carnall observations thereof; Yet I showed you also, that, in the meane time, there was an other traffick in driving under hand between God and his people, for the happinesse of the world to come, upon their obedience to his Law, for such reasons, and to such an end; and with such measures as he requireth. Therefore, The Law is spirituall according to S. Paul Rom VII. 14. and a grace according to S. Iohn I. 16, 17. When he saith; Of his fulnesse wee have all received, and grace for grace. For, the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. The grace of the Gospell, instead of the grace of the Law. And, S. Paul againe, speaketh of
the things which are granted us by the Gospell, not in wrds taught by mans wisdome, but by the Holy Ghost, comparing spirituall things with spirituall things. 1. Cor. II. 13. Signifying, that he taught the Gospell out of the Law, comparing the spirituall things of the Gospell as signified by the Law, to the same spirituall things as revealed by Christ. And againe when he saith Rom. I. 17. The righteousnesse of God is revealed in the Gospell, from faith to faith; His meaning is; proceeding to the faith of Christ, from that which was un∣der the Law. True i is indeed, and I acknowledge, that this spirituall sense of the Law, was not to be discovered in the Law, nor was discovered under it, without the revelation of Gods spirit, (that placed it there) to his friends the Prophets, and by them to their disciples and followers. But, the office of those Prophets being to call the people to the spirituall service of God, & obedi∣ence to his Law out of love. (which was the intent for which his spirit strove with them, as with those before the floud Gen. VI. 2. Whereupon Noe is cal∣led the preacher of righteousnesse 2. Peter II. 5.) it followes of necessity, that there was meanes for them to learne, & to practice true righteousnesse, seeing they are charged for resisting the spirit of God calling them to it. S, Steven in the seventh of the Acts, insisteth not in convincing the Jewes of the truth of Christianity, (supposing it done by that, which had passed,) but inferrs, by all that long speech, clearely this; That, as the Israelite refused Moses for a judge between him and the Israelite whom he wronged, as the people were rebellious to him in the wildernesse, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt, so were they to the prophet whom Moses had foretold: concluding therefore; Ye stifnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and eares, ye doe alwaies resisty the Holy Ghost, as your fathers, so you also. Which of the prophets did not your fathers persecute? Killing those that foretold of the coming of that righteous one, of whom you are now become the traytors and murtherers? And our Lord, when he telleth them, that, by honouring the memories of the Pro∣phets, and persecuting the Prophets and wise and Scribes & Apostles, whom he was sending them, they owned themselves heires of them that killed the Pro∣phets Mat. XXIII. 29▪ 37. showeth, that the case was the same with the Prophets of old, as with himselfe and his Apostles. And whatsoever we read in the old Testament, of the grace of God to that people, in granting them his spirit, or of their ungraciousnesse in resisting the same▪ serves to prove the same purpose. It is truly said indeed, in rendring the reason why our Lord Christ came not till towards the later end of the world; that God meant first to show the world, that all other meanes which he thought fit to use to re∣claime man by the fathers▪ and by, and under the Law, were not to purpose▪ that the necessity of his coming might appeare. But, that this is not to be understood, as if God meant to render them inexcusable by using insufficient meanes, that could not take effect. But, that dispensing to those times such meanes of grace, as he found the reasons upon which his secret counailes proceed to require, proportionable to the obedience and service which he re∣quired then at their hands; He reserves the full measure of them to the co∣ming of his Son proportionable to the difficulty of beraing his Crosse, which he purposed, for the condition of those promises which he brought. And, the same is to be said of the Fathers under the law of nature; Which, if we un∣derstand it to be so cailed, as if the light of nature then taught and inabled them to please God▪ we contradict, not onely the faith hitherto maintained a∣gainst Pelagius, but also the appearances in Scripture, of those revelations, of that cpmmerce and inrcourse with God, whereby, they advanced, to the state of his friends. The book of Iob▪ (to the time whereof we see this state lusted) presenting most evident instances▪ both of Gods correspondence with the Godly of the Gentiles, and of Christians, piety in their conversations. Now, to that state of inocence wherein Adam was created, it must needs be a grace o God to make knowne his will, because it cannot be supposed, that God should imploy his creature in his service and not reward him for doing it, with advantage: But, not as if suck knowledg could give him ability, but onely determine the matte of his obedience, who had nothing to hinder the doing
of that, which, commanded by God, must needs be for his advantage to do. Since the fall, if reasons provided by God to convince the understanding, to incline the will to that which he purposeth for our happinesse, may and would prove ineffectuall, were they not acted and managed by the holy Ghost, Let us not therefore so far miken the counsaile of God, in providing them, as to imgine the worke is not done by them, because it is his speciall grace that makes them effectuall to purpose. The indowments of Adam, how great soever thy were, the event sheweth, that they might faile, and, hd they not failed, it must have been ascribed to God for a greater grace then those indowments; in as much as these made him accountable to God, that, would have initled him to a re∣ward. So that, by this account, it will be no marvale, that the grace of Christ, which saveth us in and through this weakenesse of ibred concupscence, should be counted greater then that which Adam had in his inncy. And, the same is to be said of the Angels that fell, and those that stood. How great soever their indowments were, had not the motive whatsoever it was, that prevailed with the one part to depart from God, been prevened of ta∣king effect with the rest, it might have come to passe, as well in all as in some. That it did not, what can it be ascribed to▪ (all being turshed with abilities fully corespondent to that which God required at the hands) but some dispensation of Gods secret counsail, being, by no reason of his decla∣red Justice, obliged otherwise? Not that the Will of Adam or of Angels was not able to doe what God required, and hd done it, of  selfe, without any help added by God; But because▪ so geat is the influence of the ma∣kers providence, that the events thereof▪ how justly soev imputable to the choice of the creature, must of necessity have their springs, in and from the secret dispensation thereof, not concerning his justice. Seeing then, that, as I said before▪ the opinion of Jansenius, though it gives account wherein the grace of Christ formally consisteth yet gives no account from whence effectively it proceedeth▪ but, the immdiate wll of God, he question demanding, upon what ground, it redounds to mans accut; Let them either look about them for a better reason, or accept of ths, not a de∣strying that which it saith, but to the introducing of that which it saeth not. For it is ageed upon both waies, that it is delight in true goodness for the love of God, that makes the grace of Christs Gospell effctual in mens lives and conversations: How by the act of that wil▪ which in others, rejects it,  ndevour to say what the scriptures and faith of the Church will allow; But Jansenius his opinion goes no further then that so it is, to wit, because love is free, therefore man is frely saved, howsoever love be brought to passe. But, the necessity of those actions to which grace determineth, which is antecedent in Jansenius his opinion, (the cause which is Gods will being undeeasible) i in mine onely consequent, upon suposition of efficacy, which implyes the being of that which comes to effect, grounded upon the foreknowledg of God, which sup∣poses the free motion of the reasonable creature. If the advantage be such in reconciling the efficacy of grace with the free will of the creature, in recon∣ciling the same with Gods foreknowledge and effectuall providence, extending to all good and bad, it will appeare much more. For, had Jansenius done his businesse in the mater of supernaturall grace, he had not obliged us much, unlesse his resolution were an overture to abate the generall difficulty tht remaines. But, if he sends us, for that, to the predetermination of God, which is said to be requisite upon the geneall account of the creature, and the indifference of mans will; he leaves us to seeke for a reason, how God is not the author of that sin, which he determineth the will to do, before▪ it determine it selfe. If we avoid that, as Doctor Strang▪ whom I spoke of before, hath done, by maintayning against Doctor Twisse, that the will is not determined by God to the actions of sin; Besides that he is to give account, why the same providence of God, which is generall to all things, should be thought to teach this sort & not that; (all actions, as appendnces of Gods creatures, having the same dependence upon God which the prerogative of the first cause requi eth) we are let to seeke, how that
foreknowledge of God, which directeth his providence, comes informed of the truth of future contingencies. For, if wee maintaine, that the wisdome of God, comprehending the inclinations of his creatures, and all those consi∣derations, which outward occurrences, or inward appearances shall present or not present them with, to determine their choice, cannot thereby cetaine∣ly discerne what will come to passe: (as Doctor Strang maintaines, that so, there cannot be in God any certtine knowledge of future conditionalls) I leave to them that shall peruse this writing, what satisfaction it is possible for him to give, in the possibility of foreknowing future contingencies. For, to say, that they may be oreseen in the deceite of permitting them, is to say, that, that which may be otherwise may be certainely foreseen, by certainly know∣ing that there is nothing, to hinder it. It remaines, that I say, what is to be thought of that proposition which some of the School. Doctors holdforth, That, to such as do what is in them to doe by their naturall abilities, God gives grace: facientbus quod in se est ex vi ibu na∣tur Deus largitur gratiam; Because it seems to follow upon upposition of that which I have maintained; That the unregenerate are, notwithstanding originall concupiscence, able to do things that are good for a right end, though not out of a resolution to doe all for the right end of all, which is, God and his service. For hence it seemeth to be inferred, that those who live in civill righ∣teousnesse, for honesties sake (and not for their particular advantage, inconsi∣stent with the generall good of mankind,) dserve that God should end you those helps of grace, which are immediately sufficient to save them by the Cove∣nant of grace▪ But it is manifest, that the proposition may be understood in two senses; One in point of Fact▪ the other of right; Theone making the proposition universal, the other particular; The one importing that God may, te other that God must give those helps of grace, that are immediately sufficient▪ to them that live well according to the light of nature; there being a vast difference, between Gods giving the helps of grace that are immediately sufficient, to them whom he considers to have done such things as the light of nature justifies; And, his giving them because of the same, as obliged so to reward them. For, the one leaves those sufficient helps, gifts of Gods grace by Christ, the other renders them rewards of mens works, not subject to Gods bounty, being prevented with the obligation of justice; and therefore establishes that opinion of meritum de congruo, which had much vogue in the Schooles, and supposeth not, but inferreth the Covenant of grace, and therefore destroyes it, as verifying the effects thereof into those works of man, that oblige God to grant those helps, which the Gospell, pretending to be set on foot by Gods free grace in Christ, tendreth. Certainly, admitting that which hath been pro∣ved, that the preaching of the gospell is granted in consideration of the merits and sufferings of Christ; it cannot by any meanes be maintayned, that any works of meere nature can oblige God to send the meanes of knowing the Gospell, and conviction of the truth of it, without granting by consequence, that the very coming of Christ, whereof these meanes are the consequence, must be imputed to the works of those, who, in the state of corrupt nature, have ob∣liged God to send them the knowledge of Christ: Which they could not have had, had not the coming of Christ been fist provided: Which, by this reason, must have been, in consideration of the originall merit of their works. I say, the originall merit of their works, because, in this case there could be no consideration of Gods promise made out of free grace, as the ground of those blessings, which God, thereby, ties himselfe to bestow, upon condition of doing that which his Covenant requires, though otherwise, infinitely ex∣ceeding the value of the condition, which he requireth. For, here it is evi∣dent, that the free grace of God, which tenders the promise upon the conditi∣on is the originall ground of all the claime, that, any that is qualified can make to the promise. But, supposing the workes of corrupt nature to oblige God to give his Gospell, it is no more his free grace, but the originall merit of those workes, to which all the grace of it must be imputed. Which▪ as it directly falls into the prime article of Pelagius his heresy, that grace is given according
to merit, and, that it is not given to every act, being prevented by those acts in consideration whereof this opinion supposes it to be granted; So, by conse∣quence, it makes the publication of the Gospell to be no grace of Christ, but the reward of mans merit, which is the true consequence of Pelagius his po∣sition. For though, being pressed with those scriptures, in which the grace of Christ is so clearely preached, that nothing but impudence could deny it, he granted, that the preaching of the Gospell is as much of Gods free grace as the light of nature by which these workes are done; yet in very deed he oerthrewe his owne saying, (that is, gave the Church an undefeasible advantage against himselfe,) by granting it; His heresy being no waies tenable, without maintain∣ing, the very preaching of the Gospell to be the purchace of mans merit, and Christ himselfe, the subject of the Gospell, by consequence. And thus, the heresy of Pelagius becomes that very opinion which S. Paul writes against, as often as he disputes, that a man is justified by grace and not by works; One∣ly with this difference, that, when he writes against the Jewes▪ arguing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law but by faith, his meaning is; that the righteousnesse of the Jewes turned Christians is not to be ascribed to the outward observation of Moses Law, but to the Covenant of grace▪ But when he wriets to the gentiles; That they attained not the promises of the Gospell by the works which they had don before they heard of it, but by the meere grace of God that sent our Lord Christ to bring it. But, if any man in∣sist, that nothing hinders him to suppose the Gospell already set on foot, and thereupon to say and hold; That, by the use of corrupt nature▪ God may be obliged to send the knowledg of it; The insufficience of the plea will be evi∣dent enough. For, those works of morall honesty which corrupt nature is able to doe, not serving to discharge the obligation thereof to God, in those par∣ticular occasions upon which they become due, because they are void of any, whether habituall or actuall, ▪intent of that end which they ought to aime at; It were ridiculous, to tye God to grant the effects of his free grace, in sending our Lord Christ, to those that are lesse sinners then others. And consiering that which is visible in point of fact, it wil be imposible to reduce those things which appear in the propagating and maintaining of Christianity through the world, to any difference of works done before the knowledg thereof, as the reason of Gods dispensing of it. Which may also be said of another opinion, that may be, and perhaps is held upon termes not prejudiciall to the faith, as this seemes to be; to wit; That God, by declaring the Covenant of Grace, & his inclination to save all the world by it, hath tied himselfe to grant such motions and inspirations of true good to all men, that, if they neglect them not, but do what corrupt nature so pre∣vented is able to doe, he shall stand obliged to second the same with means suffi∣cient to bring them to everlasting happinesse. For, the beginning of the worke being acknowledged to require Gods preventing Grace, it cannot be said, that those who are supposed to be thus saved are saved by works and not by grace; or that, in their regard, Christ is dead in vaine, the said helps being granted in consideration of Christs death. But, though it may without prejudice to christani¦ty be said, that God may dispense the helps of that grace which Christs death hath purchased, besides, and without the preaching of the Gospell, yet can it not be said, during the Gospell, that any man attaineth the kingdom of heaven, which Christianty promiseth, but by it. Now, to be saved by the Gospell, requires the profession of the faith, and that, the Sacrament of Baptisme, at least in resolu∣tion and purpose. So that, whether, among those nations where the gospell is not preached, any man be saved by this way, is a thing visible, & to be tried by examining whom this case hath been knowne to have become a Christian. Of which, I assure my selfe, there will be found so few instances, of historical truth, that a discreet man will have no pleasure to introduce a position, so neerely concerning the intent of Christs coming wherof there can so little effect ap∣pear, For, supposing instances might be alleaged to make the mater questio∣nable, how farr would they be from rendring a reason of that vast difference,
that is visible, between the proceeding of God towards the salvation of those that are borne within the Pale of the Church, and those that live and dye without hearing of christianity? The one being so prevented with the knowledg of what they are to doe to be saved, that they shall have much a do so to neglect it, as to flatter their own concupiscence with any color of an excuse. Whereas, the other, whatsoever conviction we may imagine them to have of one true God, of an account to be made for all that wee doe, of the guilt of sin which they are under, without the Gospell; it will be impossible to reduce the reason of the difficulties they are under, more then the former▪ to an equall desire in God of saving all, together with the difference of mens complyance with the helps of Grace which it produceth. And therefore, considering the an∣tecedent will of God is not absolutly Gods will, but with a terme of abatement, reserving the condition upon which it proceedeth▪ I conceive it requisite▪ as I have don, to limit the signification thereof to those effects which we see God being to passe by vertue of it. The utmost whereof being the provdng of means for the preaching of the Gospell, it is neverthelesse no prejudice to it that the Apostles are forbidden by the sprit to preach in Bithynia or Asia, Acts XV. 6, 7. not because God would not have them to be saved, or, because the Macedoni∣ans, by their works, had obliged him to set them aside for their sakes, who could have provided for both: But for reasons knowne to himselfe alone, and, not reducible to any thing that appeares to us. Especially considering the cse of infants dying before Baptisme, in whose workes, it is manifest there can be no ground of difference. For to say, that, by the universality of that Grace which God declareth by Christ, wee are to believe, that, they are all saved, as many as live not to transgresse the Covenant of grace, would be a novelty ne∣ver heard of in the Catholike Church of Christ, tending to unermine the foundation of our common salvation laid by our Lord o Nicodmus; Vnlsse ye b born againe of water and of the Holy Ghost, ye cannot enter into the Kingdome of God For, how should the generall tender of the Gospell intitle infants to the benefit thereof, because they never transgressed that in which they were never estated. It were in vaine then, to looke about the scripture, for exam∣ples to justifie any part of this position. The widow of Sarepta to whom Elias was sent, Naaman & the Syrian, who was sent to Eliseus Cyus whom many supposed to have worshipped the onely God, (because in the end of the Chroni∣ces and beginning of Esdras, he saith, the God of heaven hath given me all the Kingdoms of the earth; & because the Prophet Esay makes him a figure of the Messias (as the Kings of Gods people were) for the freedom which they attained by his government) the Centurion Cornelius, to whom S. Peter was sen with the Gospell, are all of one case; which is the case of thse strangers, who, li∣ving in the common-wealth of Israel, though not circumcised, yet woshiped the onely true God, under those lawes, which, the Jews tell us, were delivered by God to Noe, and by him, to all his posterity: and so were capable of tha salva∣tion, which the Israelites had the meanes of under the Law, though themselves not under it. But neither have we evidence, that their works under the light of nature obliged God, to call them to the priviledg of stangers in the h use of Israel; nor can the workes of Cornelius be taken for the workes of corrupt nature, being in the state of Gods grace which was manifested under the Law, and therefore prevented with those meanes of salvation, which become necessa∣ry under the Gospell, to the salvation which it tendreth So far are we from finding in them any argument, of a Law obliging God, to grant them those helps in consideration of their works don in the state of corrupt nature. And therefore, whatsoever examples we may find of this nature under Christianity, they are to be referred to the free grace of God; which, as sometimes it may come to those of best conversation according to nature, (to whom, the words o our Lord; To him that hath shall be given, may be applied without prejudice to Christianity Math. XXV. 19. Luk XIX. 26. So also it fails not to call those, who, for their present state, are most strangers to christianity, that it may appeare, that no Rule ties God, but that free grace, which his own secret wisdom dispenseth.
And truly, those good works which corupt nature produceth, necessarily de∣pend upon those circumstances, in which Gods prodence placeth one man and not an other, though both in the state of meere nature: So that the one shall not be able to do that which is reasonable, without overcoming those difficulties, to which the other is not lyable. In which regard it hath been said, that the Heroick acts of the Hehen may be attributed to the spirit of God mo∣ving them, though, not as granted in consideration of Christ, but as conducting the whoe worke of providence. So little cause there is to imagine, that the consideration of them should oblige God to grant those helps of grace, the ground whereof is the obedience of Christ, and the end, the happinesse of the world to come. CHAP. XXVI. Predestination to grace absolute, to glory respective: Purpose of denying effectuall Grace absolute, of punishing respective. The end, to which God predestinates, is not the end for which he predestinates. Grace the reward of the right use of Grace. How much of the question the Gospell determines not. That our indea∣vours are ingaged no lesse, then if predestination were not, it determineth. Of the Tradition of the Church; and of Semipelagians, Predestinatians and Arminians. I Am now come to the upshot of the controversy concerning the covenant of grace, and free will, in imbraceing and performing of the covenant of grace, which is the dispute about Gods predestination, whether it proceeds upon the absolute will of God, or, in consideration of mans being qualified as the gospel requires, Which, though of it selfe never so intricate, the premises being sup∣posed, must of necessity be thus resolved; That, predestination being the ap∣pointment of grace and glory, as reprobation on the other side the decree of not giving effectuall grace, and of condemning to paine▪ the appointment of glory and misery cannot be absolute, but, the appointment to actuall grace and perseverance or not, necssarily is. The reason, supposing the premises, is not liable to be contradicted in either part of it; For, it cannot stand with the wisdome and truth of God, to execute his counsailes upon other reasons, and in other considerations, then, from everlasting he purposed to do. There∣fore, for what reason, and in what consideration, God shall in due time give life and death to them whom he shall give it to, for the same reason he did resolve to give it from everlasting. But nothing is more evident in Christia∣nity then this; that God at the last day, shall give sentence of life and death, according as men shall be found to have behaved themselves as Christians or not. And, all that I have premised, to manifest the condition of the Cove∣nant of grace, makes good the same. For, the state of life or death cannot be∣come any mans owne upon other termes, then, the right and title to it becomes his; Therefore God, from everlasting, determined to give life o death to every man, in consideration of his being found qualified for this or for that, accor∣ding o those termes which the covenant of grace proposeth. On the other side, it being resolved, that man, as he is borne into the world, is not able to do any thing that can oblige God to grant him those helps of grace, which onely will be effectuall to inable him, to imbrace and goe through with that conditi∣on which the gospell tendreth; It is manifest that the reason, why he provides effectually, sufficient helps for some, which others have not, why he tenders them to some in those circumstances, in which he knowes they will be effectu∣all, to others not, must take rise and begin at his owne free choice, in granting maters of free grace to whom he pleaseth, and not to others; Though, of
each mans proceeding or not proceeding in the way of Christianity a reason is to be given, from the good or bad use of those sufficient helps, which he had been prevented with. For, seeing it was in the meere appointment of God, to have caused any man to be borne, or after to live, where he should have met with sufficient helps to convict him of the truth of Christianity and those so presented to him, as he best knew they would not be refused; there is nothing more manifest, then, that it was onely in the meere will of God, that it was appointed so as it is and not otherwise. But, this is no hinderance, why the sufficient helps of Gods grace should not proceed from the Will of mans hap∣pinesse in God, though they take no further effect, through mans fau; And, the having or not having of further helps, which God either doth, or might have seconded them with, be imputed to the good or bad use of those which went afore: Because, it hath been made manifest by the premises▪ that the end of Gods gifts is the happynesse of his creature, though it come not to passe. But, the reason of the particulars, which he actually bestowes or refuses, is to be resolved into the quality of the persons that receive them or not; but so, that, the order of all depending upon the first helps of free grace which every man is prevented with, there is no reason to be given for the whole, in the na∣ture of a meritorious cause. Against the two parts of this resolution, there are two objections, one a∣gainst each, which, so far as we shall be able to resolve, so far shall we be able to leave the businesse cleare. For, seeing that the end is fist desied, and then the meanes; (the reason why the meanes are desired being derived from the desire of the end, and referred to it) And, that the end of all grace is glory, the end of all the meanes of salvation, the salvation intended by it; It seemes, that Gods predestination, must, of force, appoint salvation to them that are to be saved in the first place, from thence proceeding, to designe the way and order, by which, the person designed to it may be induced, of his owne free choice to accept the meanes of it. This slight mistake seemes to have been the occasion of many horrible imaginations, which, even Christian divines have had, of Gods designe from evarlasting, to create the most part of men, on purpose to glofie himselfe by condemning them to everlasting torments, though, in consideration of the sins which they shal have don: That which had been granted, in Gods predestination to life, upon this mistake, seeming ne∣cessarily to extend it selfe to his reprobation, signifying the decree of con∣demning to everlasting torments. But, the mistake is, that the end of the crea∣ture, by Gods appointment, is taken for Gods end; Which, though it be his end because he appointeth it for his creature, yet it is not any end that he seeks for himselfe. The reason is so punctually laid downe in the premises, that it can be but repeated here; That God, being of himselfe sufficient for himselfe, can have no end upon his creature; Because nothing accrues to him, nothing goes from him, whatsoever accrues to his creature or goes from it: And though, God having now resolved to make the world for himselfe, that is, for his owne glory, it is necessary we suppose him, to designe the go∣vernment of it so, as it may be a fit meanes, to obtaine that end; yet is it to be much considered, that, God having once given a Law to his understanding creatures, tendring happinesse as the reward of abiding by his Law; it can no longer stand with that tender, that it should be a fit meanes of Gods glory, to give happynesse to his creature, not considered as qualified by his law, and therefore, not to resolve to give it. Whether we consider the interest of Gods justice in requiring that Law, it cannot be imagined, that the love of any creature can move him to waive it; Or, whether we consider his truth in making it good, being once declared, it is manifest, that, the thing pro∣mised by it, cannot be appointed by God as the meanes to his glory, not sup∣posing the condition which it requireth. For, whatsoever may be said of the consideration of our Lord Christ; As it can have no place, till we suppose his obedience to be in consideration, when any mans reward is appointed by virtue of that Covenant which he came to treat; So can it not be in considera∣tion▪
til we suppose him to whom the benefit of it is appointed, to be qualified as it requires. And this might have been seen by the opposite decree of Repro∣bation; In which, everlasting death, appointed as the terme of it, not being capable of bearing the notion of that which God aymes at of it selfe, cannot be considered as the end; Which might have been argument enough, that, as the death of the reprobate is not, nor can be the meanes, of Gods glory, but as it is intended to punish mens forfeits; So neither can the life of the elect be the meanes of Gods glory, but as it is intended to reward their performance. It is therefore answered, that the reward of the Elect, and punishment of Reprobate becomes the means of Gods glory, not absolutely, but in regard that God, having proposed a Law, by the obaying whereof they might attain happi∣nesse, though requiring supernaturall obedience, the one have observed it the o∣thers not; And, God having proposed a law which the light of nature inableth all to observe, none have observed it. But otherwise, that it could no more be the meanes of Gods glory, to appoint life for the Elect, then it could be the meanes for the same, to appoint death for the Reprobate. And therefore, that it is necessary to the glory of God, that, the good gifts which he bestow∣eth upon his creatures, should all be taken for meanes of their everlasting hap∣pynesse, by his appointment. To which purpose, we have not a few passages of holy Scripture that are very expresse. S. Paul tells the Athenians, Acts XVII. 16. That; God made all mankind of one blood, to dwell on the whole face of the earth, determining appointed seasons, and the bounds of their dwel∣lings, that they might seeke the Lord, if by any means, they might find him gro∣ping, though not farr off from every one of us. And so those of Lystra Acts XIV 16. That; In the by past ages, he suffered all nations to walke their own waies, though e left not himselfe without witnesse, ding good, giving raine from heaven and fruitfull seasons, filling our hearts with foode and gladnesse: For what can this witnesse meane, if it intend to destroy his owne resolution of damning them? And therefore, speaking to them that condemne the sins of others, and doe the like; Dost thou condemne the riches of his patience and long suffering saith he, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth to repentance, But, according to thy hardnesse & impenitent heart, heapest up wrath to thy selfe, against the day of wrath and revelation of the just judgement of God? Rom. XI. 3, 4. Which are the same termes that S. Peter useth of the impenitent, within the knowledg of Christianity, when he saith, 1. Peter III. 9. The Lord is not slack of his pro∣mise as some men count slacknesse, but is long-suffering towards us, not willing that any should perish, but come to the knowledg of his truth; Which is, in that place, the effectuall acknowledgement of it. As like wise saith the prophet, to them that cast off the thoughts of repentance, as, dispairing of forgivenesse, Ezek. XXIII. 2. As he had done before Ezk. XVIII. 22. These exhortations signifie nothing, unlesse we suppose that it turnes to every mans account, to neglect the meanes▪ upon which they proceed: Which is this; That God on his part, hath done what his goodnesse and justice requires, (though not imme∣diately bringing to passe that which was immediately sufficient to the capacity of salvation) and therefore requires this at their hands, intending to judge them in case they faile, on their part. For, there is none of those gifts but inables a man immediately to doe that which God immediately requires, and therefore condemes him that eglects to doe that, which he is immediately in∣abled to doe. And, thugh God cannot become obliged, upon mans compli∣ance wih the light of nature, immediately to give sufficient helps of grace to bring every man to his kingdome, (because of the certaine faileur of mans compliance with them, through the servitude of sin, from which we cannot come free by nature) yet is the sin for which he is condemned justly imputed to his not dong that, which, by the light of nature he might have done. How much more is the refusall of sufficient helps to them, who have neglected the
improvement of those helps which they had, or might have had, to be im∣puted to them, who have made themselves to be refused them? From hence it necessarily followes, that those helps, which God followes his own preventing grace with, are granted in consideration of the good use of his preventing graces; Notwithstanding that nothing hinders the good∣nesse of God, both to oversee those failleures for which he might justly have given over those which he had prevented by his grace, and not brought them finally to persevere; or, to redouble upon them those helps, which, the use that they formerly had made of his former graces might justly have moved him to refuse. So, though all Gods gifts to man are granted out of Gods de∣sire of mans happinesse, (to wit, as the mans end & not as Gods) so, the gifts by which it is Purchased are granted in consideration of the right use of his for∣mer gifts? That in the nature of the finall, this of the meritorious cause, though no way obliging God, but by vertue of his owne will to be obliged. And, herewith agrees that of Solomon, Prov. XVI. 4. The Lord hath made all for himselfe. And also the wicked for the day of wrath. For, whether we translate it, with Grotius, for it selfe, or, as it useth to be translated, him∣selfe, the consequence of it will be; That, as the world is, and as things passe in it, all that comes to passe is by Gods appointment, or for his glory▪ which is all one: Leaving the account by which it may appeare so, to be given, from the rest of the Scripture. But, if we joine both causes together, by re∣peating for himselfe in the second; (As to say; That God for himselfe hath appointed the wicked for the day of his wrath) then is the reason given how the being of evill is for Gods glory; to wit, by punishing them that doe it. Herewith also agrees that of S. Paul, far better then it is imagined to do; Rom. VIII. 28, 29, 30. Now we know, that all things worke together for good to them that love God, which are called according to purpose. For, whom he fore∣knew, those he also predestinated to become conformable to the image of his Son, that he may be the first borne amonge many brethren; But, whom he predestinated those he also called, and whom he called, those he also justified, and whom he jus∣tified, those be also glorified. The purpose, according to which, he describes them to be called, to whose good all things conduce, is either the purpose of God, or their own; As Barnabas exhorteth them that were converted, to cleave to God with purpose of heart Acts XI. 23. For, those that are called are often taken by S. Paul metonymically, for those that have obeyed their calling by God, as Rom. I. 6, 7. 1. Corin. . 2. 24. Jude 9. Apoc. XVII. 14. and so  Epe. IV. 1. And so all things conduce to good, for those that not onely are professed Christians, but are so from a steddy purpose of heart. But, though we grant that they are described by two qualifications, one, that they love God, the other, that thy are predestinated to life, (that is, called, out of a purpose in God to save them) yet they are not predestinated by God to become conform∣able to the pattern of Christ, (which consists in bearing his Crosse) but as Chri∣stians▪ And this it is which here S. Paul saies they are predestinated to, not to life; The predestination which he speakes of here, is not of men to be saved, but of Christians to beare the Crosse of Christ: whereof he had said a little afore, for the occasion of this discourse, Rom. VIII. 17, 18. If we be sons, then also eires: Heires of God, but joint heires with Christ, that, if we suffer with him, we may also be glorified with him. For, I reckon that the sufferings of this time, are not valuable with the glory that is to be revealed upon us. And, when he calleth them Saints, and, those that love God, and those he foreknew, it is manifest, that the foreknowledge which he meaneth is that, whereby, God knew them true Christians from the heart, whom he intends to prove; and therefore appoints them to beare Christs Crosse, that, being justified, that is, approved in so doing, they may be glorified in Gods purpose, and the right and title of their owne estate. All this being manifest by the proposition of the Chapter; There is now, therefore, no more condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus; that live not after the flesh, but after the spirit; Which words plainly describing those that are Christians from a grounded purpose of, the heart, of whome the sequele
of the discourse must proceed, manifestly demonstrate, that S. Paul speakes not of Gods predestinating any man to be saved, but of predestinating those whom he knowes to be good Christians to beare Christs Crosse, and so to obtaine Gods promises: As the same S. Paul saith, that it was granted of grace to the Philippians, not onely to believe in Christ, but to suffer for Christ, Phi. XI. 26. And hereby it is manifest, that succeeding graces are bestowed in consideration of the right use of those that went afore. For, here you see, that those, who, being moved by the helps of Gods preventing grace, have submitted themselves to the profession of Christianity from the heart, are, in consideration thereof, designed by God, to the happy accomplishment of their course. And this is invincibly evidenced, by the promise of the H. Ghost, tendred by the Gospel, to those that obey Gods calling, by undertaking to be Christians, for the inabling of them to persevere in that which tey under∣take. The same is exprest in the words of the Apostle, when, having menaced the Hebrew Christians with the expectation of vengeance upon their Apostasy, he thus restores them againe, Heb, XI. 9. 10. But, we are perswaded better things, and that belong to salvation, of you, beloved, though we thus speake: For God is not unjust, to forget your worke and labour of love which ye showe to his name, ministring to the saints, as still ye doe. For, it is manifest that the Apo∣stle expects here the supply of grace, inabling to persevere, from the justice of God, in consideration of that which they had done in performance of their Christian profession before. On the other side it may be objected, that, if the whole worke of grace in the life of each Christian be resolved into the free appointment of God, (in re∣gard that those helps which each man is first prevented with, cannot be gran∣ted in consideration of any worke of our nature, the rest depending on those first helps) it is to no purpose to dispute, how the freedome of the will takes place in every particular act, each mans finall estate being no lesse determined, then if there were no place for it. Neither availeth it any man, that God appointeth him not to death, or gives him sufficient helps to bring him to life, seeing that, the efficacy of them depending upon his meere will, the suffici∣ence of them serves but to aggravate his sentence, To this, my answer is, that I conceive, I am not to answer further then S. Paul hath done; Who, having objected to him selfe, in the person of the Jewes, thinking much they should not be saved by the Law; Why doth God then find fault? For, who hath re∣sisted his will? Rom. IX. 29. Returnes an answer, that denies not, that God might convert the Jewes to Christianity, did he think it fitting: But thus; Nay rather, who art thou O man that disputest with God? Shall the earthen pot say to the potter; Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the pot∣ter power over the clay, to make one vessell to an honourable use, another to a dishonourable, of the same compost? What if God, willing to shew wrath, and make knowne his power, hath borne with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fit to be destroyed? That he might also make knowne the riches of his glory, upon vessels of mercy, us whom he hath called, not onely of the Jewes, but also of the Gen∣tiles, whom he hath prepared for glory, Where, since God forbeares the vessels of his wrath, with that long suffering which, S. Peter saies, leades to repentance, (designing to shew his wrath the heavyer upon them for neglecting it.) it is manifest, that they are not said to be , as if God had fited them for it, as designed and made to that dishonourable use, (which is the reason why I translated it not as a participle, but as a noune, not fitted for destruction, as by God, but fit for destruction, as of themselves.) And there∣fore, that, one and the same masse of compost out of which the potter makes vessels to contrary uses, is to be compared with mankind in that estate in which the Gospell finds it, the question being made why some obay it and not others, why the Gentiles, rather then the Jewes; and the argument made, that, if Gods grace be the cause, then are not they to be blamed that neglect it; And the Apostle having premised for his ground, that all mankind, being o∣vertaken by the Gospell destitute of righteousnesse, are to become Christians
that they may obtain it. This being the case, it is plaine that the objection is the same against S. Paul, as against the resolution proposed. For, as this an∣swer supposes, the reason why the Gentiles were converted to be Christians, & the Jewes, not, to be resolved into the will of God; so the resolution here pro∣posed resolves the reason of the true Christianity, and finall perseverance in it, of those that shall be saved, into that disposition of motives, resolving free will, which Gods free grace onely appointeth And, the question is evidently the same, if, as one ingredient into the disposition of each mans salvation or dam∣nation, it be demanded, why God suffered man to fall from the state of inno∣cence, but procureth that the preaching of the Gospell arrive at the knowledg of some people, and not of others. For, if supposing sufficient helps of grace, the reason where by they become effectuall is neverthelesse resolved into the im∣mediate disposition of God; Then, though we consider man as not fae from the state of innocence, and resolve the reason, why God should bring him into that estate, in which he foresaw that he would fall, (intending to pro∣pagate his kind under the condition of this lapsed estate) we have recourse to no other reason, then that which S. Paul imployed before us. Where, we may see the fault which hath been committed by them, who, to attaine the end of his glory, by the absolute salvation of some, and damnati∣on of others, no otherwaies qualified then as such persons; have made the ob∣ject of Gods predestination to be mankind, not made but to be made, the purpose of making mankind, being the next meanes subordinate to the attaining of that end, which the first decree proposed to God. For, besides that this ingages God to procure the fall of man, and the sins in which the reprobate finally persevere, no otherwise then the grace in which the Elect depart; it makes God to predestinate onely a number, and to repro∣bate the same: there being no other consideration possible to be had upon those, that are supposed not to be as yet, but onely, that they may be so many, as God shall appoint of either kind. So that the glory of God, according to this monstrous imagination, shall consist onely in saving such a number, and in damning such an other, rather then one more or one lesse of either sort. Neither is this inconvenience cured by the position of those that have been called Sublapsariaus, by as monstrous name as the other of Supralapsa∣ians; That God, seeing mankind Lapsed from the state of innocence, resolving to save so many of them, & to damne so many, provided to send our Lord Christ with effectual means to save these, leaving those, unprovided of sufficient means) to find their owne ruine. For, solong as those that are appointed to be sa∣ved and to be damned are qualified no otherwise, then as men found in the common case of mans fall, the glory of God is made to consist in damning so∣many of them and saving so many rather then one more or one lesse. For, the originall corruption in which we are borne, though it renders the first Adam unrecoverable without the second; yet it leaves every man, in every instance, undetermined to evill, till, by his owne choice of evill before good and the habit whch accrews by custome, his naturall inclination to it become, so determined, that his choice determines without deliberating any more. But, suppose so many absolutely appointed to life, and so many to death, in this e∣state; you suppose them respectively determined, though not in particular, what good or what evill they shall doe, yet in generall, to sin and to dye in sin, or, o the other side, to attaine the state of grace and to dye in it; Vnlesse we thinke, that, God being God, the absolute appointment of his Providence can e defeated. Whereas, in making God determine to save and to damne those, who are qualified for each, according to the Gospell: But, to give effectuall meanes of being so qualified to the one, which out of his freedome he refutes the others, granting them what he deemes to be sufficient) we make the glory of God visible here in the one point, not disparaging it, if, in the other, it be, for the present acknowledged, with Saint Paul, to be invisible. For, if there were any other Religion in the World, which could pretend▪ maintaynig the differences between good and bad the providence of God in
all things, and the reward of good and bad in another world, to give further reason of the coming in and continuance of evill in the world; there might be some pretense of prejudice to the priviledg which Christianity clai∣meth, in maintayning those principles, from the inability of declareing the reasons, by which God dispenseth the meanes of his effectuall grace. But, there never was any other religion in the world, that could pretend any such thing, The Greekish Philosophers, (who were the Divines of the Gentiles) some of them openly professed necessity and fate, as the Stoicke, thereby de∣stroying freedome and contingence, by the consequence, Religion, and all diffe∣rence between good and bad; much more the truth of Christianity, consi∣sting in a treaty for imbracing good and rejecting bad. Others, supposing this, either renounced Providence, (and by consequence the being of God) As Epicurus and his predecessors and followers; or at least doubted of it, in which mire, it is more then probable that our master Aristotle sticks. If, with Plato and Pythagoras, we suppose them clearely to acknowledge all this, yet is there a way left, either, by making the materiall cause coexistent which God from e∣verlasting with Plato; or by presupposing those contrarieties of good and e∣vill which Pithagoras imagined to have beene from everlasting, made, by consequence, the principles of all that comes to passe in the World; to advance some other cause of good and evill in this world, then mans will under Gods providence. And it is very remarkable, that Epiphanius observes, all the Sects of the Gnostickes, (whereof he, of all others, hath given us the most particulars) proceeded upon a pre∣tence, of giving a reason for the coming in of evill into the world: To wit, by setting up two principles or Gods, one the fountaine of evill, the other, of good. Which, together with the expresse testimonies of divers others of the Fathers, witnessing, that they had theire principles from the Greekish Philoso∣phers; seems to argue, that they took their rise from a pretense of rendring an account of the beginning of evill as well as of good; intimating thereby, that Christianity did not sufficiently performe it, as not pretending all to be declared, till the generall judgement. And this is the case of Marcionists & Manichees. For, as for Jewes and Mahumetans, I suppose, there is no man so little read in the difference between them and Christians, as to conceive that they can give account of Gods providence, in the evill which he maintaineth to be in the world, (together with the meanes, by which some come to life o∣thers to death) If Christians by their profession cannot doe it. Nor is it to be doubted, that the dispute about free will and providence, (consequently pre∣destination, so far as the world to come is acknowledged) hath been and in part remaines alive, as well among Gentiles Jewes and Mahumetans, as we see it is among Christians. So that we may justly inferr, that, seeing no other religion, either antecedent to Christianity, or that hath come after it, can pretend that satisfaction to this dispute which Christianity giveth, by the coming in of sin upon the fall of Adam; that it is no disparagement to it, not to be able to declare the reason of Gods proceeding with particular persons, in dispensing to them the meanes of effectuall grace; when it remaines manifest, both, that Christianity goes further in declaring the same, then any other Religion can doe, and, that there may justly be those reasons reserved to God, which he, not∣withstanding the grace which he publishes by Christ, findeth no cause to de∣clare. The answer, then, to the objection, consists in this; That, as it is not ne∣cessary for the maintenance of Christianity, to give account why God disposeth of his effectuall grace as he doth: So is there no opinion able to reconcile it to the freedome of mans will, without the bonds of Christianity, but that which maketh predestination to Glory conditionall, to Grace, absolute. It may be the readers lot, as it hath been mine, to heare an objection cast forth; That if Gods predestination be unmoveable, it is vaine for Christans to indeavour to live as Christians; And the answer so insufficient, as to leave more offense in his mind, then before it it was made; According to that which is some times
said; That unskilfull Conjurers some times raise a Devil, whom, they can∣not lay againe. For, certainely, it serves not the turn to say; That God, as he hath appointed the end, so hath appointed the meanes. For, it is the secret will of God, which is alwaies effectuall, that appoints the end. But his revealed will that appoints the meanes, by commanding, comes not alwaies to effect. And therefore, if God have absolutly appointed the end he that knowes not whether he hath appointed it or not, can have no reason to goe about the means till he knew it as absolutely appointed as the end is. Nor servs it the turn to adxe, & to say further; That God, as he apointeth the end, so, he appointeth also the meanes to be freely imployed by man for the attaining it; Which, the opinion of Predetermination may say. For, all the incouragement this can give a man to imploy his freedome to any purpose, is; That, if God determine him he shall freely imploy it, if not, he shall freely not imploy it to that purpose. Which is to say in English; That his free∣dome (being called freedom, but is not) can not be imployed by him, that is incouraged to imploy it. And therefore, it is reasonable for him to say; I shall freely doe so if God hath appointed it, and freely not do so if he have not appointed it. If it be said further, and that according to my opinion, that no event is determined by God, but supposing mans freewill, and foreseeing what choice it will make, upon the considerations which a man is outwardly or in∣wardly moved with; Neither wil this be enough to move a reasonable mans in∣devours, supposing himselfe absolutely predestinated to life or to death before. For, that life and death being absolutely appointed, becomes Gods end (though subordinate to a further end of his glory) and not onely the end of the meanes which he provideth for it; A thing, no lesse destructive to the supreme Majesty of God, then to that which I said afore. For, that which God abso∣lutely desireth, that he ingageth his supreme Majesty to execute and bring to effect; Vnlesse it can be thought, that a Soveraigne can be soveraigne, and not stand obliged, & make it his Interest, that no designe of his be defeated. Which if God do, what availeth it the creature, that the will thereof is free, and the effects of that will are not determined but by the free choice thereof; Whenas, being the will of a creature, and necessary proceeding upon con∣sideration of those objects which providence, inwardly or outwardly presen∣teth it with, it is, by a former act of that providence, determined to that, which may and must be the meanes of producing that end, which God had designed afore. And, upon these termes, providence will stand ingaged, not to permit but to procure the sins, upon which the sentence of eternall death, as the good works, upon which the sentence of eternall life proceedeth: And, he who knows that whatsoever he doth, though never so freely, shall certainely bring him at length to that estate, which God had appointed for him before he considered what he would or would not doe; wat reason can he have to imploy the in∣devours of his will to doe what God commandeth, for the obtaining or a∣voiding of that, which he hath appointed, before any consideration of his in∣deavours? But, absolute Predestination to the first helps, that effectually bring a man to the state of Grace, produceth not the like consequence. For as, supposing good and bad in the world, and, that the Gospell is refused by some and imbraced by others, it is meerely the worke of providence, that a man is borne under the obligation of it or not, and cannot be imputed to any act of his owne; So, he that supposeth that God hath not appointed him to life or to death, but in consideration of his own doings, shall no lesse stand obli∣ged, to follow those sufficient reasons of well doing, which Gods spirit by the preaching of the Gospell meetes him with, then if it did not lye in the worke of providence to make them effectuall or not. As for all the rest of every man life, that falls between the time that he is sufficiently convinced that he ought to live and dye a good Christian, and that state of grace or of sin in which he deceaseth; It is evident, that the helps of Grace are dispensed all along, upon that reason of reward or punishment, which the covenant of grace establisheth. For, seeing the Holy Ghost is pro∣mised,
to assist all Christians, in the performing of that which they undertake by their Baptisme; it cannot be imagined that God should destitute any christian of helps requisite of the fulfilling of his Christianity, whose profession was not counterfeit from the beginning, (that is, not so reall as it should have been) untill he faile of complying with the motions of it. There is, in deed, some difference of opinion, according to which, a difference will arise in the termes, by which we expresse our selves in this businesse. There be those in the Church of Rome who hold that a Christian once setled in the state of Grace, may, by Gods ordinary grace here, live without even veniall sin till death. Supposing this done, the helps of grace which God assisteth such a man with, are the effects of his justice which consisteth in keeping promise; Though, Originally the effects of meere Grace, because it was meere Grace that moved him to make that promise. Those that hold absolute predestination to life or to death, and, justifying faith to be nothing but the revelation of a mans predestination to life; can no more allow, that such a one may fall from the state of Grace, then, that Gods pro∣mise can faile, or Christs death be to no purpose. So that, not onely the sins which they doe are to them occasion of good, (as S. Paul saith, that, all things cooperate for good to them that love God. Rom. VIII. 28.) but the permission (which, in that opinion is the procuring) of them is an effect of their predestina∣tion to life; according to this opinion, also, the helps of Geace are the effects of that Justice which consisteth in keeping, as well as of that grace which was seen in making Gods promise; though the condition of that promise be cleared, in this opinion, at the first instant that a man believeth, in the other, not till the last instant that he liveth. Though I have already laid aside both the suppo∣sitions upon which this opinion standeth, yet I suppose it not refuted as yet, because there must be a time on purpose, to consider the arguments, which it pretendeth. But, because one of the contradictions which it involveth is this; that making justification to consist in remission of sins, it alloweth the regene∣rate to become guilty of sin, and yet maintaineth him justified at the same time; an other contradiction that it involveth must needs be this; That, the helps of Grace requisite to the saving of him that is justified, (which, as I said afore, according to this opinion, are due to the elect by the justice of Gods pro∣mise) are granted of meere grace, to the Justifying of him, who, being justifyed, is notwithstanding acknowledged to need remission of sin. For, to tye God by promise, to helpe any man out of sin, as often as he shall please to fall back into sin, (who, of Grace, may allow waies freely to do it,) is to make the Gospel a passeport for sin. And therefore, notwithstanding this opinion, I shall not let to presume here, (before I have spoken to it) that the helps of grace re∣quisite to the recovering of him that is falne from the state of grace come not by the vertue of the promise, wherein the Covenant of Grace consisteth (the right whereof is forfeited in that case) but by vertue of that meere grace which first moved God to tender it, though, in consideration of the merits and suffering of our Lord Christ which purchased it. Whereupon, the truth is, that the helps of grace that are requisite to maintaine them in the state of grace which have attained it, are due by that justice of God, which consisteth in keep∣ing promise. And, though Gods cleare dealing with man requires, that, from the first heareing of the Covenant of grace, (that is, from the first preaching of the Gospell; or, from the first calling of him that is fallne from the state of grace) a man be inabled to imbrace that which is tendred; yet, that he shall e∣ffectually imbrace it, will alwaies remaine the effect of meere grace. So, the gifts of nature, and the death of Christ for mankind, are provided by God for the salvation of all, not as Gods end but as the end, of the said meanes which he provideth. But, that, by providing the death of Christ for the salvation of mankind, he oblgeth himself, to grant them who never heard of Christ, inspirations, and revelations, convicting them that they are to be Christians, as he obligeth the Church to cause them to heare of Christ, I grant not; (though I find it not to be prejudiciall to the Faith) Because, then must
all men be judged by the Gospell of Christ reason being showed, that they to whom it is not preached, shall be judged by the Law of Nature. And, upon these termes, S. Paul may reject the demand, Why God should complaine, seeing no man can resist his will, but he may make whomsoever he shall please a good Christian. But, God to have absolutely appointed all men to life or to death, and so, to be ingaged by the interest of his Soveraigne Majesty, not to see his designe defeated, but to provide the meanes by which he designeth to bring his appointment to passe; S. Paul might allow the demand, and his Gospell to have no answer for it. And therefore, the comparison of the potter that fol∣lowes, though it hold thus farre; that God indeed makes the vessels, that come to honour and shame in the world to come, by the government of him that made them: yet it holdeth not in this; that Gods glory is interested to procure them to be saved, that shall be saved; and them damned that shall be damned: as it concerneth the potters trade to be furnished, aswel with vessels for dishonourable, as for honourable uses. Nor wil the instance of Pharaoh bear it, according to S. Pauls words. For, had God spared Pharaohs life out of a designe to bring him to those torments, which, his obstinacy in refusing the plagues that succeeded should deserve; he could not be said to beare with much long-suffering the vessells of wrath that are fit to be destroyed, though, intending at length to show wrath, and make his power known. The decree then of predestination proceeding, partly upon the terms of the gospell; but, in those things, to which the Gospell extendeth not, and in those men that shall be judged by the law of Nature, upon the Soverainty of God, the reasons whereof either we cannot un∣derstand, or God will not declare; contayneth all the decrees, whereby the mo∣tives, upon which God foresees a man will imbrace and persevere in his Chri∣stianity to the end, or not persevere to the end, whether he imbrace it or not; or finally, not so much as hearing of it, will resolve for the better or for the worse, from the beginning of his life to the end of it▪ which our understanding necessarily distinguisheth, by the objects which they bring to passe. The or∣der of them is the same with the reasons which the Sripture inableth us to give, for the effects which they produce, either in the nature of the finall or meritorius cause; speaking onely of that which comes from Gods declared will, not from his secret pleasure: Which, as it alwaies verifieth his declared will, so, extends to that which the other compriseth not. And, it is as easy to com∣prise in the same decree, (which is the pure essence of God, willing to glorifie it selfe by doing that, which it might have glorified it selfe by doing otherwise) the order of the reasons, upon which, all mankind comes to that estate in which they shal continue everlastingly in the world to come. Seeing then, all the effects of it fall not under Gods revealed will, there can be no reason given for the whole decree, whether respective to any man, or to mankind. Seeing there is a reason to be given for all that fall under the same, in the nature of the finall or the meritorious cause; God stands as much glorified, man as much obliged to worke out his salvation with feare and trembling, as if he knew the bot∣tome of Gods secret counsaile. And thus the objection is void. It remaineth, that we consider the Tradition of the Church, & what it declar∣eth concerning the truth of that which I have resolved, or towards it. Where, we must take notice of the Monkes of Adrymetus under Valentine, who received S. Agustines doctrine of Gods effectuall grace, and predestination to it from e∣verlasting, in such a sense, that they inferred from it, all indeavours of men, all exhortations, reproofes, instructions, and prayers to be utterly fruitlesse and vaine; as tending to that which dependeth upon the meere appoint∣ment of God, which cannot be defeated, and without which nothing can serve. To rectifie this mistake, S. Augustine lived to write them his book yet extant de correptione & Gratia, wherein he declareth, all that he had said, of the grace of God, and the efficacy thereof, to proceed upon supposition of free will in man, though inslaved to sin by the fall of Adam, from the bondage whereof, the grace of Christ, voluntarily though effectually, redeemeth those that are freed by it; whereby (as by the rest of his writings concerning the grace of
Christ against Pelagius) he establisheth two points belonging to the foundati∣on of the Christian faith. The first, of the freedome of mans will, though not from sin, since the fall of Adam, yet from necessity determing the resolution of it, when, by the treaty which the Gospell advanceth, it is invited to imbrace Christianity and to live according to it; Which were all a mere nullity, were not any man free to resolve himselfe upon it. The second, of the grace of God by Christ, which if it may be purchased by the indevour of mans free will, then was it not necessary to send our Lord Christ, as the second Adam, to re∣paire the breach which the first Adam had made; This being the sum of the Catholike faith in this mater, and the rest, which is advanced to shew how those two points both stand true together, belonging to the skill of a Di∣vine, not to the faith of a Christian, so far, as by maintayning them, men destroy the foundation of Christianity on neither side. Which, it is no marvail, that some things which S. Augustin had said, in giving a reason hereof, seemed to some to do; seeing, those that accepted of his doctrine in Africk drew from it a consequence utterly destructive to Christianity. I speake of those in the parts of France about Provence and Marsailles, who, inferring from S. Augustines saying, that in his opinion God makes the farr greater part of men on purpose to condemne them to death; seemed to mainetaine, the beginning of salvation to come from those indeavours of mans will, born as he is, under originall sin, which God faileth not to second with those helps of Grace which the mater requireth. There is great appearance of that which Jansenius disputeth so eagerly de Haeresi Pelag. VII. 5. & sq. that the maine ground of their opposition was the decree of predestination, which S. Austine would have to be absolute; As being perswaded, that, thereby, the e∣ffects of free will become fatal, in which, that reason of reward and punish∣ment which the Covenant of Grace establisheth, requires contingence. And herewith, the occasion which Faustus pretendeth, for the writing of his book de Gratia et Libero Arbitrio agreeth. To wit, that a certaine Priest called Lucidus is required by him, in the name of a Synod held at Arles, under Leontius, Bishop, to recant certaine positions tending to maintaine the necessity of being damned for originall sin, by the foreknowledg of God, in them for whom Christ dyed not, dying onely for sin. And, this by a letter subscribed by one of the Bishops. This recantation being made, Faustus pretendeth to write, at the intreaty of the Synod, to lay forth their sense and reasons. But, to have added something upon the decree of an other Synod, held afterwards at Lions True it is indeed, which Vssius observeth Historiae Pelag. VI. Thesi. XIV, that▪ whereas some of them insisted on nothing else, others proceeded to deny the necessity of preventing grace. For, whatsoever we say of Cassian, who hath writ to severall purposes, in severall places; Faustus manifestly affirmeth, that, by the act of free will in beginning to believe, a Christian ob∣taines the grace of God, which his owne choice preventeth. Which if we under∣stand the Faith which he speaketh of to signifie Christianity, and, the act of believing to consist in becoming a Christian, is nothing else but the fundamen∣tall faith of Christianity; That the habituall gift of the Holy Ghost is gran∣ted in consideration of a mans turning Christian. But, who believes, that the actuall grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby the world is converted to be, as well as convicted that it ought to be Christiane, is obtayned by the exaltation, as purchased by the humiliation of Christ, (which Faustus, supposing the preaching of the Gospell, being the meanes which it useth, no way denyeth) acknowledgeth by consequence, that act of faith, which preventeth the habi∣tuall gift of the Holy Ghost, to be prevented by the actuall helps of Grace which the preaching of the Gospel importeth. And, Jansenius de Haeresi Pelag VIII: 1-9 acknowledgeth, that they had no designe to destroy the grace of God through Christ, as Pelagius had; & therefore did acknowledg, not one∣ly the outward preaching of the gospel, but inward inspiration to make it effe∣ctuall: Onely, that, making the effect of that grace which God appointeth, to de∣pend on free wil▪ they fel into the heresy of Palagius which they desired to a void
Now, Pelagius, indeed, acckowledged that grace which the preaching of the gospell signifyed according to his own opinion, which was false. For, not believing that our will is any thing the worse for Adams fall, he could not allow, that Christ hath purchased any help to repaire the breach, and to cure the disease which he had made But, as he could not deny it to be an act of bounty in God, to propose the reward of everlasting life, which is supernatu∣pall; So he must affirme, that it is purchsed by the merre naturall act of free will, without any help of grace, granted of Gods mercy in Christ, in con∣sideration of his obedience. And, by this meanes, he brought the death of Christ, to no effect; Seeing God might have assured the tender of his gospell to come indeed from him, without it. And so the merit of grace, (that is, the reason that obliges God to give it) is originally ascribed to the works of free Will, according to Pelagius; But, according to those who, acknowledging Originall sin, acknowledg the cure of it by the helpe of grace purchased by Christ, which the preaching of the gospell bringeth; not to the in¦trinsecall value of the workes which freewill alone doth, but to the pro∣mise annexed by God, to the works which freewill, by the help of Grace, pur∣chased by Christ, produceth. It was no marvaile indeed, that they who had overseen the actuall helps of Grace, should a scribe the merit of habituall grace (so the language of that time spoke) to the act of freewill, in beginning to believe (that is to be a Christian) as not depending upon that operation of grace, which themselves supposed, though they oversaw it. But, it were ridiculous to think that he, who, by the preaching of the Gospel, and the rea∣sons which it letteth forth, why men are to be Christians, is effectually moved to become a Christian, is not to impute his being so, to that grace which pre∣venteth him with those reasons. How much more, when those reasons are acknowledged to be the instrument, whereby the Holy Ghost worketh a mans conversion at the first, or his perseverance at the last; is it necessary to impute it to the grace of Christ, that is, to those helps, which God, in regard to Christs death, preventeth us with? Surely, should grace immediately determin the wil to it, the effects that should be imputable to grace would be the same, neither the cov. of grace, nor the experience of common sense remaining the same; which wil not allow such a chang in a mans life, as becoming a good christian of an enemy to Christs Crosse, to succeed, without an express change in the wil, upon reasons convincing the judgement, that this world is to be set behind the world to com▪ It is now to be acknowledged, that S. Austine, writing against these mens positions, as they were revealed to him by the letters of Prosper and Hilary, his book now extant, de Praedestinatione sanctorum & de dono Perseverantiae hath determined; the reason why one man is converted and persevereth unto death, an other not, to consist in nothing that can, resolve into any act of mans will, but ends in Gods free appointment. That Pope Celestinus, writing to the Bishops of Gaule, upon the sollicitation of the same Prosper and Hilary, in recommendation of S. Austines dostrine, then so much questioned in those parts, determines, not onely the sufficience, but the efficacy of the meanes of Grace to come from Gods Grace. That the second councile of Orange, de∣termining the same in divers particulares, concerning the conversion of man to become a true Christian, concerning his perseverance to the end in that estate, hath onely determined, that by the helpe and assistance of Christ, and the grace received in Baptisme, a Christian may, if he will faithfully labour, full∣fill whatsoever his salvation requireth. Is there any thing in all this to signifie that a mans will, before he determine, is determined by God to imbrace Christianity, and persevere in it to the end, or not? That every man is deter∣mined to everlasting glory or paine, without consideration of those deeds of his, for which, at the last, he shall be sentenced to it, and either suffer or injoy it? Here, I must have recourse againe to Vossius his Collections, find∣ing them sufficient, and, my model not allowing me to say more. Whether no helpe of Grace but that which takes effect be sufficient; That is, whe∣ther, men refuse Christianity or faile of performing it, because they could not imbrace and persevere in it, or because they would not when they might▪
let him that shall have perused what he hath collected, in the second part of this seventh book, say, as to the perswasion of the whole Church. Whether God would have all men to be saved, and, hath appointed the death of our Lord Christ to that intent, let him that shall have perused the first part of the same Thesi II. & III. give sentence what the Church hath allwaies believed. No lesse manifest is it, by that which he saith there, parte II. thesi II. Parte III. thes. I. & II. that there is no reason to be given, why any man sinneth or is damned, because God would have it so. On the contrary, that the reason why a man is not saved, to whom the Gospell is tendred, is, because he refuseth it, which God, for his part, tendreth to all mankind. In fine, that the Catholike Church, from the beginning, believed no more, then, that those who should believe and persevere to the end good Christians, were appointed by God to be saved; Understanding this to be don by vertue of Gods Grace, for which no reason can be rendred, from any thing that a man can doe, as preventing all his indeavours; I acknowledg to appeare by that which he hath said Lib. VI. thes. VIII. When therefore S. Austine maintain∣neth, (as I have acknowledged that he doth mainetaine) that the reason why one man is converted and perseveres unto death, another not, resolves into Gods meere appointment; I will not dispute whether this be more then the whole Church delivereth, for that which it is necessary to salvation to believe. It is enough for me to maintaine, that it seemeth to follow, by good conse∣quence of the best reasons that I can see, from that sense of our Lord and his Apostles doctrine, which the Church hath alwaies taught. Which will allow me to maintaine, as well the predetermination of the will, as ab∣solut predestination to glory and paine, to be inconsistent, as with the Covenant of Grace, so with the Tradition of the Church. I find that Gennadius, being manifestly one of those in Gaule, that contra∣dicted some thing of S. Austines doctrine, (by his commending of Faustus and Cassiane, and censuring not onely Prosper who confuted Cassianus, but even S. Austine in his booke of Eclesiasticall writers) in a certaine addition to that list of heresies which S. Jerom hath made, reckoneth them in the list of the Here∣tickes condemned by the Church, who teach absolute Predestination; under the name of Predestinatians. After him, not onely Hincmarus of Rheims, condem∣ning Gotescalcus, a Monk of his Province, for maintayning it, (being trans∣mitted to him by Rabanus of Ments, who, in, a Synod there, had condemned him for the same) hath supposed it condemned for an heresy by the ancient Church; but also before Hincmarus, Arnobius, that hath expounded the Psalms, (called Arnobius the younger by some) and a certaine continu∣ation of S. Hieromes Cronicle, under the the name of Tiro Prosper, the one contradicteth them, the later mentions that they had their beginning from S. Austins writings, Sirmondus also, the learned Jesuite, hath published a peece so ancient, that, pretending to make a list of Heresies, it goeth no further then Nestorius; reckoning next after him the Predestinatians, as those who de∣rived themselves from S. Austines doctrine. To which, it is well enough knowne what opposition is now made, by them, who believe not that there e∣ver was any such Heresy, but, that the adversaries of S. Austine in Gaule do pretend that such a Sect did indeed rise, upon misunderstanding his Doctrine. And certainely, there are properly no Heretickes, as to the Church, but those whom the Church condemnes, for some position, which they had rather part with the Church then renounce. Neither can it be said, that ever there was any Sect expulsed the Church upon such cause. That there was a Council held at Arles, and after that another at Lions, that decreed some thing about abso∣lute predestination, is as certaine, as it is certaine, that Faustus writ his book de gratia & libero Arbitrio by commission from them; for both are affirmed by the Preface, which is of the same credit as the book. But what was determined, we cannot measure by the letter of Faustus to Lucidus, which goes a longe with it. Lucidus was a Priest whom Faustus moves to recant his opinion, That God makes the greatest part of men on purpose to damne them: This he
does, by a letter which he returnes to Faustus, renouncing severall articles to that purpose, but, which he might have framed out of Faustus his book, al∣waies disowned. For, why might not Faustus be intrusted, to write against the opinion, and exceed his commission so far, as to deny preventing grace? And, though Faustus his letter is subscribed by divers Bishops, yet are they not the Councill, nor do the subscriptions appeare in all copies. As for the returne, neither doth it appeare by the date, nor by any other mark, that it was approved or inacted by the Councill. But, granting it had, the leter of Pope Celestine in avour of S. Austins doct∣rine must needs have given a check to the execution of it; Which, having decreed divers articles concerning the necessity of preventing grace, in the end, condemns the determining of difficult questions that incur, upon the ne∣cessary dispute of preventing Grace. And the II. council of Orange, in the end, is content to adde onely; That, if any man say, that any man is pre∣destinate to evill, (whether of sin or punishment) the Synod declares him anathema. Whereby, as, whatsoever Faustus or Cassiane might have said to the prejudice of preventing Grace is condemned by the Synod; so, that which the former Synod had said of predestination seems to be superseded, and void, by a greater authority, of the See of Rome concurring with the Councile of Orange. Which may be the reason, why there is no further mention in anti∣quity o the decrees of those Counciles; which, had they not decreed, as some suppose, Faustus would have heard of it by Maxentius, who is so angry with the See of Rome, that they made not the adversaries of S. Austin Hereticks. I grant therefore, that there was never any sect of Praedestinatians; But I doe not therefore grant, that ever there was any sect of Semipelagians. Faustus, or Cassiane might, in opposition to absolute predestination, mistake them∣selves so far as to deny prventing grace. Some on the other side, (as he that writ the Treatise which Sirmondus his Praedestinatus confutes, though some take it for his owne that confutes it,) might deserve the censure of those Counciles; as the positions that prejudice preventing Grace are condemned by that of Orange, and the writings of Cassiane and Faustus censured afterwards, their persons remaining untouched, upon conformity to the decree. As for Godscalcus, whom Hincmarus condemned by vertue of the Counciles of Arles and Lions, which I think void; I see there is opposition in point of right, what ought to be held between Hincmarus and his party on the one side▪ and Remigius of Lyons with his; Whatsoever Godscalus his opinion truly was in point of fact. And therefore, the authority of the Church not being ingaged on either side, I am at freedome to refuse absolut predestination to glory, (much more predeter∣mination which is but one way to execute it) admitting absolute predestination to grace. And truly, though I impute it for a charge, to those that maintaine the determination of mans will by the immediate Act of God, before it deter∣mine it selfe; that they destroy freewill by pretending to maintaine it (because the determining of it, which they make the ground of freedome, is indeed the ground of necessity, which stands not with freedome) which is no small fault in Divines; yet, as Christians, I count them so much the lesse enemies to the Faith. For, in as much as they doe this under the pretense of establishing freedome, it is manifest, that they ground their salvation upon the Covenant of Grace which supposeth it; And therefore, think themselves notwithstanding obliged, to apply their utmost indeavours to the fulfilling of it: Though, the difficulty of the question; intangling, and as it were maleficiating their un∣derstanding, makes them imagine, that it is maintained by that which indeed destroys it. And therefore, I cannot in the like manner excuse them, who, be∣sides the predetermination of the will by God, do hold, that faith which onely justifieth to consist in believing that God predestinates to life in consideration of the obedience of Christ, provided for the elect of God alone; Because, not requiring that voluntary conversion of the will of God, for the condition o the Covenant of Grace, (the revelation of the will of God aforesaid not imply∣ing
any thing, but the evidence of Gods word manifested by his spirit to that e∣ffct) they disoblige themselves of imploying that freedome of the will which Christianity supposeth, to perform that condition which Christianity re∣quireth; As if the losse of freedome from sin did infer the losse of freedome from necessity, by vertue of originall concupiscence, extending neverthe∣lesse to the state of innocency. In fine, the free grace of God and the free∣will of man belonging both to the foundation of Christianity, there are two extremities to be argued in this question, consisting in destroying the one, out of a desire to preserve both, which, he that hath not, in plaine termes, destroys Christianity. And therefore, I blame not the determinations of the Councill of Orange that have secured us, on the one hand, against the merit of grace by works of nature; But I find reason that we should be secured on the other hand, against the determination of the will, that introduces necessity, to the overthrow of Christianity. For, it is possible, for the understanding of him that desires to maintaine both grace, and freewill, to be so intricated with the difficulty of reconciling them both, as to make the freedome of mans wil to depend upon the immediate act of Gods will, determining it freely to act when it acteth, out of pretense of maintaining the efficacy of Gods free grace; wheras it is, indeed, no helpe of grace, that inables not freely to doe▪ what the Covenant of grace requireth. I doe not therefore pardon our Presbyterians, when they bring into their confession of faith, (which we must all be obliged to, forsooth) the determining of mans will by God, having no waies secured us from the position of jstifying faith, to consist in beleiving that we are pre∣destinate to life. But I forwrne their mis-led hearers, that, though they think themselves bound to pay them well for their paines, to make them par∣tizans in questions which they understand not, and give them the confidence to censure for Arminians, those that resolve them in such termes as they com∣prehend not; Neverthelesse, at the last judgement of God, they may have cause to complaine of them, if not for teaching them to tye knos which they cannot teach them to loose; yet, for inducing them to breake the peace of the Church, to obtaine freedome of professing, or imposing upon others, the beliefe of things thus prejudiciall to Christianity. In the meane time, it shall be enough for me, by this short resolution, to have drawn a line, which they that will tread the Labyrinth of this dispute may be guided by, the best that I can show, from falling headlong on either side. Not doubting, that the skill of those, who, being more traded in it, resolve to avoid both extre∣mities, may produce that information, which may oblige me for further intel∣ligence, as well as the rest of the Church: But having confidence, that, the de∣nying of Gods Predetermination, is not the denying of Gods effectuall Grace; which, I have showed, that it doth stand with freewill, according to the suppo∣sition that I advance, though I undertake not to show, how reason reconciles the parts of it. And truly, I am confident, that, when S. Austine, in his book de Correptione & Gratia, distinguishes between that help of Grace without, which we can∣not obay the Gospell of Christ, and that help by which we do it, auxilium quo, & auxilium sine quo non; and, whensoever else he makes the efficacy of Grace to attaine the doing of that which it effecteth, not onely the inabling of man to do it; he never intended to determine the maner how it is effected. For, though S. Austin himselfe hath balked the ground which himselfe had laid, for the distinction between the antcedent and consequent will of God, in his book de Spiritu & litera Chap. XXXIII. by bringing in other exposi∣tions of S. Pauls words; God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledg of the truth; that are inconsistent with it; Though I have not found him distinguish betweene necessity upon supposition and antecedent, as Anselme, in pursuance of his Doctrine, hath don; yet, he that shall read what he hath said of the redemption of all mankind upon Psalm XCV. besides abundance of other passages, whereby he concurreth to witnesse that sense of the redemption of all mankind, of Gods will that all be saved, of sufficient
Grace that is not effectuall, which the Church generally declareth, as I show∣ed you before; I say, he that considereth them will find it more reasonable, to reconcile him to his owne doctrine, then to pretend a change in his judgement, where he acknowledges none, as, in the mater of preventing Grace he doth not acknowledge. Certainely, seeing that Prosper, in defending him, frequently and clearely acknowledges Christ to have dyed for all mankind, out of Gods will that all might be saved; But, the author of the book de catione Gen∣tium, (never yet suspected for a partizane of the Semipelagians) hath so plentifully maintained it, during the time that the parties in Gaule charged one another for Semipelagians and Praedestinatians; (For, during that time was it writ, without peradventure) they will never deserve well of S. Au∣stine that defend him otherwise. So far are we from being obliged by his doctrine to acknowledge grace to come to effect, by Gods predetermining the wil of man to all that coms to passe; when I have shwed a supposition, according to which it may be don, without prejudice to Christianity; though beyond my understanding to show how. For, supposing the common faith to be this; That God appointeth them to life or to death, whom he foreseeth to imbrace or not imbrace Christianity, and, to persevere or not persevere in the practice of it till death; Can it not be true also, that he hath appointed some and not others the meanes, whereby he foresees that they will persevere? Nay, if some only persevere in the state of Grace, when all might, as the Council of Orange hath decreed, what is there but Gods will to create the difference? much more, between them that ne∣ver heare of the Gospell, and those that refuse it. And, what hath Christiani∣ty hereupon to answer, but Porphyries question; why Christ came not afore? That is, why God suffered man to fall and sin to come into the world? Why he maketh not all men true Christians when he might? For one answer would serve all these questions. Which, if it be a scandall to Christianity that it is not answered, it remaines, that Christians be Porphyries disciples. In the mean time, absolute predestination to grace infers, not absolute predestination to glory. Nor obliges God to procure sin, as the meanes to his end; or, as the meanes to that meanes, to predetermine mans will to doe it. But, did Saint Austines doctrine, in my opinion, containe any thing contrary to the doctrine of the rest of the Church, concerning the antecedent & consequent will of God, the coming of evill into the world, and, that the foreknowledge of God does not effect but suppose it, the freedome of the will from necessity, while slave to sin; I would think my selfe obliged to renounce him, that I might adhere to the rest of the Church: Counting it a thing ridiculous, and contrary to the principles of Christian truth, acknowledging the tradition of Faith to come from the whole Church to advance the doctrine of a member thereof, though so eminent as S. Austine, against that which the rest of the Church is acknow∣ledged to have taught. If i be said, that, the supposition of Gods foreseeing the event of mens reso∣lutions by the objects and considerations which he appoints them to be moved with, is an invention of the Jesuites, or at least, hath been much maintained by them; I demand what advantage they have, that espoue the supposition of the Dominicans; (the first Inquisitors, that is, Ministers of persecution for Re∣ligion, by the interest of the Church of Rome with secular powers) Especially, adding unto it the position of justifying faith; by believing that we are pre∣destinate, so destructive to the Covenant of Grace. Yet, I give the reader that is willing to take the paines of being informed, notice, that the supposition which I advance, is rather in the forme that is to be collected out of Durandus▪ then in that which the Iesuites since have given it. In fine, let Maldonat and Jesuites think it their honour to professe, that they like not such and such ex∣positions of scripture because they come from the Hereticks; (by which names we know whom they meane) Let Puritan preachers cofe their simple heares with a prejudice against all that they like not, as drawne from Arminians or Jesuites, (whose positions they understood not, and when they are understood,
are nearer the truth then their owne) I shall find my selfe never the lesse oliged to follow that truth for Christs sake, which, I conceive, maintaines the interest of Christianity best, though a Iew or a Pagan, much more a Jesuite or an Arminian had said it. As for the opinion of Arminius, and the de∣cree of the Synod at Dort, having already said why I have inlarged my consi∣derations beyond the compasse of those termes upon which they disputed, it shall suffice me to say; That his opinion concerning Election and Repro∣bation is that, which, I have showed, that all the Church hath alwaies held for mater of Faith. To wit, that God appoints them to be saved and to be damned, who receive Christianity and persevere in the profession of it till death, or not. That, in mine opinion, they might have admitted some thing more; To wit, that God is not obliged by any workes of free will, preventing the help of his Grace through Christ, but by his own free pleasure, to grant those helps of Grace, which he knowes wil be effectuall to finall perseverance in Christiani∣ty, to some, which he refuseth to others. And, that the decree of granting them is Gods absolute predestination to Grace. For, I am confident, that Armini∣us doth acknowledg the calling of Gods Grace to become effectuall, by meanes of the congruity of those helps which God provideth, with that dis∣position which God foreseeth, in him whom he appointeth to be moved by the same. Whether or no the decree of the Synod require further, that they should acknowledg Predestination to glory to be absolute, I hold not my selfe any waies obliged to dispute. For I find, that those persons, that were m∣ployed to the Synod from England, have professed, as well in the Synod, as o∣therwise, that they came not by any commission or instruction from the Church of England; but onely, as trusted by K. James of excellent memory, to assist his good neighbours the states of the United Provinces, in composing the differences in Religion raised among their Divines and people. And there∣fore, I cannot be concerned in the decree, to which the Church of England never concurred. Yet I say further, that the persons that concurred to it, whose opinions, as Divines, I cannot esteeme at an easy rate; by waving the o∣pinion of predetermination, by acknowledging the death of Christ for all, & the operation of grace not irresistible, but such as stands not with actual resistence, do seem not to insist upon absolute predestination to glory. And that, if the de∣cree do necessarily import it, I do not know how to reconcile it with their own opinions. Which, whether it be also to be said of them of the reformed Chur∣ches in France, who holding the decree, do now acknowledg the death of Christ for all mankind, let them that read their writings judge.
CHAP. XXVII. The question concerning the satisfaction of Christ with Socinus. The reason why Sacrifices are figures of Christ, common to all sacrifices. Why, and what Sacrifices the Fathers had, what the Law added. Of our ransom by the price of Christs propitiatory Sacrifice. HAving thus showed, how the Gospel tenders a Covenant of Grace, though requiring the condition of Christianity, in regard of those helps which the Grace of God through Christ provideth, for the performance of it: I am now to show the same, in regard of that right to which God accepteth that performance. For if it appeare, that God, out of his grace in Christ, and not for the worth of that which we doe, accepteth it for a title duely qualifying us for remission of sinne and life everlasting; then is it a Covenant of Grace which the Gospell tenders, though it require the profession and practice of Christi∣anity on our part. And here I have to doe with the Socinians on the one extremity, in the first place; who will not allow the Gospell to continue the Covenant of grace, if it be said, that it tendereth remission of sins and life everlasting to those that are qualified as it requireth, in consideration of the obedience and sufferings of Christ, as the ransome and price of our sinnes. Acknowledging allways, that Christ died to settle and establish the New Co∣venant, but not to oblige God by his death either to declare, and become in∣gaged to it, or to make it good having declared it; but to assure mankind, that God, (who, of his owne free grace was ready to pardon and accept of those that should accept of the termes of reconcilment which his Gospell ten∣dereth) will not faile to make good that, which, by delivering his well be∣loved sonne to death, he hath signed for his promise to us. Indeed, they goe about to strengthen this opinion, by adding another reason and end of Christs death; To wit, the attaining of that Godhead, wherewith God, they say, hath rewarded his obedience in doing the message which he trusted him with, that thereby he might be able, of himselfe, to make good that which God by him had promised, confounding all that may oppose the salvation of them that imbrace the Covenant of Grace; But that it should be said, that God declar∣eth, or giveth remission of sinnes and everlasting life to them that imbrac the same in consideration of the obedience and sufferings of Christ, as satisfied thereby for that punishment which our sinne deserved of his justice; this is that which they deny, and the Church teacheth, and therefore this it is, which we must show how it is delivered by the Scriptures. Which, every man may observe, to stand cheifely in those texts of Scripture which say, that Christ died for us, that he redeemed us, and reconciled us to God by his death and bloud shed; (which being the utmost of his obedience, comes most into account at all occasions of mentioning this subject) in fine, it is easy to be observed, that the expressions of this point in holy Scripture have relation to the Sacri∣fices of the Old Testament, as figuring the death of Christ, whereby both agree we are delivered from sinne, the question remaining, whether ransomed or not. And therefore I shall first consider, how, and to what effect, the Sacrifices of Moses Law are figures of the sacrifice of our Lord upon the Crosse. Where I must, in the first place, inferre from the principle premised of the twofold sense of the Old Testament, that, all the sacrifices thereof were figures of the death of Christ, and our reconcilement with God by the same; So farre I am from yeilding them that unreasonable demand, that onely expiatory Sacrifices, and especially that of the Solemne day of Atonement, are properly so. Onely I must declare my meaning to be this; That, whereas the sacrifices of the Fathers were so, as they were pledges of Gods favour generally; the sacrifices of
the Law (being the condition upon which that people in generall, and every person thereof in particular held their interest in the land of promise) ex∣presse more correspondence with that interest in the world to come, which Christians hold by Christs death on the Crosse. For, the land of Canaan be∣ing promised them upon condition of keeping the Law, and every mans in∣terest in the goods of it depending upon the same; it is manifest, that, whether the sacrifices which the Congregation was bound to offer of course, upon ordinary or solemne dayes, or those which purged legall impurities, in∣ferring onely incapacities of conversing which Gods people, or those which were offered for sinnes properly so called, or for acknowledgment of blessings received, or whatsoever they were, all were made an offered upon the generall claime to the land of promise, and every mans share in it. Neither is there any greater argument hereof, then this; That there is no sacrifice appointed by the Law for capitall offenses, Num. XV. 23. 27. 28. 29. as those which the Law deprived of all interest in the land of promise, all right to converse among Gods people. Which, what it signified to Christians, you may see by the apostle Ebr. II. ▪-X. 28. to wit, that they who stick not to the termes of their Christianity must expect so much the heavier vengeance at Gods hands. And therefore, when the Apostle argues Ebr. X. 4▪ It is impossible that the blood of bulls and goates should take away sinne; The answer is given by the same Apostle, Ebr. IX. 13. If the blood of bulls and of goates, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the defiled, sanctifieth to the purity of the lesh▪—That it takes not away the guilt of sinne from the conscience, which shuts heaven upon us, but it takes away the incapacity of coming into the Tabernacle, or conversing among Gods people, or other forfeitures of legall promises. And therefore, I may conclude, that the sacrifices which the Law was established with Ex. XX. 4▪, though not expiatory, gave the people right to the land of promise, to wit, as done, to solemnize their resolution of submitting to the Law. For, the people having beene Idolaters in Aegypt, as we understand by the Prophet Ezek▪ XX. 6. 7. and now submitting to a Covenant with God, for the land of promise, by obeying his Law, are they not thereby accepted by God for heires of it? This seemes, indeede, not to stand well with the opinion of the Fathers; S. Chrysostome, Theodoret, and divers others, the best expositers of the Scrip∣tures that the ancient Church hath▪ that the sacrifices of the Law, were appoin∣ted by God, not of his owne originall intent, but upon occasion of their pronenesse to worship Idols, as the Hethen did; granting them those rites, which they had knowne them serve their idols with, so as they might be perform∣ed▪ after that perticulare manner which he should injoyne, as done to him alone. And this they make the meaning of the Prophet, when he saith, that God commanded their Fathers nothing concerning Sacrifices, at their coming out of Aegypt Jer. VII. 22. because, we see, that, in theire first coming out of Aegypt, he treates with them about keeping his Lawes, but not about sacri∣fices, Ex. XV. 25. 26. But nothing hinders those sacrifices, which were brought in occasionally, to have been intended to figure the sacrifice of Christ. As nothing hinders those sacrifices, which from the beginning had been d∣livered the Fathers, as pleges of Gods love to them through Christ, to be, by the malice of the devill, diverted and imployed to the service of Idols. Cer∣tainly, the Fathers before the floud sacrificed nothing but whole burnt offe∣ringes; because, at that time, they were not to eate of their sacrifices, feed∣ing onely on things that grew out of the earth, Gen. I: 28. For afterwards, when he gave the sons of Noe license to eat flesh, Noe offered peace offerings; whereof, part being burnt upon the Altare, the rest went to the use of those that had sacrificed, to east upon. Gen. VIII. 19. 20. IX. 4. And those which Moses solemnized the Covenant of the Law with, were holocausts and peace offerings. Exod. XXIV. 5. those which the Law makes properly explatory being afterwards introduced by the Law. Now, that all sacrifices are figures of Christ, we have not onely the generall reason premised, but particulare
instances in the New Testament. The Paschall Lambe 1 Cor. V. 7. The holo∣causts and peace offeringes which the Law was inacted with. Exod. XXIV. 5. Ebr. IX. 18-22. together with all those, the blood whereof purgeth by the Law. The daily burnt offeringes of the Congregation. Ebr. X. 1. (for Soci∣nus is ridiculously willfull to understand  there once a yeare, as if the speech were onely of the sacrifice for the day of atonement) and by conse∣quence, all anniversary oblations. And, whereas Socinus observes, that no lambe is appointed by the Law for a Propitiatory sacrifice; I suppose, when the Baptist saith, John 1. 36. Behold the lambe of God that takes away the sinnes of the world; when S. John saith, Apoc. 1 5. To him that loved us, and hath washt us from our sinnes in his bloude; when the Martyrs say, Apoc. V. 9. Thou wast killed and hast brought us to God, out of every kinred and tribe and language and nation; when the Apostle Apoc. XIII. 8. mentions those, whose names are not written in the booke of life of the Lambe slaine from the foundation of the world; These, I suppose knew well enough what creatures were sacri∣ficed, and yet declare, that Christ was figured by Lambes; to what purpose, let their words argue. It is manifest indeed, that the Epistle to the Ebrues argues most upon the anniversary sacrifice of the day of atonement, whereof, one thing I must ob∣serve to him concerning the accomplishment of that which it figureth; that as he maketh it, (together with all other sacrifices, the bloud whereof is sprinkled upon the Arke) to signify Christ crucified without the walls of Jerusalem; So, he maketh the sacrifice of Christ crucified signified thereby, a pace offering for the Church to feed upon, (as we doe in the sacrament of the Eucharist) though, by the Jewes not to be touched, because they killed it without the City as abominable, Ebr. XIII. 8-16. But Socinus will not have this sacrifice made, (at least not perfected) nor Christ an High Preist, till he entred into the heavens to present it to God, as the High Priest into the Holy of Holies to sprinkle the blood. How then is he figured by those sacrifices, the blood whereof is not caried within▪ the vaile? I grant, the sacrifice of Christ is not done till Christ come to judgment, as that was not done, till the High Priest came out of the Holy of Holies, declaring the accepting of it Levit, XVI. 18, 19, 20. But, as he must Be▪ an High Priest that sacrificed what God accepted, so must Christ be High priest before he was killed. And therefore a sacrifice, as the Apostle expressely saith, Ebr. X. 26, 27, 28. That; having abolished sinne by the sacrifice of himselfe, he shall appeare againe to the salvation of them that expect him; As the High Priest out of the Holy of Holies. The same is many wayes evident by Ebr. IX. 14-20. For, where Socinus will have Christ to offer himselfe unspotted to God by the ternall Spirit; by presenting himselfe in heaven immortall upon his resurrection, free from the punishments of sinne which he had upon him here on earth; you have seene that the everlasting Spirit is the Godhead of Christ. And, had the apostle meant the presentation, which is now in doing, he would have spoken in the time past . And, he that considers, that all sacrifices were visited before they were killed, whether legall or blemished (which is called in one word, ) must beleive, that he is called here , as found spot∣lesse, and so, fit to be slaine, And, does he not make the death of Christ the Sacrifice, when he makes the New Covenant, in correspondence to the Old, to be inacted by it? It is true, the same Apostle Ebr. IX. 2▪-6. show∣ing the highest heavens to be the Holy of Holies, where the Priest-hood of Christ is exercised, addes, That if he were upon earth, he should not be a Priest, there being other Priests to offer gifts according to the Law; But this is onely to say, that his Priest-hoode is not earthly, who hath caried his owne bloude into the heavenly Tabernacle, not medling with the sonnes of Levi, or theire office: For,  is (according to the Ebrew, which, for want of compo∣sition, expresses adjectives by praepositions) for : If e were upon earth, signifies; if he were an earthly Priest; as those of the Leviticall Priest∣hood. It is true, he was to learne compassion for us by his sufferinges, here,
Ebr. II. 17, 18. V. 1, 7, 8. but might he not, as well as other high Priests learn that compassion by sacrificing himself for us here, which he hath for us to the end of all things? In fine, every sacrifice is a sacrifice from the time that it is consecrated to God, as the Paschal Lamb from the tenth day of the moneth▪ Ex. XII. 2. thence it is  due, and  a gift. Or, let any Jew say, if it might not many ways become , reprobate, before it came into the Holy of Holies, because a sacrifice or Offering, before. And was not Christ consecrated when he was the Lamb of God? Of himself he saies, John XVII. 19. For their sakes do I sanctify my self; To wit, to be a spotlee sacrifice. This is therefore no exception to the generall argument, the force whereof consisteth in this; That, seeing it cannot be denied, that the inheritance of the Land of Promise, and each mans share in the goods and and rights of it, is assigned the Jewes in consideration of their sacrifices, to wit, as the condition of that Covenant by which they were prescribed; It must not be doubted, that the inheritance of the kingdome of heaven is assigned to Christians by the Covenant of Grace, in consideration of the obedience and sufferings of Christ which they figure. But this is still more evident, by the termes of ransome, and price, and buying, attributed to the sacrifice, of Christ. The heathen had sacrifices that they called Lustralia, and lustrare signifies to expiate, among the Romans, to wit, By paying a price. For Ennius, translating into Latine a Greek Trage∣dy called , (out of Homer, where he speakes of Priamus ransom∣ing Hectors corpes from Achilles) intituled it Hectoris lustra. Therefore it is the Latine of : And  signifies deliverance by paying a ran∣some. In the words of the Prophet, Daniel, III. 57. IV. 24. Redeem thy sinnes by repentance, and thy misdeeds by having mercy on the afflicted; Many blame the vulgar Latine, and would translate  breake off: But the words of Solomon Prov. XVI. 6. By mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed; showe, that it is truly translated. And having showed afore, that such considerations do qualify us for remission of sinnes, I may well argue from hence, that the terme of ransome imports the consideration for which it is bestowed. Where∣fore, let the sweet smelling sacrifice of Christ Ephes. V. 2. be understood in the same notion, as the good workes of Christians are called a sweet savour, Phil. IV. 18. Ebr. XIII. 16. Seeing Socinus will have it so: Provided that it be understood, that the sacrifice of Christ is accepted, to purchase mankind the right of coming out of sinne into everlasting life, the sacrifices of Christians, to the quallifying of their persons, for the benefit of the same. To the same sense Prov. XIII. 8. The ransome of a mans life is his wealth: For, literally, a mans wealth is the saving of his life, with the world that spares a mans life in consideration of his wealth, (or sets not upon him in regard of it) which the Psalmist saith God does not, Psal. XLIX 6, 7, 8. mystically, it is the same that Solomon said in the place afore quoted. But, when Solomon saith Prov. XXI. 18. The wicked is a ransom for the upright, and the sinner comes instead of the righteous; And the Prophet Esa. XLIII. 3. I have given Egypt for thy ransom Cush and Seba instead of thee; God signifyeth by a Parable, that, having imploy∣ed Sennacherib to execute his judgements upon those nations, he had given him the Aegyptians and Aethiopians that he might spare the Israelites. So, he paies him his hier which discharges his own people of that which they had suf∣fered otherwise. So in the words of Otho, Tacit. Hist. IV. Hunc animum, hanc vir∣tutem vestram ultra periculis objicere, nimis grande vitae meae pretium duco. I hold it too great a price for my life, to cast this courage and valour of yours any more upon dangers; It is manifest, that a ransome or price, imports the considerati∣on of that for which it is laid out: The blood of his soludiers, for their Gene∣ralls life. And, shall it be otherwise when the Apostle saith, that Christs death intercedes, for the redemption of those transgressions that remained under the Old Testament. Ebr. IX. 15? when S. Paul saith, that the man. Christ Jesus gave himself a ransome for all, to be witnessed in due time? 1 Tim. II. 5, 6? When
our Lord saith the same Mat. XX. 28. Mat. X. 45? and S. Paul againe. 1 Cor. VI. 20. Ye are bought with a price; glorify therefore God with your body and with your Spirit, which are Gods. And againe, 1 Cor. VII. 23. Ye are bought with a price. Be not servants of men. And of Christ, Titus II. 14. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The same Apoc. V. . Rom. III. 24. Gal. III. 13. Ephes. I. 7. Acts XX. 28. Where I must needs call it meer impudence in Socinus, to say, that God redeemed his Church by his own bloud, because Christs blood, which it was redeemed with, was, as Christ, Gods own. It is not here to be denied, that these terms may, by figure of speech, signify meer deliverance, and that so they do signify, in the figures of Christ in the Old Test. when the Judges and Kings of Israel, when God above them are said to redeem Israel, that is, to deliver him, without paying ransom for him: Nor, that the New Testament speakes likewise, when the effect onely is considered: See Ex. XV. 13. Deut. VII. 8. IX. 26. XIII. 5. XXI. 8. 2 Sam. VII. 23. Nehem. I. 10. Psal. LXXVI. 16. XXXI. 6. CXI. 9. Esa. XXIX. 22. Luke. II. 38. XXI. 28. XXIV. 21. Act. VII. 35. Rom VIII. 23. Ephes. VI. 30. As also for the terms of buying and selling, Rom. VII. 14. Esa. L. 1. Deut. XXXII. 30. Jud. III. 8. II. 14. Ephes. V. 16. Col. IV. 5. And therefore, it is not to be marvailed at, that the Jewes, denying Christ, should deny his ran∣some, as not expecting to be delivered by paying ransome. But, the figures of the Old Testament being performed in the New, where the sacrifice of Christ determines the ransome of Israelites, (by their Kings, Priests, and Prophets, as well as their Sacrifices) to the ransome of the World by his blood; Where the words of the Apostle and of our Lord expresse the guilt and punishment of sinne, from which it redeemeth; Next to the obstiuacy of the Jews, in not be∣lieving, it will be, to acknowledge freedome given, with the Jewes, without acknowledging the consideration of a ransome, with Christians. Let us hear the Apostle, Pet. I. 18. 19 20. knowing, that you were not redemed from your vaine conversation delivered from your Fathers, with corruptible thinges, gold or silver, but which the precious bloode of Christ, as of a lambe without spot or blemish, foreknowne indeede from the foundation of the world, but manifested in these last times for us. For, though the end of this ransome be expressed, be∣cause it is not immediately attained, by the paying of it, but by our will con∣curring with Gods; Glorify God because ye are bought with a price; Be not slaves to men, because ransomed by Christ; By the bloud of Christ ye are redeem∣ed from your vain conversation received from your Fathers; Yet, if the meaning were onely to assure them, that their deliverance will not faile them, there could no cause be given them, why the purchase of it by way of ransom should be expressed; Which every man that goes to market, must needs understand to import the consideration, in which we have it. There must be indeed free∣dome and deliverance where a ransom is paid, as there is in our case, if the se∣vice of God be freedome. But, where the guilt of sinne goes before, a clear score follows, and the death of Christ comes between them, must not the con∣sideration, which compares them together, make even the reckoning?
CHAP. XXVIII. Christ took away our sinne by bearing the punishment of it. The Prophesie of Esay LIII. We are reconciled to God by the Gospel, in consideration of Christs obe∣dience. The reconcilement of Jews and Gentiles, Men and Angels, consequent to the same. Of purging and expiating sinne by Christ, and making propitiati∣on for it. Of Christs dying for us. THere is further, in sacrifices, a consideration of bearing the punishment due to the sins that are expiated by them, and so taking them away; Wherein, the Scriptures declare, the sacrifices of the Law to figure the sacrifice of Christ. So S. Paul, Gal. III, 10. 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the urse of the Law (where it saith, Deut. XXVII. 26. Cursed is every one that abideth not in all things written in the book of the Law to do them) becom∣ing a curse for us, as it is written; Cursed is every one that hngeth on a tree: The exception of Socinus; That this belonges onely to Jewes, as a discharge of that curse which the breaking of Moses his positive Law inferreth; is neither pertinent nor true. For, where the leter of the Law takes place to civil effects, there the spirituall sense thereof takes place to spirituall effects, by that which hath been said. Therefore, if the Law of Moses bind the posterity of Abraham over to a curse, because they keep it not which S. Paul supposeth; then the Law written in the harts of mankind, (which the Law of Moses, as it is spirituall, both containeth, and improveth) binds over mankind to that curse which the transgression thereof inferreth. And there is no appearance that those whome the Apostle writes to were Jewes; but such as, out of error, thought themselves bound to be jewes, (whether in part or in whole) as they were Christians. We are then, ransomed from the curse, by the curse which Christ indurd for us. When S. Paul sayes 2 Cor. V. 21; Him that knew no sinne he made sinne for us, that we might become the righteousnesse of God in him; Socinus saith, that Christ was made sinne, and a curse, because the Jewes used him, as if he had beene sinfull and accursed by the Law. But, if God gave him up to them, so to be used, then was he used as sinfull and accursed by the will of God, not onely by the sentence of Pilate: And, if we become righteousnesse to God, then he became not sinne to man alone. Therefore, being so used, not because he, but because mankind was sinfull and accursed, the effect must be to the account of mankind, where the reason is grounded upon the consideration of it. But why doe the Israelites lay handes on the Levites, the Levites and Sacrificers both on the Sacrifice, but to signify the discharging of themselves, and charging their guilt upon the Priests and sacrifices respectively? Lev. I. 4. Num. VIII. 10. 14. which their (constitutions injoyne to be done with all▪ their might, and with confession of sins) Maimoni, of offering Sacrifices, III. 6. 8. 9. For this reason, the sinne offeringes are given the Priests, forbearing the iniquity of the Cougregation, and making propitiation for them before the Lord, Levit. X. 17. The Greeke indeede translates it, . But the meaning is; That ye may take iniquity away from the Synagogue (to wit, by taking it on themselves) and make propitiation for them before the Lord. For, in consideration of their taking the sinne upon them, they are properly rewarded with the sacrifice. So Aaron beares the iniquity of their consecrate thinges, Ex. XXVIII. 38. And, the Levites make propitiation, lest the people be slaine for coming neere. This is the reason of that which the Apostle observeth, Ebr. XIII. 11. that, those sacrifices for sinne, the blood whereof is caried within the vaile, are burnt without the campe: Because, being charged with the sinne which they expiate, they are to cary it away from among them
whome they cleare of it. Wherefore, going on to apply this to Christs suffer∣ing without Jerusalem, he showeth the figure to be accomplished in his taking away our sinnes, but, because they were layed on him first. And truly, the customes and opinion of the Hethen, in purging their sinnes by laying the upon their sacrifices, are so plaine to this purpose, that to deny this to be the intent of that paterne which the devill thereby corrupted, is to offer vi∣lence to common sense. Here I come to the Prophesy of Es. LIII. wherein, being obliged, litealy to expound it with Grotius of the Prophet Jeremy; I shall be thought by o  to make it the more difficult, to prove this to be the mysticall sense of it. Bu having given my selfe a Rule, to maintaine the difference betweene these two senses in the Prophesies of the Old Testament; I shall forbid Socinus any advan∣tage against the Church by it. Thus then saith the Prophet Es. LIII. 4—. But he tooke our sicknesses, and bore our greifes. And we thought him plaged, smitten of God, and afflicted. But, he was wounded for our transgrssios, and beaten for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his markes we are healed. We all had gone astray like sheepe, every one was turned his owne way, and God made all our iniquities to meete him. He was oppressed and afflicted, yet opened he not his mouth: He was ledde as a sheepe to the slaughter, and, as a sheepe is dumbe before him that sheares her, so opened he not his mouth. He was taken from restraint and judgement, and his generation who shall declare? For he was cut off from the land of the living, he was smitten for the transgression of any people. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich at his death, for no wickednesse that he did, nor deceite in his mouth, yet the Lord was pleased to afflict him with sorrowes. If thou make his soule an offering for guilt, he shall see a seede, he shall prolong his dayes, and the good plea∣sure of God shall come to passe by his means. For the labour of his soule shall he see and be satisfied: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and he shall beare their iniquities. Therefore will I give him a share with the great ones, and with the mighty shall he divide the spoile, because he poured out his soule to death and was counted among transgressors, and bore the sins of many, and interceded for transgressors. That the Prophet Jeremy should be a figure of our Lord Christ, in his doings and sufferings, is no more then I have showed, that all the Prophets were. That the Prophet Esay should foretell the same for a figure of Christ, is no more, then, that he should prophesy of our▪ Lord Christ under the figure of himselfe; which he doth many times The reason, why the Prophet Jeremy is a figure of our Lord, imports no more then this; That, being sent by God to reduce his people to his Law, that they might continue injoying the Land of promise, he was by them taken for an enemy of his country, and used accordingly, because he foretold theire ruine in case they obayed not; and so, God brought on him the merit of theire sinnes, which he laboured to cure: But so, that his doctrine, and the event of his Prophesies having reduced them to God and his Law, theire restitution from captivity, which he had foretold, came to passe by his means. Upon this account the Prophet Jeremy is a sacrifice for his people, though no other∣wise then as S. Paule exhortes the Romanes, to present their bodies living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God, Rom XII. 1. Or, as he saith to the Phi∣lippians; If I be poured forth (as a drinke offering) upon the service and ministery of your faith, Phil. II. 16. Or as to the Colossians; I. 24. he sup∣plies the remains of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh, for his body, which is the Church. For, the proportion will be just, betweene that reconcilement which the Prophet procures betweene God and his people, by his intercession and doctrine, as to their temporall estate, as a minister of God, and a figure of Christ; And, that which our Lord Christ procures betweene God and his Church, as to the everlasting estate of it. Seeing then, that Socinus acknow∣ledges all this to be meant of the redemption of the world by the sufferinges of Christ, what advantageth i him, that it is understood literally of the Prophet Jeremy? For, the importance of the Prophets words in him, will take place,
according to the pretense of his coming, not according to the nature of the Prophet Jeremies office, And therefore, what if the Evangelist say, that the words of the Prophet Esay; He tooke away our infirmities, and caried away our diseases; were fullfilled, when our Lord cured the blinde and the lame, Mat. VIII. 17.  in the Evangelist , I confesse, sig∣nify taking away, as well as bearing: And therefore, that which the Baptist saith Mark I. 24.  Whose soe latchet I am not worthy to stoope and unty; Is in S. Matth. IV. 11. ; not to carry, but, to take away his shooes; Which, he that looses, intends to take away. Therefore Tertul. ad Marc. IV. Ipse igitur est Christus remediator valetudinum. Hic, inquit, imbecillitates nostras aufert & languores portat. Therefore Christ himselfe is he that cures sicknesses. He saith, he takes away all infirmities, and beares our diseases. Portare autem Graeci pro o solent ponere, quod est tollere. Now the Greeke is wont to put bearing,  for taking away. And indeed, the cure of bodily infirmities by Christ, could not be fortold by the Prophet, to come to passe by taking them upon him∣selfe, but by taking them away from the people. But if we say, that he was to cure our spirituall infirmities no otherwise, neither will the figure of Jeremy, nor the words of Esay hold so properly; which as I said afore, are fullfilled more properly in the mystery, then in the History. For, it is manifest, that, bearing our sins serves to amplify the sufferings, whether of Jeremy, or of our Lord, which taking them away does not; and yet it is aswell understood, that they are taken from them, by consequence, to wit, because laide on him. For, Jeremy bare the sinnes of the people first, as our Lord on the Crosse, but the cure came afterwards. Besides, when the Prophet sayes; If thou shalt make his soule a sacrifice for guilt; It is manifest, that God layes the guilt on him which he takes from us. Thirdly, when the Prophet sayes  (where, one case of the person, another of the thing follows ) And Socinus translates it; God by him met with all our iniqui∣tes; I say confidently, he makes it no Hebrew. Had the Prophet said , it might have passed for Hebrew, to signify that which he saies; But, as it lies, at no rate. Fourthly, no man shall expound the Prophet but the Apostle 1 Pet. II. 24, 25. Who himself took up our sinnes upon his body to the Crosse, that being dead to sinnes we may live to righteousnesse, by whose blew markes we are healed. For, yee were as sheep ging astray, but are now returned to the Pastor and Bishop of our soules. First, when S. Peter repeats the very words of Esay; to question, whether he alledge this passage or not, I suppose, is ridiculous. Neither will it be of consequence, though we take  for ; For wether Christ took our sinnes up to the Crosse, or, beare them upon the Crosse, still they remain charged on Christ, faned to the Crosse. As for the Apostle, Ebr. IX. 25, 26, 28. where, (having said, that Christ went into heaven to appear before the face of God, without any intent to suffer him∣self any more, (as the high Priest entered once a year into the Holy of Holies, with the bloud of a sacrifice) for then must he have suffered many times since the foundation of the world: But, was once manifested at the end of the world, to abolish sinne by the sacrifice of himself) he concludes, that, being once offered, , to take away the sinnes of many, he shall appear the second time without sinne to the salvation of those that expect him; It is here evident, that Christ was manifested at the end of the world, to such in the world as knew him not, not to God in heaven, that did: And therefore sinne is abo∣lished by the sacrifice of the Crosse, if by his intercession in heaven, in conside∣ration of it. And, his second appearance is without sinn; because he shall have taken sinne away; but he shall have taken it away, by being offered. There∣fore if he will needs translate , to take away the the sinnes of many, yet can he not deny, that they are taken away by being born upon the Crosse. For, must we not have account from the text, in what consideration he takes them away? And is the assuring of us that God will make good his promise, or is the moving of God to make it good, the perti∣nent
reason why he is said to take away our sinnes by a sacrifice? There is no doubt, that S. Peter expresses the end of Christs sufferings in that which fol∣lowes; ye were as sheep going astray▪ but is not therefore the consideration to be expressed, upon which that end is attained? As for that little objecti∣on of Socinus, that when the Prophet saies; For the labour of his soul he shall see and be satisfyed: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and he shall beare their iniquities; That it must meane; He shall take away their iniquities; because justifying went afore. Neither uses the Language of the Scripture allwayes, according to order of nature and reason, to put that first which gives the reason of that which followes: So that bearing theire iniquities (not taking them away) may well follow, as the reason why he justifies; And if, insteade of and we translate for, (which is usuall in the scriptures) we silence the objection, and make the reason why he justifies, to follow in due place; to wit, because he beares their iniquities. Lastly, that the Prophets and righteous in generall, and the Messias in particular, were to beare the sinnes of the world, and expiate the wrath of God for them, you may see by Grotius upon Mat. XX. 28. that the Jewes have understood out of this place of the Prophet Esay. Which is prejudice enough; If they who understand not the reason why and how we say our Lord expiates sinne by bearing it, and, whose interest it concerns not to understand it by the native sense of the Pro∣phets words, find that which Christians deny, and, by denying, prejudice the common cause. Which to acknowledge, prejudices not Christianity, under∣standing as much difference betweene that expation which they make, and, that which Christ makes, as Christianity puts between Christ and Christians. Let us now consider that reconciliation, which S. Paul saith, many times, is wrought for us by Christs death. 2 Cor. V. 18—. All thinges are of God, that hath reconciled us to himselfe by Jesus Christ, and given us the ministery of reconcilement: As that God was reconciling the world to himselfe by Christ, not imputing to them their transgressions, an putting the word of reconciliation upon us. We are therefore ambassadors in Christs stead, as if God did exhort you by us, we beseech you in Christs stead, be reconciled to God. For▪ him that knew no sin he made sinne for us, that we might become the righteousnesse of God in him. Soci∣nus mervailes how any man can imagine, that Christ can proffer us reconcile∣ment, and not be reconciled to us when he proffers it. An imagination as ri∣diculous as his, that fansied he should meete his fellow, before his fellow met him. For, if reconcilement be betweene two, though one may provide the means, (as in our Case God) though out of love, yet seeing as yet he one∣ly offers friendship, that is to say, seeing as yet we are not made freindes; it is manifest that both are reconciled at once. And, doth not experience of the world show, that, when Princes and States are at warre, the one out of a desire of peace, seekes means of reconcilement, but is not reconciled before the other agree. So, God ingages to be reconciled, by publishing the Gospell, while he gives man leave to deliberate; but, is not reconciled, till man under∣take Christianity by being baptized. So, when God seekes to be reconciled to men, it is true, as S. Paul sayes, he imputes not their transgressions to them; for, if he should prosecute their sinnes by imputing them, he should not seeke recon∣cilement; But, when he is reconciled, it is a contradiction that he should impute them. Now, though the Apostles are messengers of reconcilment in Christs stead, yet with this difference that, he also furnished the means, they onely brought the message. S. Paul therefore having signified this means afore, (when he sayes that, not imputing to the world their transgressions, he sought to be reconciled with them by Christ) and inferring; Him that knew no sinne he made sinne for us, that we might become the righteousnesse of God in him; Either he makes no difference betweene our Lord and the Apostles, or it is expressed by these wordes in reference to that which went afore: To wit, that God was willing to be reconciled with the world, because he had provided Christ, and Christ had undertook the sinnes of it. So againe Rom. V. 10, 11. For if, being ene∣mies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his sonne, much more, being recon∣ciled,
shall we be saved by his life. Nor onely so: But we glory in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whome we have received reconcilement. From what shall we be saved by being reconciled? From wrath, saith the Apostle, in the words next afore. Therefore, before reconcilement we were under wrath. And surely there is a difference betweene the right and title that we have to be reconciled with God, (though upon condition of our conversion to Christi∣anity) and between the State of reconcilement, which is our right to life. But so, that, if the State be from Christ, (as S. Paul saith we have received reconcilement by Christ) then is the right to it in consideration of Christ, when he saith, that, being enemies, we were reconciled to God by his death. Saint Paul againe arguing, how God hath abolished the difference betweene Jew and Gentile by the Law; pursues it thus, Eph. II. 15. 16. That he might make up both into one new man. through himselfe making peace: And re∣concile both in one body to God, by the Crosse, slaying the enmity by it. Here Socinus will have us to construe  not with , but absolutely, to the behoofe and glory of God. Which, had a Schooleboy doe. he should have been whipt, for seeking something out of the text to governe that case, which he hath a verbe in the text to govern. Therefore, the Gentiles are indeed re∣conciled to the Jewes, according to S. Paule; But why? because both to God. And therefore, the reason is the same in the reconcilement o men and Angels Col. I. 19 22. For in him he pleased that all fullnesse should dwell. And by him to reconcile all to himselfe, pacifying, through him, by the bloud of his Crosse, whether the things that are on earth, or that are in heaven. And you, being once estranged, and enemies in your mind through evil workes, now hath he reconciled by the body of his flesh, through death. Especially comparing this with the purpose of God, which he declareth Eph. I. 10. For the ordering of the fullnesse of time, to recollect all in Christ, whether thinges in heaven, or on earth. For, that which here he termes , to recollect unto Christ, (that is, by Christ to reduce to the originall state of dependence upon God) is in part, the same with , to reconcile to himself, afore; But wholy agrees not, in as much as this particularly concerns the case of mankind, whose sinne required reconcilement, that they might be reduced to God, in one body with the holy angels that had no sinne. All this the Apostle meant to ex∣presse at once, and yet imply what was particular to man, besides that which belonged to the Angels. And we must either admit reconcilement between Men and Angels, because both reduced to God, (, signi∣fying, , that is, , (because, of Christ▪ mention had been made afore Col. . 20.) as , 1 Pet. I. 4. is, ; and 1 Pet. I. 25. , is, . And  Ephes. I. 5. is, , 1 Cor. VIII. 6. ) or show, how the Angels are reduced to God, by the death and bloud-shed of Christ his Crosse. It remaines, that I say something of the effect of all this, in cleansing and purging of sin, and in making propitiation and attonement for it: Of which you have the words of the Apostle, 1 John I. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ clean∣seth us from all sinne. Where, cleansing of sinne by Christs bloud supposing the condition of Christianity, it is manifest, that the effect of Christs bloud in cleansing of sinne, is not to bring us to Christianity. Againe, 1 John II. 1, 2, If any man sinne we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes, and not for ours onely, but for the sinnes of the whole world. Saith Socinus, Jesus Christ the righteous, that is, Jesus Christ the faithfull: 1 John I. 9. If we confesse our sins▪ he is faithfull and just to forgive our sinnes, and cleanse us from all unrighteousnesse; That so, he may be thought to expiate our sinnes by testifying the Covenant which ingages Gods faith. So farre he goes for an interpretation that destroyes the virtue of Christs inter∣cession, founded upon his innocence, 1 Peter I. 19. Isaiah LIII. 7, 9. For,
if Christ be an effectuall advocate because he suffered innocently for Gods will, then, not onely, because he hath obliged God, by dealing in his Name, to make good what he hath promised us. Whereas, if his bloud be a propitiation for the sinnes of Christians, that are not any more to be moved to receive the faith, as well as for the sinnes of the rest of the World, that are; it must be the same consideration of Christs obedience, that moves the good∣nesse of God to send the Gospel to the World, and to make it good to Christi∣ans. And, what , or  meanes, is seen by the Latine hila∣ris, according to Hesychius  saith he, is ; And , chearfull in countenance; And , chearfully, mr∣ly. So, the condition of Christianity being supposed in these words also, the consideration of Christs bloud makes the face of God chearfull to a Christian that sinneth. Here they alledge , Heb. II. 17. to signify expiating sinnes, and that must presently be, by bringing men to be Christians. But there is, in diverse speeches of this subject, that fi∣gure which Servius so often observes in Virgil, calling it Hypallage. As , Heb. I. 3. It is not the sinne that is clean∣sed, but man from sinne. And yet the Apostle saies of Christ; who, having made purgation of sinnes. So, neither are sins ransomed, but men from sinne; and yet he saith againe, Heb. IX. 15. . For the ransoming of the sinnes that were under the former Covenant. And this is the true sense of Dan. IV. 24. . Redeem thy sinnes. For, though a man ransomes not his sinnes, yet he ransomes him∣self from his sinnes, by repentance, as I said afore. So, seeing propitiation tends to make God propitious, of angry; It is manifest that , for variety, or brevity, or elegance of Language, stands for . As for the Hebrew verb, , whereof,  is alledged to be the Greek, in the signification of expiating a man of sin, which the sacrifice of Christ, does, say they, by perswading him to be a Christian; sometimes it is said of the Priest making propitiation for the sanctuary or the Altar, with the particle , or for the people, with the particle  as Levit. XVI. 33. And then, out of that which hath been said, it may appear, how the sacrifice is the consideration whereupon it is made. But, if it be said of God, as Jer XVIII. 23, Ps. LXXIX. 9. with the particle , it seems to expresse God propitious to sin, (when it is said; Be propitious to our sinnes: Be not propitious to their sinnes) without signfying, how, or upon what consi∣deration he becomes propitious. The Apostle saies againe, Ebr. IX. 11. That Christ entered into the Holy of Holies, not with the blood of goates and bullocks▪ but with his own blood, having found, that is, obtained, everlasting ransome. To wit, by the sacrifice of the Crosse. They say the indefinite tense signifies not alwaies the time past; And I grant, it is enough, that the time which it signifies be past to him that speaks, as  which you have so often in the Gospels, he answered and said, arguing no priority between answering and speaking. But necessarily, that our Saviour answered and said before the Evangelist related it, for sometimes it concerns not which is first, as, whether our Lord first answered or first said. So, Heb. II. 10. When therefore the Apostle saies, that Christ enter∣ed into the Holy of Holies, , he saith not, ; (which he might as easily have said) Nor meant, that he should or would finde ransome, by delivering his brethren from sinne; But that hee had found ransome, by paying the price of theire sinne. For, deliverance from sinne is future in respect of the Apostle, and the time when he writ. Which  cannot signify. Besides, if there be questi∣on, what but the nature of the thing signified can determine the order that is be∣tween them? Now, in our case, ransome is ascribed alwaies to the sacrifice, (as I have shewed) never, to the sprinkling of the bloud before the Propitia∣tory. So Heb. I. 3. when it is said, Christ having made purgation of sinnes, sate down at the right hand of God. For if it be said, that he made purgation of sin,
by that assurance of pardon, which the appearance of his bloud before God gives Christians; Manifest it is, that, what is attributed to the sprinkling of the bloud before the Propitiatory, must be understood to be effected by virtue of the blood shed at the Altar. The case is plaine, Heb. XII. 24 You are come to the bloud of sprinkling, that speakes better things then that of Abel. Abels bloud shed called for vengeance; Therefore, Christs bloud shed, for remission of sinnes. Herewith agreeth S. Paul Rom. III. 25. whom God hath proposed a Propitiatory through Faih in his bloud. Late Writers so translate , in the notion of a place, as  of the same orme. For my part, I rather follow Hesychi, or rather those that he followed, who most certainly, had regard to this text, when they expound , a purging sacrifice, or an Altar, as the meanes to make God propiti∣ous: Which is clear for our purpose. But whether the place, or the meanes, why did God appear propitiou▪ upon the Ark, but because made propitious by that which it signified, Christ incarnate, and by the bloud of the sacrifice signifying the bloud of his Crosse? Therefore they prayed towards the ark un∣der the Law, as under the Gospel towards the East, and found God propitious, because of the consideration in which they directed their prayers, directed by out Lord John XVII. 23-26. To which purpose we may observe the purging of the Altar, Tabernacle, and all within the vaile by the bloud of the sacrifi∣ces Levit. XVI. 16, 20, 33. Ezek. XLIII. 20, 22, 26. XLV. 20. For, what purging needed they, but, as they became polluted by the sinnes of the people; As the Land, which was holy, being polluted by bloud shed, must be cleansed by the bloud of him that shed it. Num. XXXV. 33? Therefore the Congregation be∣came guilty, when he that did a murther was not taken, because the Land was promised to the Congregation, and therefore an expiation is appointed, Deut. XX. 1▪ 10. In correspondence whereunto, it must be granted, that the world and the heavens being polluted with mans sinne, (which is that bondage of va∣nity and corruption, under which S. Paul saith, that the whole creature groaneth, desiring to be delivered into that freedome which the resurrection shall restore, Rom. VIII. 19▪ 22.) were to be expiated by the sacrifice of Christs body brought in, and his bloud sprinkled there Heb. IX. 23. that, in consideration of his obedience and sufferings, God might be found propitious there So the everlasting intercession of Christ, is grounded upon the everlasting ransome Ebr. VII. 24. This Priest remaining for ever, hath an everlasting Priesthood. Where∣fore, he is able, perfectly to save those that come to God by him, all wayes living to interceds for them, To wit, by pleading his owne blood, the ransome of all sinne. This is the ground of all our prayers, and the confidence which we may make them with, in particular, for the cleansing of sinne, after reconcile∣ment. Of which S. Paul Rom. VIII. 34. Christ it is that died, or rather that is risen again, who also is at the right hand of God, making intercession for us. And, this is the necessity of Christs sufferings, which the Apostle pleades Ebr. II. 14▪ 18. that he might be sensible of ours. For, if the guilt be taken away by his intercession succeeding his sufferings, then did he suffer that it might succeede. And thus are our sinnes forgiven for his name, or, by his Name, John II. 12. Which Socius will have to be Gods name▪ as in the Old Testament Es. XLIII 25. Psal. XXV. 11. LXXIX 9. CVI. 8. CXLIII. 12 But, if the name of God be in Christ under the ew Testament, as in the Angel that represented God in the Old as I have showed; then, when we pray in christs name, we pray in Gods name, though in consideration of Christs merits. Upon the premises depends the true meaning of all those Scriptures, where Christ is said to have died for us, and for our righteousnesse; Not as if the preposition for could determine whether we are to understand the finall cause in respect of man, to move him to accept of Christ, or the impulsive cause in respect of God, moving him to grant the Gospell. For, when S. John sayes, that we ought to lay downe our lives for the brehen▪ as Christ for us, John, III. 16. it is manifest, that our life is no ransom for the brethren, as Christs for
us: And, when S. Peter saith; He will lay down his life for Christ, John XIII. 37. 38. he meanes not, to move God thereby to spare his Masters life. And yet notwithstanding, when Esau sold his birthright for a messe of potage, Ebr. XII. 16. he gave away his birth right in consideration of it. And, should God have taken S. Paules life, upon condition of saving the Jews, they must have been saved in consideration of his becoming anathema for them, Rom. IX. 3. And Caiaphas thought that Christ must be destroyed, least the Ro∣manes should think, that they would rebell under him, as theire true Prince; and so it was necessary that Christ should dy for the people Joh, XI. 50. 51. 52. But, in what sense doe Christians find it true? Surely, no man that ever pray∣ed to God in Christs name need to be told it. It is requisite, therefore, that we have recourse to the consideration of those thinges, which the Scripture uses to joyne with the mention of Christs dying for us, if we will rightly de∣termine the meaning of it. And so, having premised the consideration of a sacrifice, upon which our sinnes were charged, of our ransome, by the price of it, of reconciliation and propitiation for sinne, obtained for us by it, we must conclude, that, when the Scripture speakes of Christs death for us, the mean∣ing of it cannot be satisfyed, by granting, that he died to move us to be Christians. CHAP. XXIX. The grant of Grace, in consideration of Christ, supposes satisfaction made by him for sinne. Neither our sinnes imputable to Christ, nor his sufferings to us, for∣mally and personally, but, as the meritorious causes which satisfaction answer∣eth. The effect of it, the Covenant of Grace, as well as help to performe it. The Fathers saved by the Faith of Christ to come. The Gospel a new Law. The property of Satisfaction and Punishment in Christs sufferings. Of the sense of the Catholike Church. THere remaines one argument from the premises, where I concluded, that effectuall Grace is appointed from everlasting, and therefore granted in time, in consideration of Christ and his merits, according to S. Paul, Ephes. I. 3-6. For, if this grace be granted in consideration of Christ, and life ever∣lasting appointed from everlasting, and granted in time, in consideration of that quality which this grace effcteth; it cannot in reason be avoided, that remission of sinne and life everlasting is granted here in right and title, and in effect in the world to come, in consideration of that quality, which the ef∣fectuall helps of Grace, of their own nature tend to produce, which they are appointed by God to produce, and which really and in effect, thus are produced, being granted by God, in consideration of Christs obedience. But why should I be so solicitous to restore all those Scriptures to their true meaning, which they have set upon the rack to make them speak a false, having such evidence of reason, that, by this position, they make the death of Christ voide, and need∣lesse, even in their owne judgement? For though, if they should say, that Christ came, onely to show those workes that migh be sufficient to make his Gospell credible, and give us good example; I could not say that the death of Christ were to no end; Yet would they say, that it were to no competent end, complaining, (as they do) how much they are wronged, when they are un∣derstood to acknowledge no further end of his coming. But, when they say, that he died to induce men to be Christians, by inacting the Covenant of Grace; (that is, assuring them, that God will stand to it on his part, and that, according to the example of Christ, bearing his Crosse, they shall attaine his glory) I de∣mand, how all this can be more assurance then every man hath, that is perem∣orily assured otherwise, (as no man doubts, but, competently it may be as∣sured
otherwise) that the Gospell of Christ is Gods message. For, when suf∣ficient evidence is once made, and a man is convinced to beleeve, that God promises remission of sinnes and everlasting life to them that imbrace it, can he that beleives God to be God, remaine any more doubtfull of the truth of his promise? To Pharao and to his people, it was necessary, that the wonders of God should be repeated, till they stood con∣vict, that there was no God else, which they beleived not afore: But, to them that admit the God of Israel to be the onely true God, being convict that the Gospell is his promise, is any further assurance requisite that he will stand to it, who were not God if he should not stand to it? when they say, that Christ died to the end that, being advanced to be God, he might be able to bring his promises to effect; I referre my selfe to the sense of any man that is able to thinke of God with due reverence, whether it be possible to im∣agine, that a meere man, having made promises to mankind in Gods name, can live with God, to see Gods promises frustrate: And, by consequence, whe∣ther it can appeare necessary, that our Lord Christ should be advanced to be God, that he might be able, in his owne person, to fullfill the promises which he had made us in his Fathers Name. I referre my selfe to that which I have said, to show, the word of God, which took the flesh of man from the Virgine, to be God from everlasting, as the Sonne of God, and his everlasting wisome and image: And therefore, not advanced to be God, in consideration of his obedience: But, that, having condescended to that state, which his obedience, in doing his fathers message and testifying the truth thereof, required; the Sonne of God incarnate, was advanced in our flesh, by the appointment of God, in reward of his obedience, to the privilege of sending the Holy Ghost, to make his Gospell effectuall to convert the nations to Christianity, that, by them he might be acknowledged, and glorified for that which he was from everlasting. So that, the end of his coming being, to obtaine that grace, by which the world might be converted to Christianity, and being converted, obtaine re∣mission of sinnes and life everlasting for it; and, neither of these purposes ad∣mitted by Socinus; we may well say to him, as S. Paul sayes to the Jews Gal. II, 21. If righteousnesse be by the Law, then is Christ deade in vaine; So, if righteousnesse came as Socinus would have it, then is Christ deade to no pur∣pose; Because, all that he requires might have been as well effected without it. Whereas, a due valuable consideration, in regard whereof, the converting grace of the Holy Ghost, and remission of sinnes and life everlasting in con∣sideration of the effect thereof, should be granted; could not have been had without it. It is strange to be observed, how litle Socinus hath to produce out of the scriptures, to prove a position of such consequence as this; All his businesse, (in a maner) being, to draw those texts, which heitherto have been under∣stood in the sense of the Church, to his intent. I can, for the present, recall no more, then those frequent passages of the Apostles, (especially S. Paul) whereby they affirme, the righteousnesse and salvation of Christians to come by the meere grace of God and our Lord Christ. Which I need not here re∣peate, no wayes apprehending the infernce; That it cannot be said to come from the meere grace of God, if I suppose the consideration of Christs obedi∣ence and sufferinges, as the purchase of it. It is true, in the wordes of the Prophet Jeremy XXXI. 34-34. (alleged by the Apostle Ebr. VIII. 8-12. to be meant of the Gospell) we find a promise of God to pardon the sinnes of his people, without expressing any consideration, in regard whereof he would doe it. And likewse our Lord, in the Parable of the master that forgave his servant ten thousand talents, Mat. XIIII. 23—. Seemes to expresse Gods pardon, which his Gospell publisheth, to be free from any consideration, in which it is either proclaimed or granted. But, as I said to our Antinomians, who will needes beleive, upon the warrant of the Prophets words, that their sinnes are pardoned, meerely in consideration of Christ, without regard to any disposition requisite to qualify them for it, by the Gospell; That it was neither
requisite nor fit, that the termes, upon which the blessinges promised by the Gospell are granted, should be expressed by the Prophey, that onely foretell∣eth the coming of it; (being to be gathered from that proportion, which the Law, in regard of the land of promise, holds to the Gospell, in regard of the world to come) So say I to the Socinians, who will needs have the same wordes to signify; That, supposing the disposition that qualifies for the pro∣mises of the Gospell, they suppose no consideration of the obedience of of Christ; That, (though the termes of the Gospell are not expressed by the Prophet, foretelling the coming of it, as being included in those of the Law, by virtue of the proportion aforesaid) it were strange to thinke, that the coming and death of Christ is not sufficient since, to determine the mean∣ing of the Prophets words to it. And so likewise, to the Parable, that, if our Saviour found it not fit to expresse the consideration; upon which the par∣don which the Gospell publishes is passed; yet, his death and suffringes com∣ing after, to interpret the intent of that which he hd said before▪ that was to be declared, it is strange, that they should not be thought sufficient, to adde that consideration, which, before, he had neither expressed nor de∣nyed. As for the free grace of the Gospell, I challenge all the reason in the world to say, If Gods free act, in providing the means of salvation by Christ, and sending him to publish the conditions upon which he is ready to be reconciled to those that accept them, (tendering withall, sufficient help so to doe) be not a valuable reason, for which the Gospell is to be called the Covenant of grace, though granted in consideration of tht ransome by Christ, which the free grace of God provideth. Whether our Antinomians have not as good reason to say, that the promises of the Gospell are not free, if they re∣quire the condition of Christianity, as the Socinians, if they suppose Christ, and his obedience. Here followes, I confesse, a very valuable reason of Socinus, so long as that satisfaction of Christ which the Church teacheth is not understood; which, it is no mervaile, if it cary them aside, not understanding the faith and doctrine of the Church aright. They allege, that there can be no ground in reason, up∣on which, one man may be punished for another mans sinne▪ Guilt, being a mo∣rall consequence of an act that is naturally past and gone▪ (that is, for the present, nothing in rerum natura) upon a due ground of reason, which imputes the acts of reasonable creatures to their account, because they are under a Law of doing thus and not otherwise. But, that th sinnes of one man should be imputed to another, who cannot be obliged for another, to doe or not to doe, that which redounds to the others account, if done, or not done; is no more possible, then, that he should have done, or not done that, which the other is supposed, to have done, or not done. If it be said, that Christ voluntarily took upon him the punishment of our sinnes, as a surety answeres for his freinds debt; It is acknowledged, that this way turnes off the Debt, from him that it is payd for, to the surety, but extinguishes it not, as the undergoing of punishment extinguishes the crime in all the Justice of the world, so that, he who had right to punish, can exact that no more, for which he hath received satisfaction once: Which is to say, that the sufferinges of Christ are not the punishment of our sinnes, And I truely doe freely acknowledge, that, the instances which have been brought, either out of the scriptures, to show, that one man hath been punished for another mans sin among civil people, (so that it is not to be thought against the light of nature) are either insufficient, or impertinent to the case. For, I have learned, from my beginning in the Schooles, that God, when he visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the children; does not inflict upon them more punishment then their owne sinne deserues, but, makes their sinnes his opportunity, of bringing to passe his judgements against the sinnes of their predecessors, or those who, in regard of other relations▪ are reasonably taken to be punished by their punishment. And this I will here prove no further; but, taking it for granted, inferre, that it comes not home to the case of our Lord Christ, purchasing us, by his
death, remission of sinnes, everlasting life. But my reason is, because, it is evident to me, that one mans doings or sufferings may be understood, or said, to be imputed to another, two wayes. First: immediately and personally, supposing that there is a ground in reason for it; And this, that opinion re∣quires, which holds, that faith which alone justifieth to consist in beleiving that a man is praedestinate to life meerely in consideration of Christs death, suffer∣ing for the elect alone; For, how should we be justified by beleeving this, but, supposing, that Christ suffered upon this ground, to this purpose? But, ha∣ving showed this opinion to be utterly false, by showing, that the Gospell sup∣poses the condition of Christianity in that Faith which alone justifieth; I must here presume, that this sense of the imputation of Christs merits, (and there∣fore, this intent of his death) is meerely imaginary: And the supposition whereupon it proceedes; to wit, that one mans doings or sufferings may be personally and immediately imputed to another mans account, utterly unrea∣sonable. And therefore must and doe say, that, as it is sufficient, so it is true, that the sufferings of Christ are imputed unto us in the nature of a meri∣torious cause, moving God, to gant mankind those termes of reconcilement which the Gospell importeth. This is evident by the opposition which S. Paul maketh, betweene the disobedience of Adam and the obedience of Christ, Rom. V. 12. 18. 19. Where, discovering the ground of our reconcilement with God, whch the Gospell publisheth, he imputeth it to the obedience of Christ, in the rest of his discourse attributing it to his death. For, having said, that Christ died for us being sinners, and that we are justified by his bloud, and reconciled by the death of his sonne, being enimies, he inferreth; therefore as by one man sinne came into the world, and death by sinne, and so death passed upon all; Signifying▪ by the other part of the comparison, which he rendreth not till after a distance, that; As by the offense of one it came to all men to condem∣nation, so, by the righteousnesie of one, it came to all men, to justification of life: For, as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners, so, by the obe∣dience of one many shall be made righteous. And hereupon, as the exaltation of Christ is imputed to his obedience in the state of his humiliation, (by S. Paul, Phil. II. 8. he humbled himselfe, becoming obedient unto death) So are the effects and consequences thereof, (Rom. IV. 25. who was delivered for our trans∣gressions, and rose againe for our justification) to be ascribed to the same. And, that which the Father proclaimes of the sonne, Mat. III. 17. XVII. 5. This is my beloved sonne in whom I am well pleased: cannot be understood in any other regard, but, of his obedience, performed, in publishing the message which the Father sent him upon into the world, and suffering for it; (in which, he testifies so often in S. Johns Gospell, that he came not to doe his owne will but his Fathers, that he sought not his owne glory but his Fathers, he did not, he said not any thing of himselfe, but what he had seen his Father doe, what he had heard his Father say; that it were tedious to repeate the severall places) And this according to the figure of David Psal. XI. 9. 10. then said I, Lo I come. In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fullfill thy will: I am content to doe it, O Lord; yea, thy Law is within my heart. Whereupon the Apostle saith, that we are sanctified by this will, through the once offering of the bo∣dy of Jesus Christ, Ebr. IX. 9. to wit, the will of God, which, by doing his will, Christ had moved to favor us. Even as, in the figure, punishment is re∣mitted re∣mitted to Davids posterity, for the promise indeed 2 Kings VIII. 19. XX. 6. 1 Kings XI. 3. but made, in consideration of Davids obedience 2 Sam. VII. 18. Here, I suppose further, that, this obedience of Christ is not tenderd as of Debt; (which, they that beleeve him to have been borne a meere creature must hold) But, having proved, that he assumed mans nature, being the Word of God, God of God from everlasting afore, doe necessarily presume, that this obedience, being undue, is meritorious to whatsoever purpose God, that sent him, accepts it. And hereupon inferr, that God granted those termes of recon∣cilement, which the Gospell importeth, (in derogation to his owne originall
Law) in consideration of it. For, I doe suppose, that man, being fallen from God, yet knowing God, and himselfe to have been made by God, and to be governed by his providence; necessarily understood himselfe to be under the obligation of making God the end of all his actions, and therefore, of injoying no creature otherwise then the service of God should either require or allow. Though, that ignorance of God, which originall concupiscence hath since brought into the world, through the worship of Idols, and the corruptions that attend upon the same, had since so extinguished or darkned the light of nature in man that the greatest part of mankind, though they could not deny this truth, neverthelesse held it prisoner in unrighteousnesse, as S. Paul sayes Rom. I. 18. This is that which I call the originall Law of God, the trans∣gression whereof bindeth over to that punishment, which God by his word declareth. And of this Law, the necessary immediate consequence is, that we submit to all such Lawes as God shall publish to man, in as much as he re∣quires, and upon such penalties as he declares. So that, by publishing the Gospell, the originall Law of God is not abrogated, continuing still the rule of mens actions, but rather strengthened, and inlarged to all those precepts, which are positive under the Gospell, and come not from the light of nature, as necessary conditions to salvation in all estates; But, the publication of the Gospell is a dispensation in the exercise and execution of the originall Law, by the penalty which it in acteth, in consideration of Christs obedience; though, (being generall to all mankind after the publishing of it) it may be called a New Law, as proposing new termes of salvation, which, if any man challenge to be a derogation to Gods originall Law, I will not contend about words. As for the Law of Moses, if we consider it, as containing the termes upon which that people held the land of promise, the publishing of the Gospell nei∣ther abrogates it nor derogates from it; Being onely given to hold till the time of reformation, as the Apostle calls it Ebr. IX 10. therefore expiring when the Gospell was published, which limited the intent of it. But if we consider it as containing an intimation of that spirituall obedience which God required of those that would be saved under that light, by the outward and civil obedience of those positive precepts, whereby they were restrained from the worship of Idols and commerce with Idolatrous nations▪ in proportion to the reward of the world to come, signified by the happinesse of the land of promi∣se; then must we acknowledge another dispensation in the same originall Law, by the Law of Moses, and for the time of it, which was also in force under the Fathers from the beginning, though not burthened which that multitude of positive precepts which the Law of Moses brought in, for the condition upon which they were to hold the land of promise. And, in opposition to those, it is called, by the Fathers of the Church, the Law of Nature, not in opposi∣tion to Grace; The very giving it by Gods voluntary appearing to the Fa∣thers and instructing them by familiar conversation, as it were, being a work of meere grace; as also the effect of it, in the workes of their con∣versation, which we find so truly Christian, that the Fathers of the Church doe truly argue from thence that Judaisme is younger then Christi∣anity. And therefore, I do here acknowledge, this his dispensation, by which the Fathers obtained salvation before the Gospell, to have been granted also in consideration of that obedience, which our Lord Christ had taken upon him to performe in the fullnesse of time; Nothing hindering us to understand, in Gods proceeding, with them, something like that, which, in the civil law is called novatio or delegatio, renwing of bonds, or assignation of payment; Gods ac∣cepting the interposition of our Lord Christ to the reconcilement of them, being, as if he accepted a new bond for an old debt, or, of payment by proxy, to be made at a certaine terme. This is a point as manifest in the Scriptures of the New Testament, as it was requisite, that a point not concerning the salvation of those that live under the New Testament, but, the understanding of the reason thereof in the salvation of those that died under the Old, for
the maintenance of it against unbelevers, should be manifest. For S. Paul thus writeth 1 Cor. X. 1-4. I would not have you ignorant brethren, that our Fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and all were baptized unto Moses in the cloude, and in the Sea, and all eate the same spirituall meate, and all drank the same spirituall drink. For they all drank of the spiri∣tuall rock that followed them; Now the rock was Christ. They that entred in∣to a Covenant of workes to obtaine the Land of promise, as I have showed they did, entred not expressely into a Covenant of Faith in Christ, for obtaining the world to come. No more then, being baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the Sea, as he sayes here they were, (that is, into his goverment, into the observation of the Lawes he should give, in hope of the promises he should give) they can be said to have been baptized expressely into Christ, and that profession which his promises require. Wherefore when he saith; that the rock was Christ; his meaning is not immediately, and to those that rested in this temporall Covenant of workes; But as the Manna was Christ, and Moses was Christ, by the meanes of that faith, which God then received at their hands; to wit, the assurance of everlasting happinesse, for them, who under this call∣ing, should tender God the spirituall obedience of the inward man; upon those grounds, which, his temperall goodnesse, the tradition of their Fathers, and the instruction of their Prophets afforded at that time. Now, I appeale to the sense of all men, how those can be said to have that interest in Christ, which, I have showed that Christians have, (and therefore upon the same ground) if there were no consideration of Christ, in the blessings of Christ which they in∣joyed. Wherefore, when S. Paul proceeds hereupon to exhort them, not to tempt Christ as some of them tempted, we must not understand, that he forbids us to tempt Christ, as they tempted God; But, that they also tempted Christ, who went along with them, in that Angel, in whom the name of God, and his word was, as I said afore, So, when the Apostle saith that Moses counted the re∣proch of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Aegypt, for he looked at the re∣cempense of reward; Ebr. XI. 26 when, putting them in mind to follow their teachers, considering the end which they had attained, and Moses, aimed at, he addeth; Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for everlasting, Ebr. XIII. 8. when S. Peter sayes, that, the Prophets, who foretold the Gos∣pell, searched, against what time the Spirit of Christ, that was in them, declared and testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glorious things that fol∣lowed, 1 Pet. I. 10. when S. Paul saith, that all Gods promises are yea and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. I. 20. me thinkes it is strange, that a Christian should imagine, that there was no confideration of Christ in these promises, under which they ranne the race of Christians. Nor could S. Paul say; As by Adam all dy, so by Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. XV. 22; Nor could the comparison hold, betweene the first and second Adam, which he makes Rom. V. 12-19. if that life, which, I have showed how Christ restores Christians to, were given to the Fathers before Christ without confideration of Christ. Nor could the Apostle otherwise say; That Christ is the mediator of a New Covenant, that, dth coming, for the ransome of those transgressions that were under the Old, they that are called may receive the promise of an everlasting inheritance. Ebr. IX. 15. but because those sinnes which were redeemed onely to a temporall effect, by the sacrifices of the Old Law, (as also those, which were not redeemed at all by any, as I said) were, by the sacrifice of Christ, redeemed, to the purchase of the world to come. Which is that which S. Paul tells the Jewes Acts XIII. 29. that, through Christ, every one that beleeveth is justifiyed from all thinges which they could not be justified of by the Law of Moses. For, as the Law did not expiate capitall offenses, so, it expiated none, but to the effect of a civil promise. And, though we construe the wordes of S. John Apoc. XIII. 8. whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lambe, slaine from the foun∣dation of the world, out of the same sense repeated Apoc. XIII. 8. Not, that the Lambe was slaine from the foun∣dation of the world, but, that their names were written in his book from the foundation of the world: yet, in as much
as it is called the book of the Lambe, that was foreknown from the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. I. 19. when Moses demands, not to be written in Gods book, or, when mention is made of it in the New Testament, it must be the book of Christ in the mysticall sense. And when S. Paul sayes; that Christ gave him∣selfe a ransome for all: A testimony for due time; What can he meane, but that, though he gave himselfe for all, yet, this was not to be testified till the proper time of preaching the Gospell? And what is this, but that, though this is testified onely by the preaching of the Gospell, yet he was a ransome for all. Which reason suffers not the same terme all, Ebr. II. 9. Rom. III. 23. to be restrained from that generality which it naturally signifies. Lastly, when the Apostle argues; that, if Christ should offer himselfe more then once, that he might, more then once, enter into the Holy of Holies; he must have suffered oft from the foundation of the world; that is, before the end of the world, in which he came indeed Ebr. IX. 25. 26. he must needs suppose, that he suffered for all that were saved before the Gospell. For, what pretense can there be that he should suffer for sinnes under the Gospell before the Gospell, more then, that the High Priest, before the Law, should expiate those sinnes which were committed against the Law, by entring into the Holy of Holies. And here you may see▪ that I intend not to affirme, that all that were saved under the Law, though in consideration of Christ, did know, in what considera∣tion Christ should be their salvation, as Christians under the Gospell doe; But to referre my selfe to the determination of S. Augustine, and other Fathers and Docters of the Church; that they understood it in their Elders, and Superiors, the Prophets of God, and their disciples, the Judges of Israell, (who were also Prophets) and the Fathers of severall ages, of whom you read Ebrews XI. who, being acquainted with the secret of Gods purpose, were to acquaint the people with it, so sparingly and by such degrees, as the secret wisdome of God had appointed. These things thus premised, I do acknowledge, and challenge, the act of God, in dispensing in the execution of his originall Law, and bringing the Gospel into effect in stead of it, not to be the act of a private person, remitting this particular interest in the punishment of those sinnes whereby his Law was transgressed; But the act of a Master of a houshold, or the Prince and Sover∣raigne of a Comonwealth, which you please, disposing of mankind as his subjects or houshold servants. Not denying, that a man, considered as free from all obligation of civile Society, and a member of no Common-wealth; that a Soveraigne in respect of another Soveraigne; yea, in some sort, the subject of one Soveraigne in regard of another Soveraigne and his subjects, may have right to exact punishment, which he may as freely remit: but resolving, that whatsoever can be said of such cases, is impertinent to ours; God being, ne∣cessarily and essentially, Soveraigne Prince over his own subjects, his creatures, and master of them, as his houshold goods. And this act, whereby he dispenseth in the effect of his originall Law, so as to introduce another in stead of it, being such, that his glory must necessarily consist in the consideration upon which it is done, as the principall act that can be done, in the government of the prin∣cipall creature. And therefore, I say on the other side, that the cases of Damon and Phintias the great freinds, (whereof the one suffered, or would have suffered for the other under Dionysius the Usurper of Sicily) and of Zal∣ecus, (who, having made a Law, for his Countrey to punish adulterers with losse of both eyes, and, his sonne being taken in adultery, pulled out one of his own and one of his Sons, to satisfy the Law) are not pertinent to our case. Suppose a friend had right to lay down his life for a friend; Suppose the Usur∣per had right to take away one life, and to accept another for it: Suppose Zal∣eucus had right to dispose of his own eye to his sons interest; suppose the peo∣ple, that inacted the Law, did dispense so farre in it: The effect of a civile Law is utterly satisfied, by the evil once suffered, (proportionable to the for∣feit, in the judgement of the Law, (not considering out of what intent of mind it was suffered, nor claiming any thing further, when it is suffered. But I
have shewed, that the sufferings of Christ were accepted of God to the redem∣tion of mankind, in consideration of that free and pure obedience to God wherewith they were tendered to God, not to satisfy his wrath against us, by the evill which he indured, (for the time of meer punishment is not till the World to come) but that he might shew that virtue, and that obedience, which is not to be showed, but through the difficulty of afflictions: And this, not to the effect of making personall and immediate recompense for the sinnes of so many as shall be saved; (which, were it made, God could not in any justice, impose upon them any condition, for obtaining remission of those sinnes, which he had received satisfaction for) But to give God that sa∣tisfaction, (by so undue and so perfect obedience in such trials, that the world can never see the like virtue) as might move him, in consideration thereof, abating that debt of punishment which we are ingaged to, by transgressing his Originall Law, to publish an act of Grace, admitting all to remission of sinnes, and right to life everlasting, that will undertake to live true Christians. And this consideration, I conceive I may say, redounds as much to the glory of God, as it is possible to conceive, that any can do; There being nothing more valuable then this obedience, nothing more acceptable in him that is a sinner, then new obedience for the future. But, the consideration in the meane time, not personall, but in the nature of the meritorious cause, to which all satisfaction is reducible, as purchasing freedome from evil, though not right to good: For no mans debt is immediately paid by the paine which Christ suf∣fered, but, in consideration of his obedience to God in undergoing such trials, all that will undergo the condition are admitted to remission of sins and ever∣lasting life. Therefore, the punishment which Christ indures for our sinnes, importeth not that there was any ground of reason, why he should be accounted to have done them, or we accounted to have undergone his sufferings; But, in regard of the evill which he suffered, in consideration of our sinnes, with an intent to take them away in freely offering himself, to undergo what God should think fit to that purpose, neither can it be pretended, that any thing is wanting, to manifest the justice of Gods proceeding with him, nor the reason why it re∣dounds to our benefit. Now Socinus, having in detestation that opinion, which, places justifying faith in believing that we are predestinate in conside∣sideration of the merits of Christ, suffering onely for the elect; And abhor∣ring as much the doctrine of the Church, which he took to be tainted with the levain of Antichrist, from the Apostles time; It remained, that he should runne into another extreme, making the Gospel an act of Gods Grace exclu∣ding all consideration of Christ, which could not be brought in but by voiding the Faith of the holy Trinity into the bargaine. But, though I allow Socinus to dispute, whether the sufferings of Christ be properly the punishment of our sinnes, or not; because I have showed, that they are not the punishment which civile Lawes require; (though, not allowing him to blame S. Au∣gustine, or other Church Writers, that have so called them, much lesse to de∣part from the Faith of the Church, for the signification of a word) yet can it not be denied, that the death of Christ is properly satisfaction, upon the pre∣mises. For, satisfaction is, properly, a payment that may be refused, as not in the nature and kind of that which was due. Suppose, for the purpose, when a band is forfeit, the forfeit incurred, recompense satisfies not. Indeed, it is contrary to naturall equity in man, to refuse to be satisfied with such a re∣compense as makes up his interest: But between God and man it is otherwise. For, the forfeit of sin consisting in this, that the act is done which cannot be un∣done; Suppose the sufferings of Christ, (supposing his divine nature from everlast∣ing) both voluntary and meritorious of themselves, and that to an unvaluable value, even in justice; yet are they refutable in point of Gods justice, because he i not to be obliged by any thing, as receiving advantage by it. But, being accepted by him, they become a full recompense, to the purpose for which they are ten∣dered,
that is, for the obtaining of pardon and salvation for them that imbrace Christianity, and that, in the strict and rigorous estimate of justice, for the in∣finite value of the person from whom they proceed. And this according to Ʋlpiane 46. ff. III. L. 52. Satisfactio est pro solutione; Satisfaction is that which succeeds in stead of payment not made: And according to Caius 2 ff. VIII. 1 Satisfacere est desiderium alicujus implere. To satisfie is to fulfill a mans desire. For, that God cannot be obliged but by his own will, to accept it to this effect; whereas man is bound by natural equity, to accept that for full satisfaction, which makes up his whole intresse, when civile Law oblies him not; Makes the tender of Christ no lesse the substitute, to our payment of that debt which Gods Law requireth, (for, how is it lesse fit to be tendred, when it is not due to be accepted, then when it is?) no lesse able to fulfill Gods de∣sire; seeing nothing can be imagined more acceptable to him, then the volun∣tary obedience of his own sonne; consisting in those sufferings, wherein, the greatest virtue that mans nature is capable of was seen: and tending to the re∣demption of mankind, which his love to his creature inclined him so much o desire, as his wisdome found to comport with his native goodnesse, and the ex∣ercise of his justice. I shall not here, as in other points, stand to clear the Faith of the Catholike Church. When Pelagius is alleged for one, that held not the satisfaction of Christ; it is plain enough, that it can have no footing in, or allowance, from the authority of the Church, which hath disclaimed Plagius. Onely we may take notice, how well, the evidence which the witnesse and practice of the Church renders to the rule of Faith, is understood by them, who, in stead of alledging some allowance of the Church▪ (by some person of noted credit open∣ly professing it, and nevertheless esteemed to be of the Church) name us one that was cast out of the Church for holding it, whether expresly or by consequence. As for Lactantius, who, alleging the suffering of Christ for our example, addes further neverthelesse, pro crimine nostro, for our crime. Instit. IV. 23, 24, 26. Though I might safely have said, as afore, that a word of his upon the by may well have past without censure, because his credit was not such in the Church, as to create appearance of offense; Yet I shall not need to have recourse to this answer, his own words having given so much advantage, for a fair inter∣pretation of his meaning, in the sense of the Church. As for Ptrus Abailar∣dus, that is thought to have said something to the same purpose, I shall not need to insist what his opinion was. For, as I allow, that he lived in such an age, when something that is true might be entertained with the censure of the Church; So, when it is said to be in a point, wherein he is prtizane with Pe∣lagius, the Church that condemned him must needs, in condemning him for i, be partizane with the Church that condemned Pelagius. I will onely allege here, a doctrine, which, I take to be generally received by the ancient Fathers of the Church; That the devil, by bringing Christ to death, that had not sin∣ned, forfeited that power of death, which the Apostle speakes of Heb. II. 14. to wit, that which he had over man that had sinned, in bringing him to death. And I allege it because, the Socinians seem to take it for granted, that the Church is now ashamed to maintaine this, which, I confesse, I am not. For, if the devil be Prince of this World, as our Saviour calls him, John XIV. 30. be∣cause he is imployed by God as his Goaler, (or the executioner of those judge∣ments, to which he abandons those that forsake him, by giving them up to his temptations) shall we not understand, the justice of God to be seen towards him in limiting this imployment, as under the grace of Christ we believe it is limited, in consideration of his attempting upon Christ beyond his commission, because without right, he being without sinne? And therefore, the justice of God having appointed him this imployment, and, this justice satisfied by the obedience of Christ; it is but due consequence, that this imployment, in which the principality of this World consisteth, should become forfeit and vode, so farre as the Grace of Christ determineth it. By virtue of which reason, our Lord Christ rising from death, because, not having sinned, he could not be ld by
death, drawes after him all, that, upon the sound of his Gospel, imbrace the profession of Christianity. CHAP. XXX. God might have reconciled man to himself without the coming of Christ. The promises of the Gospel depend as well upon his active as passive obedience. Christ need not suffer ell panes that we might not. The opinion that maketh justi∣fying Faith to be trust in God not true; Yet not prejudiciall to the Faith. The decree of the Council of Trent, and the doctrine of the Schoole; how it is not prejudiciall to the Faith. As also that of Socinus. I Will not leave this point, till I have inferred, from that which hath been said, the resolution of two or three points in question, necessarily following upon it. And first, that, though, as I have said, it is impossible for the wit of man to propose any course, for the reconciling of men to God, by which, the glory of God▪ in the exercise of his divine perfections should have been more seen, then is that which it pleased God to take; Yet was it not impossible for his divine wisdome to have taken other courses to effect the same, his glory remaining in∣re, according as S. Augustine hath long since resolved; Though, to the great displeasure of all them, who distinguish not the imagination of immediate satisfaction by the death of Christ for the sinnes of them that shall be saved, from that dispensation in the Originall Law of God, which the Gospel decla∣reth to all that imbrace the terms of it; To the effect whereof, I have showed, that God provided and accepted it. For, if God did not provide, no accept de facto the death of Christ, for immediate satisfaction to his vindicative justice, in behalf of their sinnes that shall be saved▪ Then was he not tied in point of right, to seek that satisfaction for the same, either from Christ, or from us. And truly, this opinion, (that God was tied to execute his vindicative justice either upon Christ or us) seems to represent God to the fansies of Christians, as taking content in the evils and torments which Christ suffered, (that being the onely recompense that vindicative justice seeks) without consideration of that perfect obedience and zeale to Gods glory in the saving of his creature, together with his justice and holinesse, in regard whereof God indeed accept∣eth the same. Now, though it be necessary, for the maintenance of Christiani∣ty, to say; that, the course which God takeh for the reconciling of man to himself, according to it, preserveth his glory intire, as being agreeable to his divine perfections; (For, to say, that man cannot propose a course more for his glory then that which it advanceth, is rather honourable for Christianity then necessary for the maintenance of the truth of it) yet, to say, that Gods wisdome, in designing this course according to the exigence of all his perfections, is so exhausted and equalled by the work of it (as it were) that his own wisdome could have designed no other course to attaine te same end, preserving his own glory intire; is to make the wisdome of God subject to be comprehended by man, supposing what he hath revealed of the workes of it. But, as nothing is more derogatory to the glory of God, then to say, that God can do nothing but that which h doeth; So, supposing the fall of man, the will of God to propagate mankind, and to tender him meanes of re∣concilement; To say, that God could take no other course to effect this, but that which e took is, without doubt, in the next degree, derogatory to his glory In the next place, I inferre, that, as well the active as the passive obedience of Christ is imputed to us, in consideration of remission of sinnes, and ever∣lasting life. It is said, that this opinion; That we are justified onely in considerati∣on of the sufferings of Christ; was first heard of in the parts of Germany, con∣tained in the upper Palatiate: And, being consured by the Divines of Wittem∣berg,
went no further among those of the confession of Augsburg. But the remains of it subsisting at Heidelberg, John Cameron, it seems, studying there in his younger time▪ brought it with him into the Reformed Churches of France. Where it caused such a heate as had come to a breach, had not the dispute been put to silence. I have not seen what reasons that ingenuous man maintained it with: This I may take upon me to say; One of the principall was this; Be∣cause, that which we are released of in consideration of Christ, that of Christ, is imputed to us, not that which we are not: Now, as it is certaine, that we are released of punishment in consideration of Christ; So, it is certaine, that we are not released of the obligation to new obedience, according to the per∣formance or neglect whereof God will judge us. Therefore, in regard of the sufferings of Christ, our debt of punishment is discharged; whereas, were the active obedience of Christ imputed unto us, we could not stand bound to the like obedience, nor be judged by our bond to it. So that, ascribing remission of sinnes to the sufferings of Christ, and Faith in his bloud alone, he ascribeth salvation to our new obedience▪ according to the manifest sentence of the Scri∣pture, which I have produced in due place. In the mean time, you see this opinion stands upon the same imaginary presumption of the immediate and personall imputation of Christs death, in consideration of the remission of sin, which the adversaries thereof proceed upon, as well in consideration of Gods assigning everlasting life, as of his forgiving of sinne. And therefore I shall easily shut it out of doors, upon supposition▪ first, of that which hath been said concerning the condition that quallifieth for remission of sinnes; Having shewed, that it is no other faith, but the sincere and cordiall proession of Christianity. Secondly, of that which hath been sad here, to show, that the immediate imputation of any thing done or sffered by Chist to any mans person, in satisfaction for his sinnes▪ is a meer imagination which the Gospel of Christ never taught us; But onely, that, in consideration of the obedience of Christ, in publishing the Gospel, under such difficulties as ended in the death of the Crosse, God grants remission of sinnes, and life everlasting, to all them that take upon them resolutely and sincerely to professe Christianity. For, these things being admitted, it is manifest, that, as well the active as he passive obedience of Christ is considered, in passing the promises wich the Gospel brings, upon the terms which it requires. Neither indeed, can there be any consideration of Christs sufferings in the businesse, without the consideration of the free an voluntary and perfect obedience which he undertook and un∣derwent them wth; All the course of his life, wherein he displayed that onely accomplished mirour of virtue hat ever the Sun saw, being a continual course of suffering that hardship, which he was no otherwise obliged to undergo, then because he had undertaken to show uch example, to such effect nd purpose. And therefore, if any Scriptures eem to make mention of his sufferings, with∣out speaking of that obedience which he undertook and indured them with; It is easie to have recourse unto those, whereby, I have showed the account which God had, of that free and constant obedience, which he undertook and went through them with. And truly it is an inconsequence which no reason par∣dons, to imagine any other consideration for that remission of sinnes which the Gospel tenders▪ then, for everlasting life: Seeing it is manifest, that the Gospel tenders not remission of sins, without everlasting life; Nor can any man attain really the state of remission of sinnes, without attaining as really and effectually the right of everlasting life. For, as it is evident in reason, that in what conside∣rations God one day actually gives everlasting life, in that consideration he de∣ermined from everlasting to give it; So it is no lesse evident, that, the person that becomes so qualified, as the Gospel requires, is, at that time, and from that time that he becomes so qualified, invested in the right of those promises which the Gospel tenders, in the same consideration, for which they are either granted from everlasting, or bestowed in due time. And I conceive, that neither Cameron nor any of his opinion would undertake, that eternall life is assigned to the new obedience of Christians, without consideration of what Christ hath
done for us, which surely, was not done, but in suffering, and by suffering for us. It is therefore for the honour of Christianity, to maintaine, that God, for Christs sake, is ready to admit the heirs of everlasting damnation into the inhe∣ritance of everlasting happinesse, in never so short a time, as we can believe, that they can change their resolution from following sinne, to professe that be∣lief and conversation which Christianity importeth. Suppose we believe Zo∣simus, when, to the disgrace of it, he reports, that Constantine was perswaded to become Christian, in hope to come clear of those sinnes, which were so great, that he could find no other meanes to expate them; Provided we un∣derstand alwayes the condition which Christianity requires. Be a mans by∣past sinnes greater or lesse, it is the claime of Christianity, that there is no sinne so small as to be clensed without it, none so great as not to be cleansed by it, all in consideration of Christ whom it preacheth. If this be as soone done as a mans mind can change, it is to be remembred, that the change of a mans mind infers the change of all his life that remaines; and, that the change of his life must obtaine the effect of those promises, the right whereof he is invested with upon the change of his mind, all in the same precious consideration of our Lord Christ and his obedience. Lastly, I inferre, that there is no reason to imagine, that the redemption of mankind should require our Lord Christ to suffer the paines of the damned, supposing, that we are delivered from damnation, by his sufferings; And therefore, that this cannot be the intent of Christs descent into hell, which the Apostles Creed declares. I pretend not here to dispute what are the paines of the damned, or what were the paines of the soul which our Lord Christ indure∣ed upon the Crosse; Or, in order to it▪ How essentially requisite it is, in the paines of the damned, that they should despair of Gods favour for ever, and therefore, ever to come free of that estate. This I inferre upon the premises, that the redemption of mankind doth not require, that Christ should suffer the same kind of paines, which we must have suffered, had not e interposed for us; But, that he tendred that obedience to God, in undergoing, whatsoever, the execution of that commission, which God hd imposed upon him, required, which, coming from the Sonne of God, was valuable in worth, to move God to dispense in that Original Law, which he had made the rule of our actions, by right of our creation, upon paine of everlasting death, and to allow everlasting life upon remission of sinnes, to all that should imbrace Christianity. For, see∣ing the sufferings of Christ were not intended meer for punishment, (so that, he induring that which we were liable to, we should no longer remaine chargeable with it) but to tender God a consideration, valuable to satisfy him, not to ex∣ecute the penalty of his Originall Law upon us, but to abate of it by tendring us new terms of reconcilement and peace with him; there can be no reason why he should undergo the same kind and nature of punishment, which we must have suffered had not e interposed. And therefore, whatsoever the paines were which Christ indured in his soule, either upon the Crosse, or in order to his Crosse, being abandoned by God to the will of Satan and his ministers, even unto death; (which here I am not concerned to dispute) this I must inferre from the premises; That we are to seeke for no other consideration for which we are admitted to Grace, but that, which, the whole tenor of the Scriptures, and the consent of Christs Church holds forth to us: that is to say, the precious bloud of our Lord Christ shed upon the Crosse for us. Having thus excluded the two extreme opinions concerning the justification of sinners by the Gospell of Christ, which, I hold to be equally destructive to Christianity on contrary sides, the one acknowledging no condition to qua∣lify us for the promises of the Gospell, but the immediate imputation of the merits and sufferings of Christ, sent to dy for us; The other acknowledging no consideration of Christ, in sending, or accepting the Covenant of Grace, and the condition which it requires; I will now proceed to resolve the merit of meane opinions concerning the same, from the premises. The first is the opinion of many of the Reformation, that make the justification of sinners by
the Gospell to consist in remission of sinnes, tendred and imbraced by that Faith, which consisteth in a resolution of trusting and reposing confidence in God, for the obtaining of his promises tendred us in Christ Jesus; But, supposing allwayes and premising Repentance, as a condition requisite to make this confidence lively and Christian, not sensuall, carnall, and presumtive; And supposing allwayes, and inferring upon it, the promise of Gods spirit, sanctifying, and inabling to performe that new obedience, which qualifieth for the world to come. That there is this opinion amongst the Reformed, and those of them, that labor most to interpret the Reformation so, as not to contradict the Faith of the Church; I may well say, without going further then my selfe, who doe acknowledge this to have been mine opinion for many yeares, and doe certainly know that it was maintained in my time, against the furious pretenses of Zelots, in the University of Cambridge. And of this opi∣nion I will say three thinges. First, that it is not destructive to the true Faith of Gods Church. My reason is, because of that Repentance which it suppos∣eth, and the consideration of new obedience in obtaining everlasting life, which it inferreth. For, Repentance, in this argument, cannot signify conver∣sion from any particular sinne, but the change of the whole man, of his inten∣tions, and by consequence of his actions, to seek God, in stead of himselfe and this world: And therefore containeth in it, whatsoever the Gospell can require, to make any man, that is surprised in the state of sinne, capable of Gods grace by Christ; In as much as this change cannot be wrought, without the tender of pardon for Christs sake, upon that which his Gospell requireth. For, Repentance thus understood, as it turneth from all sinne, so it import∣eth a resolution, to all that goodnesse which Christianity prescribeth; Which is all, that he who is presently surprised in sinne can have, to come out of it; supposing this resolution not to be suppericiall, but rooted in him by frequent prayers, and teares, which such workes of humiliation as are one∣ly able, and absolutely requisite to make effectuall impression in mans mind, allwayes apt, through variety of objects, to entertaine impressions tending to contrary resolutions. And therefore, this Repentance being required to the truth of living and justifying Faith, as new obedience to the attaining of the world to come; And, every thing required by Gods Law, being of ne∣cessity that which qualifyeth for Gods promises, in his account who tenders the Law; The condition which this opinion requireth, to qualify for the promises of the Gospell, is materially, and for the things it contains, the same which I have showed that the Gospell requires: Though formally, and in ex∣presse termes it renounces all consideration, in the justification of sinners, but that of Christ and his obedience imbraced by Faith, as I have said. This I may say, that, in the remembrances of those thinges which I have said in publick to the people, concerning this point, during the time that I was of this opinion, I doe not remember now that their is any thing, that I could not presently say; my Judgment being thus farre chang∣ed. For, secondly, I must say, that this opinion is not true. As may appear by that which hath been said, to show, what it is the Gospell requires on our part▪ to qualify us for the promises which it tenders on Gods; and, by consequence, what is that Faith which alone justifieth. For, having showed the true sense of the Scriptures, according to that which the Jewes opinion that S. Paul disputs against, (still extant and visible in their Constitutions) which the consent of Christs Church, which the consequences of the difference between the literall and mysticall sense of Moses Law, (pointed out in part by some moderne writers) hath taught me; I doe conclude, the sense of them which this opinion inferreth, though it be not destructive to Christianity, yet, not deducible from the principles of it, by good divinity. And truly, to re∣quire repentance to the truth of that faith which onely justifieth, and not to make it part of that quality, in consideration whereof, God, for Christs sake, allowes remission of sinnes; is to say thinges utterly inconsequent: In
as much as I have said, that Gods consideration imports onely this, that he decrees remission of sinnes for repentance in the nature of a motive cause, not that he is moved by repentance to decree it. Neither is it any way consequent for him that admitteth new obedience to be in consideration, in bestowing everlasting life, to stick at admitting repentance to be in consideration, in bes∣towing the right of it. For, though the promises of the Gospell in this life are many, (remission of sinnes, and reconcilement, regeneration, justifica∣tion, sanctification, adoption of sonnes, and, if there be any thing else of that ranke) yet, whatsoever difference a divine may justly argue between these from the Scriptures, it were a grosse inconvenience to say, that, the condition of the Gospell being performed, they are not all due to him in whome it is found. The terme of sanctification it selfe, though it necessarily imports the habituall dwelling of the Holy Ghost in him that is reconciled to God, because we know the Gospell promises it; yet, it supposes not onely that promise, but also another, that God will accept it for holinesse, in him, in whome originall concupiscence, notwithstanding, remains. And, if the terme of regeneration import that inhaerent disposition of mind, to which a man, by becoming a Christian is borne a new; yet, that of adoption ex∣presses the free will of God, by which he accepteth him that i changed to such a disposition, for his sonne. So that, neither remission of sinnes, nor right to the kingdome, can be understood to be assigned under the title of justificati∣on, in consideration of Christ, without consideration of that condition which the Gospell of Christ requireth. Lastly I say, that the said opinion is apt to give just occasion of a mistake in justifying Faith, that may be destructive to the Christian Faith. My reason is, be∣cause it is hard so to provide, (as heitherto sufficient provision could never be made) as to distinguish from it the opinion of justification, by beleeveing that Christ died for him that beleeves, as one of the Elect, for whome alone Christ died; Which is no lesse destructive to the Faith, then the Haeresy of the Antinoians, that a man is justified in consideration of Christ, before we beleeve it. And truly, the manifold controversies, and everlasting wrangles, which, the misunderstanding of the nature of that faith which alone justifyeth hath raised, among those that depart from the Church of Rome; (Some making it to consist in beleeving that a man is predestinate to life, others, in trusting in God through Christ; Some making onely the passive obedience of Christ, others both active and pasive to be imputed to us; Some making justification to consist onely in remission of sinnes, others in that and in the imputation of Christs merits both) may justly move them to retire to the simplicity of the Gospell, which they will never find in any termes but those which I propose; That all the promises thereof are due, upon makeing good the true profession of Christianity. If it be said, that those Homilies, which the article of the Church of England referres us to, for the right understanding of Justification and Justifying Faith, seeme to expresse this opinion which I esteeme neither true, nor yet destructive to the Faith; I answere ingenuously that they seeme to me so to doe: But that, so doing, the sense of it, is utterly unreconcileable with those things which I have quoted out of the office of bap∣tisme, and the beginning of the Catechisme. Which being as much subscribed by the Clergy as the Articles and Homilies are, and also containing the whole Religion of the people, and the Clergies, therefore, as Christians, (for the people, being not acquainted with the Articles but when they change theire Curate, had no meanes to take further notice of them) is by conse∣quence to be preferred in case of competition. Unreconcileable I say, as farre as this opinion is unreconcileable to that which I have proposed; the com∣munion of the Church no wayes requiring that men should be reconciled in the interpretation of the Scriptures, provided it draw no consequence destructive to the Faith, as this doth not, but that which in termes it complies with doth. And therefore, I have held it my duty, (that opinion having broken forth into a manifest Heresy of the Antinoians, and the detestation of that
tending to let in a contrary Heresy of the Socinians, as first it bred it) to declare to all, that are not professed enemies to the Church of England, and the Catholick Church with it, the first misunderstanding, from whence I con∣ceive such dangerous errors proceed; that, if God ever send order, out of that confusion in Religion which now rules among us, I may have contested, that there can be no sure ground for it, but the plaine faith of the Catholick Church. It is well enough knowne, that there is still another opinion concerning Justification, to wit, that of the Schoole Doctors, which the Council of Trent seemeth to have made mater of Faith; Which maketh the beginning of Justification to consist in that faith▪ which beleeveth the Gospell to be true. Whereupon, as there necessarily followes servile feare of that punishment, to which, it discovers all that refuse it to be liable; So it gives ground enough of hope, to all that resolve not to refuse it: So that, the mind balancing betweene the love of God, (which preferres the next world) and the love of our selves and of this world, (which preferres this) if a man (concerning that sorrow for his sinnes, which the love of God, not the feare of punishment suggests, and, acting those workes of Penance, which, if a Christian before, the neglect of his calling and profession requires) resolve to preferre the love of God in all his actions for the time to come; the faith and the hope, which he had before without forme, now being informed by the love of God above all, and his servile feare turned into filiall, he becomes just, because form∣ally indowed with this love, which makes all his indowments supernaturall, and proportionable to the reward of everlasting happinesse which the Gospell tenders; provided that he receive the Sacrament of Baptisme, or effectually desire it▪ if it were to be had; Of this opinion I say▪ First, that it com∣mitteth as great a fault as the former, in assigning the true conceit and notion of justifying Faith. For, whereas there are indeed, as I have showed, three significations of Faith in the writings of the Apostles, (wherein onely there is expresse question of the justification of Christians) the first and last whereof depend upon the middle, as the cause and effect of it; And that the Apostles intend the second sense properly, when they dispute against the Jewes, that a man is not justified by workes, nor by the Law, but by Grace, and by Faith (that is, by the Gospell, tendring the Covenant of Grace, and by that Faith, whereby we undertake that Christianity wherinto we are baptized) they who make the office o Faith in justifying no more then beleeving the Gospell to be true, seeme as voide of the truth in that, as those who place it in repo∣sing trust and confidence in God, upon it. For, as the Gospell gives suffi∣cient ground of trust and confidence in God, from the first moment that any man heares of it, (what state soever it is, and how sinfull, in which it over∣takes him) if we speak of confidence that we may or shall obtaine remission of sins, upon condition of imbracing and performing the condition which it advanceth; So, if wee speake of trust and confidence in God, as, indeed and actually reconciled to God, seeing it supposeth justification, it must needes suppose that Faith which justifieth; And so, justifying Faith cannot be said to consist in it, but, by consequence of nature, to produce it. On the other side; whereas all the works that a man can doe, after he sincerely beleeves the truth of the Gospell, but▪ before he hath made profession of Christi∣anity by being baptized, cannot availe to the forgivenesse of sinne, much lesse, to intitle him to everlasting life, according to the doctrine of the Apostles; It can by no means be imagined, that, when they attribute justification to Faith, whether alone, or, in opposition to workes, or to the Law, they doe attribute it to that Faith whereby he remains not justifyed, not to that, which, he i necessarily justifyed as soone as he hath. And this is the true end of that endlesse dispute, between Faith and good workes, when it is questioned, whether true Faith can be without Good workes, or not. For it is manifest, that Hereticks, Schismaticks, and sinfull Christians doe as truely beleeve, either the whole Gospell, (so farre as the Common salvation of Christians requireth) or▪
at least, that part which their Heresy or Schisme contesteth not, as a good Christian really doth. It is nolesse manifest, that, not onely Heretickes and Schismatickes, but even badde and sinfull Christians also, not onely may, but really have a true and reall confidence in God, as to the world to come; without which, those that beleeve the world to come could not live and dy in that course, which, indeed, renders them uncapable of it. But, the Faith which, whosoever is baptized plighteth to God, to professe the Faith which he hath taught to the death, and to live according to it, must needes either be counterfeite, (and so, produce no effect but the damning of him that is baptized with it) or produce the workes of Faith, so long as it is and con∣tinues sincere. And thus is the Tradition of the Church, concerning justifi∣cation by the good works of Christians reconciled▪ not onely with the doctrine of the Apostles, that a man is not justified by the workes that go before Chri∣stianity; But also with the Tradition of the Church, concerning the ingredi∣ence of Baptisme into the same work; And▪ with the doctrine of the Fathers, manifestly distinguishing that true Faith which produceth good workes, from that dead faith, which doth not, not by the accession of Love, but by marks intrinsecall to the nature of it; manifestly distinguishing those good workes which indeed doe justify, from those, which, for the mind which they are done with▪ doe not justify, but▪ for their kind might, had they been done by Christians; by the boundary between them, which is baptisme. But so, that the workes themselves are but the materiall part, that is, the thing which the Covenant of Grace requireth; But, the reason and consideration in which they are accepted by God to that effect, is not the influence of our free will, though cured of concupiscence, (as cured it may be in this life) and acted by Gods Spirit; but the Grace of God, moving him, in consideration of our Lord Christs sufferinges, first, to publish the Gospell, then to accept the professi∣on and life of Christians according to it, for a condition qualifying them for that which he promiseth by it. Which is but the English of that which is commonly said, that God accepteth of our workes as dipped in Christs bloud, which he accepteth not, if he accept them not to that effect which his Gospell promiseth▪ having, (as he doth, if the Gospel be true) all that he accepteth not to that purpose. Having said this, in common, as it were, to both these opinions, in particulare, to that which I propose last, or rather, to the rest of it, I say three things. First, that it may be understood two wayes; To wit that this holds, Either by vir∣tue of the originall Law of God, or by virtue of that dispensation in it, that abatement of the penalty of it, which the Gospell imports. For, so long as it is onely said, that God infuseth into him that receives the Sacrament of Baptisme out of a resolution of Loving God above all, an habit of supernatu∣all righteousnesse; which is formally the remission of sinnes, as extinguishing them by contrary dispositions; and that this is the righteousnesse which he pleades to God, for the reward of the world to come; I say, all this while it is not said, whether the nature and kind of the quality thus produced oblige God to give him that happinesse of the world to come, in recompense of it; or, whether the promise of the Gospell, decreed and declared out of his meer goodnesse, render that due by way of recompense, which, otherwise, this dis∣position could no way claime. For, he that sayes, that the naturall worth of the qualities here supposed claimes the reward, as due by Gods justice, must needes say▪ that they justify by Gods originall Law: But he that sayes, by Gods promise, and, onely by that justice which consists in keeping promise, by the Covenant of Grace. Now then I say, if that, this opinion proceed upon first ground, it is destructive to the Christian faith. For, I have shewed▪ that the Gospel containes a Covenant of Grace, not onely in regard of helpes of Grace, to fulfill the condition which it requires, (which, I have shewed that God grants, in consideration of our Lord Christ and his obedience) but also, be∣cause in the same consideration, he accepteth of the condition, both to extin∣guish the debt of sinne, and to intitle us to everlasting life, which otherwise it
inables us not to claime; And both these regards▪ I have showed, belong to the Christian Faith. Now, he that affirmeth that the righteousnesse which God infuses into those that are baptized challengeth remission of sinnes and ever∣lasting life, (or rather challengeth everlasting life, because it extinguisheth sinne) by Gods originall justice, acknowledges indeed the Grace of God, in granting those helps, by which we attaine the said righteousnesse; (and that in consideration of our Lord Christ and his obedience) But acknowledgeth not the Grace of God through Christ in accepting of it to such purpose; and therein, as I suppose, denies the Covenant of Grace which the Gospel con∣tains. Secondly, I say, that there is enough in the doctrine of the Schoole, or in the dcree of the Council of Trent; to show, that they cannot intend the first sense, but that they must acknowledge it to Gods free promise, which, being accep∣ted, becomes the Covenant of Grace. This followes upon severall points of their doctrine. First, as they make, at least the materiall of originall sinne to consist in concupiscence, the remains whereof in the regenrate re therefore, even with them, of the same nature and kind, though rebated, and acquied of the nature and effect of sinne, which is, to make liable to death. For, this cannot hold, but, in regard of severall Lawes, whereof the one forbiddeth this concupiscence, the other allowes reconciliation and grace supposing it, as I said afore; that Law that succeedes being the Covenant of Grace. Second∣ly, as it requires the Sacrament of Baptisme to the allowance of this righteous∣nesse, in lieu of the reward which it challenges. For, the Sacrament of bap∣tisme being a part of the Christian Law, which is the Covenant of Grace▪ and so, a Secondary and positive provision for the salvation of mankind, lost by Gods originall Law; it were a contradiction to say▪ that, any thing claimed by vitue thereof should be due by Gods originall Law. Thirdly and lastly, in regard of that sound sense in which they clearely and freely main∣taine the satisfaction of Christ; which, by the promises, is nothing else, but the consideration, for which God accepts the acts and the quliti which the Gospell requires, in due plea for that which it premiss. For▪ imputation being nothing else, in common reason, but the immediate consequenc of satisfaction▪ the righteousnesse which God imputes to Abrahams spirituall seed, as to his person, according to S. Paul, Ro. IV. 16, 24 cannot depend upon the meer worth of the condition required, but upon the free grace of God, accepting it for that it is not worth, in consideration of the obedience of Christ. Lastly I say, there is appearance of reason, to move men that are jealous of the glory of Gods grace, to thinke that they clame the promises of the Gos∣pel, as due by Gods originall Law, to that infused righteousnesse, by having whereof, they say we are righteous before God. First, in that they depart from the language of the Scripture, and the true meaning thereof, in making justification to consist in the infusion of righteousnesse; which, though it pre∣supposeth, by the premises, formally it signifieth not. For, having showed, that the condition which the Gospell requires, is allowed of grace, in conside∣ration of Christ, to qualify us for the promises of it; it remains beyond question, that the righteousnesse which the Gospell require is of it selfe rall true righteousnesse; because it is God that allowes it and accepts it to that effect, to which he accepts not the righteousnesse of an hypocrite. Allwaye understanding it to be the righteousnesse of one that turneth from sinne▪ with a sincere and effectuall resoluton to serve God in all thinges for the future; Whose righteousnesse may well be called infused righteousnesse, in regard of the helpes of Gods grace whereby it is effected▪ though we suppose no other kid of quality, (beside that disposition which brings a man to Baptisme) to succeede upon it, but onely the habituall assistance of the Holy Ghost, pro∣mised, o inable all them that sincerely undertake Christianity, to preforme what they undertake. Thus then, making justification to consist, not in Gods allowance, but in his act of infusing righteousnesse, they create appear∣ance o reason, that the righteousnesse so infused, is, in their opinion, that
righteousnesse before God, to which the promises of the Gospell are due by his originall Law. For, if there were not other points of theire doctrine to create another interpretation of it, there could be no other sense for it, then this. Secondly, in that they make this righteousnesse to consist, not in any acceptation and allowance of God, but in his grace really infused into that soule, which, out of an act of the love of God raised by the helpes of his grace▪ supposing faith and hope, joyned with servile feare afore, had resolved upon Baptisme. For what allowance can this love be imagined to need, as of grace, to make the promises of the Gospell by Gods originall Law due to it, if it be admitted for righteousnesse before God? Here I must doe them right. I must not say that it is the Council of Trent, or that it is any act of the Church obliga∣tory to all the Communion that ownes it, that obliges them to attribute the effect of justifying to Gods infused Grace, by virtue of the nature of it, and not by virtue of his Grace in accepting it to that purpose. For it is notorious, and you may find the names of the Doctors in Vasquez. in 1. 2. Disput. CCIV. Num. 1. 2. 3. that hold this grace not to render men gracefull to God for it selfe, but by his free accepting it to that effect; The Nominals in par∣ticular, besides Durandus and Alliacensis by name. In the meane time, no man can deny, that it is lawfull to old that we are justfied by the worth and naturall perfection of Gods infused Grace; Which though he freely giveth, yet can he not refuse justification having given it: And therefore, they who place their Religion in making theire distance from Hereticks, (as our Puri∣taines from Antichrist) as wide as they can possible, have taught and still doe teach, that the supernaturall infused righteousnesse of Christans, (which, as I said, they make to consist principally in the love of God above all thinges) of it owne worth and intrinsecall perfection▪ and not by Gods accep∣ting of it to that effect, not onely formally remitteth sinne, as formally it expelleth the same, but so justifieth, that God were unjust should he not justi∣fy Christians in consideration of it? And, what could have been said more expresse, that it is due by Gods originall law, not by any dispensation in it which the promise of the Gospell importeth? That the grace of God in Christ i not seene, in rewarding that disposition which the Gospell requireth, but in giving those helpes whereby we attaine unto it? A thing never a whit more contradictory to that which hath been proved here, then to other points of their owne Profession alleged even now. Before I leave this point, for the clearing of that which I said; that the Council of Trt seemeth to have inacted the doctrine of the Schol for mater of Faith, not, that indeed it hath so done; I will observe, that it hath not decreede, that we are justified by Grace habitually dwelling in the Soule; But onely, that, through the merit of Christs passion, the love of God is diffused in the harts of those that are justified, and is inherent in them, so that, in theire justification, with remission of sinnes, they receive Faith Hope and Charity, as infused into them. Sss. VI. Cap VII. For here, it is expressely claimed by Doctors of that Church, not▪ that the Grace whereby we are justified is a qua∣lity habitually informing the soule of man, as supernaturally infused by God into it: But onely, that Faith Hope and Charity are infused into them that are justified, and inherent in them, as shed into theire hearts by the Holy Ghost; Which▪ they say, may all be understood, supposing that a man is justified by the acts of Faith Hope and Love, infused or shedde into the hart by the Holy Ghost▪ as well as by habites supernaturally created to reside in the soule. For, you may see by Morinus in his Late worke de Administration Pniten∣ti VIII. 2. 3. 7. that for MCC yeares after Christ, a good while after the Schoole Doctors were come in, there was no question at all made, whether we are justified by an infused habit of grace or not; and that it was about the yeare MCCL that this opinion intirely prevailed in the Schooles. Whereby it appeareth, that, as this opinion containes nothing destructive to the faith▪ if it be understood in that sense which the Church of Rome allowes; that it is not the naturall worth of it which justifies, but Gods accepting of it to that
effect; So if it did, yet could not the Church of Rome be said to teach any thing destructive to the faith▪ But onely to allow since uch things to be taught. For, the Council of Vienna under Clement V. determines it not as matter of faith, but as the more probable opinion, as you may see Clement. de summa Trin. & Fide Cathol. Tit. I. Cap. VII. And therefore Albertus Pghius de libero Arbitrio lib. V, notwithstanding this decree, stickes not to count this doctrine forged without any authority of Scripture; And those that speake of it with more respect then he, thinke not themselves tied to that, which the Council hold the more probable. It is indeed manifest, by the experience of all Christians, that the custome and practice, even of supernaturall actions, to which the inclination of corrupt nature is utterly averse, breedes in a man an habituated disposition of doing those things, with ase and pleasure, which, at the beginning of his Christianity, he could not doe without offering himselfe much violence. But, that habit which custome and practice leaves behind it, though supernaturall for the cause or effect of it; because the acts upon▪ which it accrues, as also those which it produces, cannot accrue from meere nature, without the helpe of Christs grace; is notwith∣standing, for that wherein it consists, a disposition really qualifying the na∣ture and substance of the soule, and inclining it to act otherwise then without it. Besides, the Gospell promising the Holy Ghost for a Gift to abide with and dwell in those that are baptized, nothing hinders the Gift thereof to be held and termed an habituall grace. In these regards, I find it neither pre∣judiciall nor inconsequent to the Christian faith, to acknowledge habituall grace, though neither scripture nor tradition of the Church owne any habit of grace, created by God, and infused into the soule in a moment, as the Schoole imagineth. But they seeme to have committed another mistake, in that, the Church having decreed against Pelagius, that the Grace of Christ is necessary to all truly good actions, and therefore, that man cannot merit the first grace; this infused habit of grace they have made to be that First grace which God giveth, before man will indeavor any thing towards it. For so the Master of the Sentences determineth, that grace which preventeth mans indevors to be faith with Love libro II. distinct. XXVI. D. which, though it be capable of a very good sense; That the motion to beleeve the truth of Christianity out of the love of God is that which Gods grace prevents all mans compliance with; yet, in what sense they swallowed it, will appeare by the difficulties and dispues they were intangled with, about that sorrow, which the heart conceives for sinne out of meer love to God▪ not feare of punishment, which the love of our selves breedeth. For, this sorow being necessarily a disposition preparing him for justification that cometh to God; in regard the first grace which God preventeth all man indeavors with is to them this infused habit of Faith and love which formally justifieth; how he should come prepa∣red for justification by that contrition, which without Gods grace man can∣not have, who is justified by that infused habit of grace, which he was first prevented by God with; hath been among them the subject of endlesse jangles. Whereas, it is manifest, the maintenance of the Faith against Pelagius requir∣eth no more, then▪ that the resolution of persevering in Christianity to the nd be thought necessarily to depend upon the motion to imbrace it, which God first preventeth man with, without respect to any act of man obliging God to grant it. And therefore it is manifest, that the Church decreed no more against Pelagius, but, that the first motion to become a good Christian, that every man is prevented with, must be ascribed to Gods free grace through Christ, not ingaged by any act of mans goeing afore. Now, requi∣ring onely the actuall assistance of Gods preventing grace, it is easy enough to say; not how attrition, that is, sorrow for sinne in regard of punish∣ment, accompanied with slavish feare, is changed into contrition, that is sorrow for sinne out of the love of God whome it offendeth; (For, it is not possible, that he who loveth God should be sory for sinne for the same rea∣son,
which he was sorry for while he loved the world) But, how the man that was attrite becomes contrite. For, when first the Gospell reveales unto a man his desperate estate in and by the first Adam, it is not possible that he should remaine utouched, either with sorrow for the present, or apprehension for the future. And yet no lesse unpossible is it, according to Gods ordinary way of working, even by his Grace, that he should, in an instant, resolve to imbrace the onely way to give him peace in that exigence. But while he neither casts off the motion of grace, nor resigne his interest in himselfe and the world to it, but considers, upon what reason it behoves him to resolve; this consideration, by the worke of Gods Spirit disovering to him, how much God and the next world is to be preferred before himselfe and this; as the love of God and the world to come prevailes in him above the love of him∣selfe and this, accordingly of necessity, must the greife of having offended God afore, prevaile in him above all that he can conceive for the misery he hath incurred. And all this, by virtue of those helpes which God grants, though allwayes in consideration of our Lord Christ; yet, not by virtue of that Covenant, which is not contracted till  man be baptized, but, of his owne free goodnesse, dispensing the effects of Christs coming, according to the reason of his secret wisdome, which the Covenant of grace discovers not. I neede say no more to show, how a man that come into the world with concupiscence becomes, either habituated to the love of God above all things, or indowed with the habituall assistance of Gods Spirit, by that promise which the Gospell importeth. Thus much is to be seen, by that which hath been said; That, in the justification of a sinner by Christianity, (which, I have showed to be the condition of it) there is a twofold change either implied or signified: For, that a man should become reconci∣led to God, continues in the same affection to himselfe and the world as before he heard of Christ, is a thing which the soeret of them that dispute justification by faith alone abhorre. And, that a man, by the Gospel, should be intitled to no more, then, that disposition which be is changed to, obligeth God to give, is no lesse horrible to them that dispute justification by the works of faith. And there∣fore, besides that change in the nature and disposition of him that becomes esta∣ed in the promises of the Gospel, which justification involveth, there is another change in Gods esteeme, which is morall, by virtue of his free promise, which the change which his nature hath received signifieth not▪ because Gods will onely infrs it. The former of these the Schoole insist upon, and they seeme to follow S. Austin in it; who, though he have nothing to doe with any conceit of habituall grace, yet, most an end, attributeth the effect of justi∣fying; even before God, to those inherent acts of righteousnesse, whereby, the grace of God translateth his enimies into that state of his grace. The later, though it be that, which, both the Scriptures, and the most ancient records of the Church doe expresse; yet, so long as the effect of justifying is attri∣buted to the disposition which is inherent in the soule, not for the worth of it, but by Gods Grace, it can containe nothing, either formally destructive, or, by consequence prejudiciall to the Faith. That the one is fundamentally imply∣ed, the other formally signified in the justification of a Christian, belongs rather to the skill of a divine, in understanding the Scriptures, then to the virtue of a Christian in holding the faith. What the Church thinkes, of the workes of those, who▪ believing, do not yet declare themselves Christians, by procuring Baptisme; as it is a considerati∣on fit for this place, so is it manifest, by the doubt which they make of the sal∣vation of those, that dye in that estate. For, though the life that they live, sup∣posing the preventing Grace of the holy Ghost, to bring them to that estate, must needs be ascribed to the same, yet is it not as yet under the promise of re∣ward, because they are not yet under the Covenant of Grace, but onely dis∣posed to it. And, how good soever their life may be, yet, so long as it pro∣ceeds not to an effectuall resolution of undertaking Christs Crosse, it is bu actuall, and dependeth d facto, upon the assistance of Gods Spirit, which d
jur they can challenge no title in, being not yet estated in Gods promises, but onely prevented by those helps, which, they can claime no difference of right in, from those that are not prevented with the same. But he that undertakes Christs Crosse by coming to Baptisme with a good conscience, obtaineth re∣mission of sinnes, adoption to be Gods Sonne, and right and title to everlasting life; Which adoption, and which title, as they are morall rights and qualities; so are they meer appendences of that justification which God alloweth the Faith of those that are baptized sincerely, without consideration of workes, ac∣cording to the doctrine of the Fathers. Supposing, it is true, as much change as between a Christian and no Christian, in him that obtaines them, (in which regard, it is no marvaile, if remission of sinnes or justification be ascribed to the said change many times, in their writings; For, how such sayings are to be understood, imports onely the signification of words, not the salvation of a Christian) but not importing Gods consideration of their qualities, the con∣sideration of whose, works is excluded. S. Augustine, it is true, considering this change in him that is justified (which is indeed the ground upon which God accepteth of his Faith to that purpose) and using the word justifying to signify the same, hath occasioned the Schoole to agree in that forme of doctrine which the Council of Trent canonizeth. But though he frequent the terme more then others in that sense, yet can he no wayes be thought to depart from the mean∣ing of the rest, who do sometimes describe justification by the ground which it supposeth, sometimes by the quality in Gods account, which it signifyeth. Ac∣knowledging all of them, the gift of the holy Ghost to be obtained by this faith which justifyeth; of Gods free Grace indeed, which onely moved him to set the Gospel on foot, but as due by the promise which it containeth, to abide and to dwell with him that voides not the condition upon which it is granted. This grace of the holy Ghost, habitually dwelling in them that have undertaken Christs Crosse, to inable them to go through with the work of it, as it cannot be unfruitfull in good works; so are those works, henceforth, under the promise of reward, which no workes done afore Baptisme can challenge. I must not leave this point till I have said a word or two of Socinus his opi∣nion, as to this point of justifying faith. For, as concerning the two points premised, I conceive I have showed you, that it is no lesse destructive to Faith, in teaching that a man is able of himself to imbrace and to fulfill all that the Gospel requires at his hands, witho any help of Gods grace granted in re∣spect of our Lord Christs obedience; Then, that God accepteth what a man is so able to performe, not out of any, consideration thereof, but of his own free goodnesse, which, moving him to settle such a decree, moved him to send our Lord Christ to publish and assure it. As for the rest of his opinion, having maintained, that the efficacy of all acts, whether of Gods grace or of mans will, toward the obtaining of the promises of the Gospel, necessarily depends upon the receiving of Baptisme, where the outward fulfilling of the promises of a positive precept (which the onely will of him that is converted to Christianity fulfilleth not) is not unavoidablely prevented by casualties which his will cannot overcome; I suppose I have by that meanes showed, that his opinion is destructive to Christianity, because destructive to the precept of receiving Baptisme, without which no man is a Christian. And truly this imputation reflects upon the other extreme opinion, concerning the justification of a Christian, which, ascribing it to believing that a man is predestinate, excludes it from being necessary, either as a meanes to salvation, or as a thing command∣ed; both which considerations concurre in the necessity of it, supposing the pre∣mises. For, the necessity of that which is necessary as the meanes, and the ne∣cessity of that which is necessary as a thing commanded him that will obtaine salvation, differ onely in this; That the necessity of the meanes of salvation is undispensable in regard of whosoever will be saved: But the necessity of a thing commanded takes not hold, till a man becomes liable to the precept whereby it is commanded. The want of Baptisme then not being peremptory to the sal∣vation of them that are prevented of it by unavoidable casualties, but of all
others; Chuse whether you will call it necessary as the meanes, not supposing that exception, or necessary as a thing commanded, supposing it. But that opi∣nion which justifies without it, because before it, and makes it signify nothing to the not predestinate, to them that are, onely to signify that which is done without it, is necessarily destructive to the Covenant of Grace: Whereas sup∣posing repentance, to justifying faith, the necessity of the Baptisme of repent∣ance may be maintained; Nay, repentance implying a conversion to all that Christianity requires, and Christianity requiring Baptisme, in reason, implied it is in that repentance which that opinion presupposeth to justifying faith. But, that Volkelius Instit. IV. 3. makes justifying Faith to consist in believing all that Christ taught, and trusting in him, out of a resolution to keep his com∣mandments; I take to be the meaning of S. Paul when he saith, that a man is justified by Faith alone; Provided that a man be baptized with that disposition which he calls justifying faith, believing that, being inabled by the holy Ghost, in consideration of Christs merits accompanying his Baptisme, to perform what he undertakes, he shall attaine the life to come in consideration of the same. CHAP. XXXI. The state of the question concerning the perseverance of those that are once justi∣fied. Of three senses, one true, one inconsistent with the Faith, the third neither true nor yet destructive to the Faith. Evidence from the writings of the Apo∣stles. From the Old Testament. The grace of Prophesie when it presupposeth sanctifying grace. Answer to some Texts, and of S. Pauls meaning in the VII. of the Romans. Of the Polygamy of the Fathers. What assurance of Grace Christians may have. The Tradition of the Church. THat which hath been said properly concerns onely them that first heare of the Gospell at mans age, and are justified by being baptized into the pro∣fession of it; But the reason of it is the Rule of that which is to be said of all. To extend it so as to answere all questions concerning all mens cases; There remains yet another question, whether those are once justified can fall from the state of grace, so as, finally, to be damned; Which, he that will speake truth, must allow to have beene burthened with unchristian prejudices, with∣out any cause. For, who knowes not, that commonly, it hath been given to understand, that, whoso alloweth this, granteth; Gods everlasting grace and purpose towards him whom he accepteth in Christ, as righteous, to faile, and become voide? Which, I grant to be truly consequent to the opinion of those, that hold justifying faith to consist in beleeving that a man is predestinate to life. For, if that were so, then, he that should faile of his justification, must, by consequence, faile of his predestination; That is to say, the decree of God, by which he purposed finally to save him that is justifyed by beleeving that he is predestinate, must faile, and become voide, when soever he ceaseth to be justified. But, what is that to him that beleeves, and hath proved, that God absolutely decreeth, whom he will give and whome he will refuse the helpes of effectuall grace, whereby they attaine that disposition which qualifies them righteous before God? That the helps of Grace whereby they are effectually inabled or not inabled to continue or not to con∣tinue in the same disposition, are granted in consideration of the right use of those helps which went afore? That the decree of reward or punishment pas∣seth in consideration of persevering or not persevering to the end in the same? Is there any ignorance in the world so slanderous, as to pretend any change in the purpose of God, when his sentence changes upon the change of the con∣dition, upon which he grants remission of sins and right to everlasting life? If any man do, let him first call him self to account whether he will undertake to
maintaine that position, whereupon it followeth; to wit, that to believe a mans self prdestinate to life, is that faith which alone justifieth. And undertaking it, let him take this defiance from me, that his opinion is destructive to the founda∣tion and ground of Christianity. But as I said before, that there is so great difference between those that hold justification by believing a mans self to be predestinate to life, and, by trusting in God for the obtaining of his promises in our Lord Christ, that the one opinion is destructive to Christianity, but the other not; at least, in those that require and presuppose true repentance to go before that trust in God, wherein justifying faith, in their opinions consisteth; So must I consequently say, concerning this point, that it may be held, and I have some reason to think that it is held by divers, upon such termes as seem not to render it destructive. For when I see, that they require repentance to go before justifying faith, as a condition requisite to that trust in God, wherein justifying faith consisteth; I must needs inferre, as I see some Authors of that opinion to grant, that, when the children of God fall into such sinnes, as Tertulliane, saies lay waste the conscience, neither remission of those sinnes, which justification includeth, nor that trust in God, wherein that faith which onely justifyeth consisteth, can be understood to have place before repentance, if they speak things consequent in reason to ther own positions. How then shall they pretend, that the sentence of justification once granted, or rather, the promise obtained by virtue of that contract which the Gospel tendreth, as I have showed, can remain firme, the condition failing which it necessarily pre∣supposeth? Surely, I suppose, in that maner as it is ordinarily said, in many disputes, (and that very truly, how much soever to the purpose) that a thing is in some respect false, which is absolutely true, or contrariwise▪ absolutely false, which, notwithstanding, in some respect, holds true. So seem they that are possessed with this prejudice to imagine, that, when God admits any man into the state of Grace by virtue of that contract which the Gospel tendereth, (that is as I say, by being baptized upon a sincere profession of Christianity) if this be done with an intent of granting the grace of perseverance, then is that per∣son said absolutely to be justifyed; who, when he falls into such sinnes as I have named, becomes in some respect not justified, to wit for the present, and in re∣spect of those sinnes of which he is not yet reconciled by repentance. And con∣sequently, the act of justifying faith is suspended and interrupted, as in him that cannot have confidence in God, as reconciled to God in regard of these sinnes; the seed of it notwithstanding remaining, by virtue of that act of Faith, whereby, being reconciled as these are that are for ever reconciled to him, he remains certaine of helpes of grace, that shall be effectuall to work in him true repentance, and of reconcilement upon supposition of it. Where∣upon it must be said the contrary, that, those whom God receiveth into grace without any purpose of granting them the grace of perseverance, cannot be said to be justified, without some terme of abatement, signifying the justifica∣tion granted them to be, as to the sense of the Church, or, to an opinion undue∣ly conceived by themselves, but not as to God. So that their faith also must be understood to be a confidence unduely grounded, the failing whereof is not the disanulling of that which once was good, but the discovering of that, which once seemed good and was not. This opinion, so limited as I have said, I should not think destructive to Christianity, for the reason delivered afore, concerning that opinion of justi∣ing faith, upon which it followes. But, as I then concluded, that though not destructive to the Faith, yet, that opinion from whence it followeth is not true according to the true sense of the Scriptures, wherein the skill of a Divine consisteth; So must I here conclude, that this opinion of perseverance, which proceedeth upon that supposition of justifying faith, which, though not de∣structive to the Faith, yet is not true, is also not true, though not destructive to the Faith: The other, which proceeds upon that supposition of justifying faith and predestination, which is destructive to the faith, remaining both un∣true and destructive to the faith. I grant that, though the gift of the holy
Ghost, (which is, as I have said, the habituall assistance of it) being granted in consideration of a mans undertaking Christianity, becomes void upon not performing that which a man undertakes; yet God, of his free goodnesse, not as obliged by any promise of the Gospel, may continue the assistance there∣of, but upon the same terms as he first grants the help of it, to bring men out of the state of sinne into the state of grace. I grant, that the resolution of be∣lieving the faith of Christ, and of living according to the same in the professi∣on of Christianity, having been once made, upon reasons convincing a man that he is bound so to do, cannot be changed at his pleasure, in an instant, though it fall out, that he be overtaken with some sinne that laies wast the conscience. But, the promises of the Gospel being made in consideration of undertaking the profession of Christianity, (and therefore incompetible to those that live not according to it) I say, that they all become void to him that falls into such a sinne. For, the Covenant of Grace passing upon supposition of originall concupiscence remaining in the regenerate, and insnaring them all with the oc∣casions of sinne; It cannot be imagined that all sinne makes it void. But on the other side, some sinnes being of so grosse a nature, that a man cannot be surprized by them, (but that the being so conquered must imply a resolution to preferre this world before the world to come) must needs forfeit those pro∣mises, which depend upon the Covenant of Grace, a rebellion against which they containe and declare. So that, unlesse the free grace of God, by the ope∣ration of his Spirit, bring a man back to repentance, the whole resolution of being a Christian shall in time be blotted out, though the profession, because it imports the benefit of this world in Christian states, remain counterfeit. This is then the reason of my resolution, necessarily following upon the pre∣mises, that the sincere profession of Christianity is the condition of the Cove∣nant of Grace; seeing it is not imaginable, that any man should hold any pri∣viledge at Gods hands, by professing that which he performeth not: The pro∣fession, as it serveth to aggravate the sinne which it committed under it; (as done in despite of all the grace of God, and the conviction which it tendereth, to reduce us to Christianity, and the profession made in submission to the same condemning a man by his own sentence) So, containing the condition upon which all the promises become due, upon the violation whereof, on the contra∣ry, they must of necessity become void. And this is the reason that leaves no place for any composition of this difference, by saying, that a man remains absolutely justified, when the particular sinne which is not yet repented of is not pardoned. For, seeing the wages of it is death, so farre as the Covenant of Grace dispenses not; and, seeing the Covenant of Grace cannot protect him that transgresseth the termes of it; of necessity, he falls into the same estate which he was under setting the Co∣venant of Grace aside, as if to him our Lord Christ had neither been borne, nor crucified, nor risen againe. Those that suffer the truth of this condition to be obscured, by defective interpretations of that faith which alone justifieth, and the scripturs concerning the same; it is no mervaile if they can imagine a reconciliation betweene the state of sinne and the state of grace, in the same man at the same time; which makes the positive will of God, declared by the Gospell, to dispense with the necessary and naturall hate he beares to all sin∣ners, for their sinne. But, when it is once discoverd, that, by the termes of the Gospell, God, who declares himselfe ready to be reconciled to all sin∣ners, is declared unreconcileable to any, so long as he continueth in sinne; then must it necessarily appeare, that, the positive will of God declared by the Gospell concurring with the naturall detestation of sinne which is essentiall to the purity of his nature, whosoever is under the guilt of sinne remains liable to his wrath. And, proceeding upon this ground, as I doe, I shall not thinke my selfe obliged to take notice of those thinges, which have lately beene disputed, in great volumes, upon this point, to and againe. For, presuming that the parties have not the ground upon which I proceed, in debate; As, of necessity, he who seemes to come short of proving his intent without it,
may with it be able to make the conviction effectuall which he tenders; So, he that seemes to have made the worse cause seeme the better, without considering it, must provide new evidence, to make the condition of the Covenant of Grace seeme otherwise then I have showed it to be, before he can thinke to have done his worke. Notwithstanding, because there are many texts of Scripture, which evidently fortify the summe of Christianity setled upon the termes of the Covenant of Grace, by demonstrating the failleure of the pro∣mise upon failleure of the condition to which the Gospell makes it due; I take it to be part of my businesse to point at the cheife of them; without being much troubled to bring all that might be alleged; Because I may make this generall inference from the premises▪ that all precepts, all exhortations, all pro∣mises, all threats made to induce man to perseverance in that estate, to which the promises of the Gospell are any way signified to be due, are necessary ar∣guments to show, that those to whome they are made may faile of the perse∣verance to which they induce. And this, by virtue of the generall reason premised, that they are all evidences of that free will of men, which the grace of God destroyeth not but cureth. And therefore, as▪ when they are used to induce men to imbrace Christianity, they containe an evidence that he may doe otherwise; So also, when they are used to induce man to persevere in that profession which he hath once undertaken, they must necessarily, by the same reason, containe an evidence, that it is possible for any man not to persevere, who is induced by them to persevere in the course of a Christian. For if it be said, that, without the grace of God they cannot, with it, they cannot but be effectual; Either it is supposed, the grace of God here named shal become effectuall to induce them to persevere to the end, supposing that God foresees that they shall sopersevere, or something else including the fore-sight of the perseverance it selfe, or not; If so, it is no mervaile, that the said exhor∣tations cannot but prove effectuall, because God foresees they shall be ef∣fectuall, and, that which shall not be, can never be foreseene: But if, not supposing this, any man undertake to say, that, the exhortation of the Gospell with the helpe of Gods inward grace must necessarily prove effectuall; he will necessarily fall into all the inconvenience which I have charged them with, who maintaine, that the will of man is immediately determined by the will and operation of God, to doe whatsoever it doeth; Which is no lesse then the destruction, aswell of all civility as of Christi∣anity. But let us see what the Apostle writes, Heb. VI. 4-7. For, it is not possible to renew unto repentance, those, that being once inlightned, and having tasted the heavenly gift, and been partakers of the Holy Ghost, and relished the good word of God, and the powrs of the world to come, fall a way, and crucify to themselves and traduce the Sonne of God. For, the earth that drinkes the raine that oft comes upon it, and beares herbes fit for them by whome it is tilled, receives a blessing from God; But that which beares thornes and thistles is reprobate, and neare a curse, the end whereof is, to be burned. Could more have been said to expresse the state of grace? For, if any man can undertake to have the Spirit of God, without premising Christianity, I say confidently there is no cause why any man should be a Christian. Therefore , here, as Ebr. X. 32. signifieth neither more nor lesse then Christened ( with the ancient Church signifies Baptisme) because of the darknesse of Hethenisme, or Judaisme which it dispelleth. What is then the heavenly Gift which Christian tast? be it remissi∣on of sinnes, or be it the Gift of the Holy Ghost that followes, (expressing the same thing in severall parallel termes) my businesse is done, if the Gift of the Holy Ghost be not granted but upon that condition, which makes all other promises of the Gospell due. Wherefore, I am content that, relishing the good word of God, shall signify no more then that conditon, to wit; That sense of Christianity which resolveth a man to undertake it: But to relish the powers of the world to come no man can be understood, but he that, upon supposition of the said condition, becomes sensible of that peace and joy of
the Holy Ghost, which, under Christianity, onely Christianity can give. And therefore, though I dispute not here, how he means that it is impossible to renew those that fall from Christianity to repentance▪ yet I challenge that impos∣sibility of renewing to contain both a former right in, and a possession of that estate, to which they are renewed by repentance, and also the present losse of it, by falling from the condition which gves it. So that, the comparison which followes, of fruitful and barren land upon tillage, as it expresses a promise of fol∣lowing helpes of grace, to them that use those which went a fore aright, contain∣ed in the promise of giving the Holy Ghost, to inable them who sincerely pro∣fesse Christianity to performe that which they undertake; So it convinceth the fruitlesse to be liable to the curse of fire, which it is said to be neare, be∣cause it is called reprobate. The same is the effect of the like exhortation Ebrews X. 26▪-29. For, if we sinne voluntarily after receiving the acknowledgement of the truth, there re∣maines no more any sacrifice for sinne, but a certaine terrible expectation of ven∣geance, and glowing of fir that is to consume opposers. If one set at naught the Law of Moses, without mercy he dies upon two or three witnesses. Of how much worse punishment, think you, shall he be thought worthy, that treads the Sonne of God under foot, and esteems the blood of the Covenant by which he is sanctified un∣leane, and doth despite to the Spirit of Grace? I say, this is to the same effect, if it be once granted, that this sinne may be committed by a true Christian, which no man can deny. For, can a Christian be thought to doe that des∣pite to the Spirit of Grace, which the Scribes and Pharises are said in the Gos∣pell Matt, XII. 28. 32. Marke III. 29. Luke XII. 10. to doe, in sinning that sinne against the Holy Ghost, which, our Lord there pronounces irre∣missible? Is it not manifest, that their sinne consisted in attributing the miracles by which our Lord sought to convert them, to the uncleane spirit, being in Judgment convinced, that by the Holy Ghost alone they were done? And is it not as manifest, that a Christian, having received the Spirit of Grace, promised to those that are baptized out of a sincere resolution of Christianity, abuses the spirit which is so given him, and which he hath, and which had allready wrought that worke of conviction, which the scribes and Pharises sufferd not to take effect in their harts? Especially, when the Apostle expressely premiseth the washing of them, called here sanctifying by the blood of the Covenant, which is the cleansing of that vessell by remission of sinnes, into which the new wine of the Holy Ghost is to be put. Wherefore, I will not say that the faith of these men is true faith, if you meane that onely to be true faith which lasts to the end, which is many times, in common language, that which truth signifieth: But, if you meane that to be true faith which effecteth remission of sinnes, and qualifieth for the world to come; he must set the scripture upon the rack, that will make it confesse any other sense. Now, consider what the Apostle writeth of those Christians, who, he saith, are seduced by the Hereticks which he speakes of, 2 Pet. II. 18▪22. For, speaking bombast words of vanity, they catch with the baite of fleshly concupiscences, in uncleannesse, those that had really escaped them that converse in error; Pro∣mising them freedome, themselves being slaves to corruption; seeing a man is slave to that by which he is conquered. For if, having escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ, and being intangled in them againe, they be conquered; the last error is become worse to them then the first. For, it had beene better for them not to have knowne the way of righteousnesse, than having knowne (or acknowledged) it, to turne from the holy precept once delivered to them. But it is fallen out to them accor∣ding to the old Proverbe; The dogge that returnes to his owne vomit; And the sowe that is washed to wallow in the mire. Is it possible that all this should be thought to import no more then profession, as to men, without any effect as to God, but onely to the Church? For, if we suppose them all to have counterfeited Christianity, not really resolving to live as Christians, how comes he to say that they had really escaped those that live in error, whose
wayes they had not really left? And, if they had escaped the pollutions of the world by the knowledge of Christianity, had they done no more then a man by meere nature may doe? Then may a man by meere nature be disintangled of the pollutions of this world. But if they had conquered sinne by those helpes of grace which brought them to be Christians, (for otherwise, how should they be conquered by the baites of sinne, which those Heretickes deceive them with?) then had they obtained those promises which the Gospell rewardeth that conquest with. In fine; Can a dogge returne to the vomit, or a sow to the mie which they never left? or can the later end be worse then the beginning, to them who never were cleare of that damnation, in which they were overtaken by the preaching of Christianity? To that of S. John, speak∣ing of the Antichrists of the time, them and their followers, John II. 19. They went ut from among us, but they were not of us; For, had they been of us, they would have continued among us; I will use no other answer then that which S. Austine hath given us, de corrept. & gratia cap. IX. that those who are qualified by attributes signifying predestination, cannot fall away; as long as they are described by present righteousnesse they may. For saith he, had they persevered, they had persevered in Grace, not in unrighteous∣nesse, neither was theire righteousnesse counterfeite, but not durable: There∣fore they were not in the number of sonnes, when they were in the Faith of sonnes, because those are truly sonnes, that are foreknowne and predestinate, and called according to purpose, that they may be like the sonne. For, S. John and S. Paul, being assured of theire owne adoption, according to purpose, it is no marvaile if they presume the like of those whome they comprise in the same quality with themselves, in regard of theire present righteousnesse, the profession whereof was visible. I must not here omit the Epistle to the Seven Churches Apoc II. III. and the exhortations, promises, and threatninges tendred the Angels of them, whether in behalfe of themselves, it maters not much to this purpose, or, which is certaine, in behalfe of the Churches. In particular to that of Ephesus II. 45. But I have this against thee, that thou hast left thy first love. Remember therefore whence thou art allen, and repent, and doe thy first workes; Otherwise I will come to thee suddenly, and remove thy canlesticke out of the place thereof, if thou repent not. How should any man be exhorted by the Spirit of God, to returne to those workes that were not the workes of a true Christian? How should the Judgement threatned take effect, and no soule perish, that had been saved otherwise. To that of Thy∣atira II. 25. 26▪ 28. But hold what you have untill I come. He that conquer∣eth, and keepeth my workes to the end, I will give him power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with an iron rodde, as a potters vessells are broken, as I al∣so hae received of my Father: And I will give him the morning starre. What means this exhortation to them that are not capable of doing otherwise? What means the power of Christ, and the morning starre, if not the reward of the world to come? To that of Pergamus III. 11, Behold I come suddenly: Hold what thou hast, lest another take thy crowne. Is it not plaine that he shall be saved if he hold what he hath? That he shall not, if another take his crowne? Can S. Pauls severe sentences be avoided? 1 Cor. VI. 9 10. Know ye not that the injurious shall not inherit the kingdome of heaven? Be not deceived. Neither whoremongers, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor the soft, nor abusers of them∣selves with mankind, nor thieves, nor those that defraude, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor robbers shall inherit the kingdome of God. Gal. V. 19. 20. 21. The workes of the lesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleannesse, wantonnesse, Idolatry, witchcraft, enmities, strifes, jealousies, animosities, provocations, divisions, sects, envies, murders, drinkings, debauches, and the like to these, of which I told you before hand, a I foretold you, that they who doe such thinges shall not inherit the kingdome of God. Eph. V. 58. For this ye know, that no whoremaster, or uncleane person, or that defraudeth, who is an Idolatur, hath inheritance in the kingdome of God and of Christ. Lt o man deceive you with vaine wordes; For, for these thinges cometh the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience. Be ye not therefore partners with them. For ye were darknesse, but are now light in the Lord. Wale as children of the light. They that sowe pillowes under sinners elbowes (excusantes excusati∣ones in peccatis, according to the vulgare translation Psal. CXL. 4. and treating termes of reconcilement betweene Christ and Belial, betweene the promises of the Gospell for everlasting, and the pleasures of sinne for a moment) will not have this to belong to the godly, whome they allow to doe such thinges for a snap and away, without forfeiting their interest in the world to come; but to the unregenerate, who live in a setled course of such sinnes without remorse. And, I freely allow, that, so soone as the godly man, whome they suppose to be overtaken with any such sinne, shall take such a course to turne from it, as may restore in him that resolution of mind, for which God accepts a true Christian; he is restored to the place which he held in Gods grace, not as never forfeited, but, as recoverd anew. In the meane time, if any pretense be made, that, being once in Gods favor he can never faile of it, it is as easy to wipe it off with S. Pauls argument, as any of those vaine words that were advanced in his time: For, if for those thinges the wrath of God cometh upon Gentiles, that are darknesse, much more upon them, who, being become light, have a share in the works of darknesse, if S. Pauls argument be good. And, whatsoever induces a man to beleeve other∣wise, belonges to those vaine words which S. Paul forbids them to be deceived with. The prophesy of Ezekiel must needes have a roome here; which, in order to induce the backsliding Israelites to repentance, protests that God judgeth the righteous that turneth from his righteousnesse, and the sinner that turn∣eth from his sinne, not according to the righteousnesse or to the sinne from which, but according to that to which they turne, Ezek. XVIII. 5—. For, to say, that the Prophet of God, speaking in Gods name, of the esteeme and reward which God hath for righteous and unrighteous, speakes onely of that which seemes righteousnesse and unrighteousnesse to the world; or, which an hypocrite cousens himselfe to thinke such, is such an open scorne to Gods word, as cannot be maintained, but by taking righteousnesse to signify unrighteousnesse, and turning for not turning, but continuing in that wickednesse which was at the heart, when he professed otherwise. Which is nothing else, but to demand of us, to renounce our senses, and the reason common to all men, together with the signification of these wordes whereby God deales with us in the same sense as we among our selves, to make good a prejudice so prejudiciall to Christianity. And, what shall we doe with those examples and instances of holy men, recorded in holy Scripture, to have fallen from Gods grace into his displeasure, beginning with our first parents Adam and Eve, whom, no man doubteth to have beene created in the state of Gods grace, that will not have theire fall redound upon Gods account. For if it be said, that this is a difference between the Covenant of workes, first set on foote with our first parents in Paradise, and the Covenant of grace, tenderd by our Lord Christ; It is said indeed, but it cannot be maintained, without destroying all that hath been premised of the Covenant of Grace, and the condition of the same: Which, though it take place under the Covenant of workes, which is supposed forfeite, to restore mankind to the hope of a heavenly reward, upon conditions proportionable to theire present weaknesse; hath notwithstanding appeared to be tendred to their free choice, as contain∣ing conditions, by transgressing whereof, they forfeite as much as Adam could doe. The examples of Saul, and Solomon, and David, and S. Peter, have in them indeed some difference one from another, but, is there any of them, that imports not the state of damnation after the state of grace? S. Peter, it is plaine, forfeits the condition of professing Christ, whom he that denieth, if our Lord say true in the Gospell Luke XII. 8. 9. shall himselfe be denied at the generall judgment; and, can we imagine his teares to have been shedde without
sense of this forfeite? Wherefore, whatsoever seedes of grace remained in him, to move him to repentance, as soone as he was become sensible of his estate; it is manifest, that he had lost the state of grace, which he laboureth to recover by repentance. I will not examine, how much longer David lay in his sinnes then S. Peter, before the Prophet Nathan brought him to the sense of them: It is enough, that he prayes so for pardon, as no man could doe for that which he thought he had afore. He prayes also for the restoring of Gods Spirit to him againe Psal. LI. 10. 11. 12. Make me a clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy Spirit from me. O give me the comfort of thine helpe againe, and stablish me with thy free Spirit. For, that which he prayes God not to take away, he acknowleges to be forfeite: So that, it is but of reason, that he further desires, that it be restored him, rather then conti∣nued. Some thinke they avoide this, by understanding, onely the Spirit of Prophesy to be his desire, not wanting the Spirit of regeneration, whereby he desires it. Which, in the case of David, no way takes place, without offering violence to the words. And I have sufficiently advised, that, by the helpe of Gods Spirit granted out of that grace which preventeth the Cove∣nant of grace, and, that state of grace which dependeth upon the undertak∣ing of it, a man is inabled to desire the gift of Gods Spirit to dwell in him, according to that which the Covenant of Grace promiseth. As for Saul and Solomon, both of them indowed with Gods Spirit, the one of them must not be understood ever to have been in the state of grace, the other, to have ever fallen from it. For, it is alleged, that Balaam and Caiaphas prophesied; and, our Lord shall say to those that had prophesied and cast out devils and done miracles in his Name, I never knew you; Mat. VIII. 22. 23. But S. Paules words would be considered, concerning his Apostles office 2 Cor. III. 4. 5. 6. This confidence we have towards God through Christ; Not because we are sufficient of our selves to thinke any thing as of our selves, but our sufficience is of God, who hath made us able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter but of the Spirit. For, if the grace of an Apostle suppose not the grace of a Christian, how hath S. Paul confidence to God, in the grace of an Apostle given him by God, which a Christian obtaineth through Christ? Certainly, no man spares to argue from these words, that we are not able of our selves to think any thing towards the discharge of a Christian mans office; as taking it for granted, that a good Apostle supposes a good Christian. And, what an inconvenience were it to grant, that God imployes men, that are not good, upon his messages to mankind, giving them the opo∣ration of the Holy Ghost to demonstrate that he sendes them, which is suffi∣cient credit for all that they deliver as in his name; unlesse we will imagine it no inconvenience, that God gives testimony to those whom he would not have to be beleeved? As for Balaam, it is manifest, that he was imployed by un∣clean Spirits, to maintaine men in theire Idolatries, by foretelling things to come by their means: And, that Gods appearing to him, to hinder him from cursing his people, was upon the same account, as Arnobius saith, that Magicians did use to find the virtue of Spirits opposite to those unclean Spirits whome they imployed, not suffering them to bring to effect those misehevi∣ous intentions, for which they set them on work. And by this means it was that Balaam, not being imployed by God, is forced to declare that will of God which he would have made voide. As for Caiaphas, it is not to be im∣agined, that he had any revelation of that truth which he declareth by the in∣spiration of Gods Spirit; but, that God, who, from the beginning had used the High Preists, by Urim and Thummim to declare his direction to that people, directed his words so, that they might serve to declare that will of his which he had never acquainted him with, as a Prophet of his; nor could have been acknowledge for that will which God intended to declare by him, had not S. John, by the Spirit of God, declared Gods intent in so directing his words. Wherefore, when God changed Sales heart at his parting with
Samuel, and sent his spirit upon him straight wayes, 1 Sam. X. 9. 10. it seemes that, having liked so well of him as to call him to be Prince of his people, he indowed him with the grace of his Spirit, for the discharge of that place, which onely a good man could rightly discharge. Whereupon it fol∣lowes, that, the taking away of this Spirit, and sending an evill Spirit in steade thereof to torment him, are the evidences of his fall from that inward grace, which the gift of Gods Spirit presupposed afore. Whereby we may judge, what the Parable of the uncleane Spirit cast out, and returning with seven Spirits worse then himselfe Mat XII. 43. 44. 45. Luke XI. 24. 25. 26. imports to our purpose; though, being a Parable, I bring it not into con∣sequence. The like is to be said of those, who, having prophesied and done miracles in our Lords name, shall not be acknowledged by him at the day of judgement. For, when he saith, I never knew you; he speaketh out of the knowledge of God, which, reaching from one end to the other at the same instant; when they had the grace of Prophesy, to witnesse their im∣ployment from God, foresaw that they would fall away, and, becoming Apostates, retaine no part in the kingdome of heaven which they had preach∣ed. No mervaile if he take them not for his, who, he sees, are not to be his for everlasting; To which purpose the graces of Gods Spirit are promised true Christians Marke XVI. 17. Acts II. 38. V. 32. And, though Origen hath excellently said; that the name of Christ had such power over devils, that some times, being alleged by evill men, it did the deed, though rather, when out of the sound and genuine disposition of beleivers; (as those Ebrews, who, in our Lords time, did exorcise Devils, as he showes us Mat. XII. 25. and, as we learne by Justine Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertulliane, and Theophilus of Antiochia produced there by Grotius, that, so they did till theire time) yet, the doing of miracles in evidence of the Gospell which they preached, alleged by those whome our Lord shall disclaime, seemes to import a great deale more, then the casting out of devils by naming the name of Christ; and therefore, to containe the approbation of those men, whose imployment from God they seemed to witnesse. Here is the place where I will give the true meaning to three or foure Scrip∣tures, (for so many there are) that, in opposition to the whole streame of Gods book, men will needes produce, to reconcile the promises of the Gos∣pell with the present guilt and love of sinne, in Christians that have beene overtaken with it. Jesus answered and said; to the Samaritane woman John IV. 13. 14. 15. Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst againe. But, whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall not thirst, for ever; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up to life everlasting. The woman said to him; Lord, give me that water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw. I allow him that hath a mind to it, to tran∣slate our Lords words shall never thirst. For, it is plaine, the woman under∣stood him as if he had told her of a water, which, whoso should once drink of, should never be a thirst any more, as long as he lived. But, if she failed of his meaning, because she understood not that he spake of thirsting in the world to come; do not they faile of his meaning, who when he saith, he that drinks of my water shall not thirst for everlasting, understand it to be, that he shall ne∣ver thirst in this world; Being so plaine, that he shall not thirst in the world to come? They make him say; He that once tastes of my Grace, in him the spring of it shall never dye in this world; which is that the woman understood him to say in the literal sense, because she understood not that he spake of the world to come. He, comparing this world with the world to come saith; He that drinkes of my water in this world, shall not thirst in the world to come. Which is to say, that he who departs from the Christianity which once he professed in this world, does not drink of my water in this world, because he comes short of my promise, that in him it shall be a well of water springing up to life everlasting. I have no reason to be afraid any more of the difficulty of S. Pauls words,
Rom. VIII. 28-39. having showed by evident arguments, that the subject of them, are they that love God, they that are called according to purpose, they that he foreknew to be such, they that walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit in Christ Jesus. For, to such I may well allow, that all workes for the best, because God, having foreappointed them to be once conformable to the pat∣tern of his sonne, that he might be the first-borne of many; calleth them o their trialls, and finding them faithfull in them, justifyeth and glorifyeth them there∣fore. Nor can S. Pauls words signify more, supposing, when he saith; whom he foreknew those he predestinated, whom he predestinated those he called, whom he called those he justifyed, whom he justified those he glorified; That he speakes of those whom God foreknew, to be qualified as afore; then this; that, know∣ing them to be such, he appointed them to bear Christs Crosse, and to inherit his glory for the reward of it. Wherefore, when it followes; What shall we then say to these things? If God be with us who can be against us? He that spared not his own Sonne, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things? It is manifest, that the quality which S. Paul understandeth in them whom he comprehends, when he names us, is no other but that which he hath described true Christians by, thus farre. And therefore, when he pro∣ceeds; Who shall impeach the elect of God? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, or rather that is risen againe, who is also at the right hand of God, Who also maketh intercession for us; It is manifest, that this word elect, hath no maner of reference to Gods everlasting decree, but to the present Christianity of those whom God declareth to account his choice ones, his jewels, his first fruits, out of all the rest of the creatures. So is  often used, in the New Testament especially, to signify egregius or eximius or that which they signify in Latine, when they speak of creatures chosen our of the flock to be sacrifices, or dedicated to God for first fruits. Examples you have in abundance, Mat. XX. 16. XXII. 14. XXIV. 23, 24, 31. Mark XIII. 20, 22, 27. Luke XVIII. 7. Rom. XVI. 3. Col. III. 12. 2 Tim. II. 10. Titus I. 1. 1 Pet. I. 1. II. 9. 2 John I. 14. Apoc. XVII. 14. In all which texts there is nothing to be sound, that inforceth any more, then the choice esteem which God has of those that are there qualified his elect, without inti∣mation of any decree of his, whereby he hath designed them to life everlasting. Which, those that will not content themselves with, when the Apostle exhorteth to make our calling and election sure. 2 Pet. I. 10. to wit, to assure our selves of the state and condition of Gods choice ones; do intangle them∣selves in everlasting difficulties, how any man can assure himself of that which he can never forfeit, being passed from everlasting. Let S. Paul then go for∣ward; Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or hunger, or nakednesse, or peril, or the sword? (as it is written; For thee are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep to be slaine) Nay, in all these we are more then conquerors, through him that hath loved us. For I am perswaded, that neither death nor life—shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is through our Lord Christ. Is there any thing in all this to signify, that sinne cannot separate Christians, from the love of God; Not, that neither life nor death, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things pre∣sent, nor things to come, nor heigth, nor depth, nor any other creature can separate those whom S. Paul comprehends with himself in the plurall us, from the love of God to sinne? Surely I cannot allow the curiosity of those, that would have Saint Paul say all this, out of a revelation made to him in particular, of his sal∣vation; For what shall become of this us? whom besides S. Paul shall it com∣prise? But when S. Paul sayes , I am perswaded, he sayes no more of himself, then, I can maintaine every one of those whom he comprises with himself in the plurall us, to say; Which is, that every good Christian may aime at as firm a perswasion, of attaining salvation, as he findes, his own reso∣lution to be firme, to abide in the way of it; And that, having digested the greatest difficulties to which he is liable, and, being assured not to faile of Gods help, in not failing of his indeavours by grace received from God; none
of them shall be of force to cast them away. Indeed I find S. Paul more con∣fident in the same purpose, when he speakes nearer death 2 Tim. IV. 7, 8. I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the faith: henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righte∣ous judge shall render me; As having it from God, that there was not much of his course remaining, and having digested in his mind the terrors of death. But when he saith further; And not onely to me, but to all that love his appearance; I am confident, as those that love his appearance have the same crown laid up∣for them, so, they that know they love his appearance, may as well know, that they have the same crown in store. And therefore, that S. Paul meant not to abate any thing of this confidence, when he said; 1 Cor. IX. 26, 27. I there∣fore so runne as not at random: So fight I, as not beating the aire; But chasten my body, and inslave it, least, having preached to others, I leave my self a re∣probate; But, that he expresseth hereby the supposition upon which his confi∣dence was grounded, together with his resolution to undergo the utmost of it. The words of S. John have no difficulty in them, if we take them together 1 John III. 7, 8, 9. Little children let no man deceive you: He that doth righ∣teousnesse is righteous, even as he is righteous: He that sinneth is of the Devil, for the Devil sinneth from the beginning. The Sonne of God was manifested on pur∣pose to dissolve the workes of the Devil. Every man that is borne of God doth not commit sinne, because his seed abideth in him, and he cannot sinne, because he is born of God. Was there not reason for Saint John to warne them against all deceitfull pretenses of righteousnesse before God, in them that live not in righteousnesse, when it is manifest, that he writes against Heresies, which, wallowing in uncleannesses, pretended a secret ground where∣upon they continued righteous before God? I say not that this is the opinion I write against: But I say, that, if the Apostles argument be true; that sinne is from the devil, and, that Christ came to dissolve the works of the devil; Then, he that doth the works of Belial hath no part in Christ, more then Belial hath. And therefore, when it followeth, every man that is borne of God doth not commit sinne, because his seed abideth in him; He meanes not to show us a distinction, to sinne, and injoy the pleasure of sinne, without com∣mitting of sinne, as if the sinnes of the regenerate, overcoming so many more obligations, were not committed more then those of the unregenerate. Nei∣ther doth he discover that which every man knew before, by saying, that a Christian, if he do like a Christian, sinnes not, because the seed of his Christia∣nity remains in him; unlesse we think our Lords words to no purpose Mat. VII. 16. 17. 18. doe they gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles? So, every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree badde fruit. A good tree cannot bring badde fruit, nor a corrupt tree good fruit; And that, speaking of the same Heresies, of which S. John is to be understood, as I have showed, that they might not admit any pretense against that mark. Or, unlesse we thinke S. Ignatius his words to no purpose, who uses the same sentence in the same case. Wherefore, when S. John saith, that he who is borne of God cannot sinne, because his seed is in him; his meaning is that which Tertulliane expresseth, de praescript. Haeret. Cap. III. Non futurus Dei filius si admiserit; Because he cannot continue the sonne of God if he sinne. It hath been much argued, that S. Paul, Rom. VII. 7-25. sets forth in him∣self, as regenerate, such a conflict between the law of his members and the law of his mind, that, as a carnall man, he confesses himself to be sold under sinne; because saith he, what I do I allow not: For what I would I do not, but what I would not that I do. Which if I doe when I would not, I agree with the Law that it is good. But it is not I that do it, but sinne that dwelleth in me. And this law in his members, warring against the Law of his mind, he sayes lead him cap∣tive to the Law of sin in his members, so that he cries out; Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Whereunto is added the authority of S. Augustine, pressing this exhortation so hard, that it serves
for an aspersion of Pelagius his heresy, for a man not to allow it. Though S. Augustine is not alone in it. Methodius against Origen, in Epiphanius writing against his heresy, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and others perhaps among the Fa∣thers, follow the same sense. But the aspersion is too abusive. For, I have showed, that the Tradition of the Church, declared by the records of the Fa∣thers, extendeth not to the exposition of particular Scriptures, but to give bounds, within which the Scriptures are to be understood. Wherefore, had S. Augustine and his party truly expounded this Scripture, yet ought it not to be a mark of Plagianisme to maintaine another exposition, without supposing any part of Pelagius his heresie. But, if they consider further, that S. Au∣gustine acknowledges no more then the motions of concupiscence, which are alive in the regenerate, to divert the rigor of their intentions from the course of Christianity; not, the committing of any sinne that layeth wast a good conscience, to be consistent with the state of grace; they will have little joy of S. Augustines exposition of this place. For, what is that to the murther and adulteries of David, to the apostrasy of S. Peter, to the Idolatries of Solo∣mon? Or, what consequence is it, because concupiscence is alive in Christians, that are at peace with God untill death: that therefore David, S. Peter and Solomon were at peace with God, before they had washed away those sinnes by repentance? Wherefore, I must utterly discharge S. Augustine, and those of his sense, of having said any thing prejudiciall to Christianity, by expound∣ing S. Paul according to it. The question that remaineth will be, how S. Paul can call himselfe carnall and sold under sinne, how he can say, I like not that which I doe; For I doe not what I would but what I hate; And, to will is present with me, but how to doe that which is good, I find not; And; I find a Law, by which, when I would doe well, evill is at hand to me; And that, this Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, leades mee cap∣tive to the Law of sinne that is in my members; And; wretched man that I am, who will deliver me from the body of this death? The question I say will be, how all this can be said of him, of whome it followes, Rom. VIII. 1, 2, 5-8. There is therefore now no damnation for those in Christ Jesus, that walke not af∣ter the flesh, but after the spirit. For, the Law of the spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, hath freed me from the Law of sinne and of death. For, they that are according to the flesh, mind the thinges of the flesh; They that are according to the Spirit, the things of the spirit. For, the sense of the flesh is death, but the sense of the spirit, life and peace. Because the sense of the flesh is enemy to God, for it is not, nor can be subject to the Law of God; Neither can they that are in the flesh please God. For, if these things cannot be said of the same man at the same time, it remains, that, though we allow S. Augustine and those of his sense, that a Christian falls continually into sinne, and by continuall offices of Christianity comes cleare of it; yet, when he willfully runnes into that sin, which, he cannot but know that it cannot stand with his Christianity; he can∣not be of that number, for whom, S. Paul sayes, there is no condemnation, in Christ Jesus, that walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. And therefore, for the true meaning of the Scripture in hand, it will be requisite to have re∣course to that figure of speach, whereby, S. Paul himselfe declareth, that he speakes that of himselfe, which he would have understood of others, meerely for the a voiding of offense, 1 Cor. IV. 6. So is it no mervaile, if, to make those that were zealous of the Law beleeve, that they could not be saved but by Christianity, he whom they took for an Apostle, show it in his owne case, before he was a Christian, saying; Is the Law sinne? Nay, I had not knowne sinne but by the Law. Rom. VII. 7—I have showed, you, how Grotius hath understood him to speak of himselfe, in the person of an Israelite, comparing himselfe, considered as having received the Law, and under the Law, with himselfe, before he received it. If any man think this considera∣tion to farre fetched, for S. Paul to propose to those, zealous of the Law, that he writes to; He may understand him to speake in the person of one of them, to whome the Gospell had been proposed, (and thereby, conviction of
the spirituall sense of the Law) which therefore, the concupiscence which we are borne with cannot but make great difficulty to imbrace, according to the premises. For, seing the Scribes and Pharises, having received the Tra∣dition of the world to come, in opposition to the Sadduces, had prevailed with the body of that people, to believe, that the outward observation of the law, according to the letter, was the means to bring them to the rewards of it; It is no mervaile if S. Paul, in the person of one so reduced, say; I had not known concupiscence, had I not found the Law to say; Thou shalt not covet. For, he that understood not the Law of God to prohibit the inward motions of concupiscence, till, by the preaching of Christianity, he learned that to be the intent of the precept▪ may very well say, that, he knew not concupi∣scence but by the Law so preached. By that same reason might he say, as it followeth; Without the Law sinne is dead. But I was once alive without the Law: To wit, when he thought himself in the way to life under the doctrine of the Pharisees; But, when the commandment came, to be declared to him in that sense, which the salvation tendred by the Gospel requireth, its no marvaile if sinne that was in him, and concupiscence of it revived, and he was discovered to be dead in sinne, as not yeelding to the cure of it. But, that the command∣ment which was given for life became unto his death, because sinne, taking occasion by it, deceived and slew him; All this takes place in that Pharisee, who, being perswaded by the Pharisees, that, by not contriving to take away his neighbors wife and goods, he stood qualifyed for the world to come; now, coming to know, by the preaching of the Gospell, the restraint of inward concupiscence is commanded by it, found himself by meanes of the Law, cousened and slaine, as enimy to Christianity, which tenders the onely cure of sinne; Whereunto the conclusion agrees well enough. For when, having questioned; Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me out of the body of this death? He answereth; I thank God by Jesus Christ our Lord; He seemeth to declare, that, the Gos∣pel having overtaken him in this estate, and discovered him to himself in it, the imbracing of it cured him, and gave him cause to thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ, for his deliverance from it. All the rest, that followeth be∣tween these terms, in the discourse of Saint Paul, serving for a very lively description of that mans estate, who, being convinced of the truth of Christianity, findeth difficulty in renouncing the pleasures which sinne furnisheth, for the obtaining of those promises which the Gospel ten∣dreth. There remaineth yet one difficulty, concerning the Polygamy of the ancient Fathers, before and under the Law; which to me, hath allways seem∣ed an argument for the truth which I maintaine, rather then an objection against it. If any soule, sensible of the feare of God, can imagine, that Gods Jewells, his choice ones, the first fruits of his creatures, knowing them∣selves to be under the Law of having but one wife, not to be parted with till death, should notwithstanding take many, (and those many times so quali∣fied, as the Law, much more Christianity, allows not; as Jacob two sisters, Abraham his neece, and so Amram) and, to outface the Law, hold them till death, and never come short of Gods favour, whose Law they transgresse with bare face, as the Scripture speakes; let him believe that a Christian, living in sinne, can be in the state of grace. But, he that sees the Law to have restrained marying with the neice, which he sees practiced afore; and sees withall, that plurality of wives is not forbidden by the Law, (for, be∣sides wives of an inferior ranke, which may be called concubines, a captive Deut. XXI, 11. and an Ebrew maid sold for a slave Ex. XXI. 8. 9. 10. there can be no question in the Law of two wives whereof the one is beloved the other not Deut. XXI. 15. besides, that, the Law restraining the King from having many wives, seemes to allow him more then every man hadde, and therefore, that David might be within compasse of the Law, though Solomon trode it under foot) I say, he that considers these things, will be moved to be of opinion, that the Pharises interpretation of Levit. XVIII. 18. is true, and
that, before that Law, there was no prohibition for a man to marry two sisters, which is there first introduced, and yet with an exception in Deute∣ronomy, in the case of a brother deade without issue; which before the Law, was also in force, as by the story of Judah Gen. XXXVIII. doth appeare. I will therefore conclude, that, as the knowledge of God increased by giving the Law, so was the posterity of Abraham restrained from more by the Law, then the posterity of Noe, upon the promises given them, had been restrained from after the deluge. From whence, in all reason it will follow, that the posterity of Abraham according to the spirit, which is the Church of Christ, should be still restrained from more, then the posterity of Abraham accor∣ding to the flesh, by the law. And so, that the Fathers before and under the Law, living in Gods grace, did, not withall, live in open violation of Gods Law; but, that they knew themselves not to be under the Law of one wife to one husband (though intended in Paradise) by virtue of Gods dis∣pensation in it, till Christianity should come. For unlesse we presume, that, not onely all thinges necessary to our salvation, but, all thinge necessary to the salvation of all men since the world stood, are recorded in the Scriptures, there can be no reason to presume, that they could not understand what Lawes they were under, but by those Scriptures, which for our salvation, have been granted us. I argue yet further, that it will be impossible for true Christians, and good Christians, to attaine unto assurance of the state of Grace, if it be to be had for them, that commit such sinnes as Christianity consists not with. And this, upon supposition of the premises, for the ground of this assurance. For, without doubt, were not some thing in the condition which the Gospell re∣quireth impossible for flesh and blood to bring forth, it were not possible for him that imbraceth the Gospell, to assure himselfe, that he doeth it out of obedience to God, not out of those reasons which hypocrites may follow. But I, having declared afore, and maintaining now, that no man, by the force of flesh and blood, (that is to say, of that inclination to goodnesse which a man is born into the world with) is able to profess Christianity out of a resolute and clear intention to stand to it; am consequently bound to maintaine, that he who soe doeth not onely may, but must needes assure himselfe of the favour of God, in as much as he cannot but assure himself of that which himselfe doeth. For, in as much as he knowes what himselfe means, and what he does; as S. Paul sayes, that no man knowes what is in man, but the spirit of a man which is in him; so sure it is, that a mans selfe knowes what he means, and what he does, as it is sure that another man knowes it not. But, not allowing, nor presupposing this ground of a mans knowledge, how shall he know it? Shall a man, by having a perswasion that he is in the number of Gods elect, or, by ha∣ving in himself an assurance of Gods love, to the effect of everlasting hap∣pinesse, be assured, that his assurance is well grounded, and that he is of that number which is elected to life everlasting? As if it were not possible for the temptations of Satan, and carnall presumption, to possesse a man as much, even to this effect, as the Spirit of God can do. Where is then the effect of Christianity seen, if not in limiting such grounds, and such termes, as he that proceedeth upon, shall not faile of that grace of God, whereof he assureth him∣self upon those grounds? But, he that placeth that faith which alone justifyeth, in believing, that he who believeth is predestinate to life everlasting; Or in the confidence of Gods grace in attaining the same; I demand; upon what ground he can pretend to distinguish this faith from that, which, he cannot de∣ny that it may be false. For if it be said, that the Spirit of God that is in him assureth him, that his perswasion is well grounded; It is easie for me to say, that the question to be cleared, that is to say; whether it be the Spirit of God that tells him so, or not; cannot be the evidence to clear it self. And there∣fore, that he standeth obliged to bethink himself of some meanes, whereupon he may assure himself that it is the Spirit of God, not the temptation of Satan, or carnall presumption, that assures him to be of the number of those that are
predestinate to life everlasting. For, if any man say, that he is assured that the act of his faith, which he first conceived, when he was first converted from sin to righteousnesse, assures him of the grace of God, because it was grounded up∣on that conversion to God which the Gospel requireth; I will yeeld him all that. But then I will demand of him, who presupposeth true conversion to God, according to the terms which the Gospel requireth, (that is to say; Joyn∣ed with a sincere resolution of living for the future, in that conversation that the Gospel prescribeth) to be the condition of those promises which the Gospel tendereth; I say I will demand of him, upon what ground he can perswade himself, that, having professed Christianity and failed of it he remains in that favour of God, which he obtained by professing that Christianity which he performeth not. Indeed could it be said, that the condition which the Gospel requireth is a thing that God immediately determines man to do, without and before any determination of his owne; I should not much marvaile, that a man, who is accepted by God upon such a condition, should continue in favour till it come againe, and make him hate that sinne for which he forfeited it. But having proceeded thus farre, in showing, that the condition which the Gospel pel requires, is no lesse then the totall change of a mans intentions, from seek∣ing the world, to seek God; and, that the helps of Grace determine him to this no otherwise, then, by determining him to choose the better and leave the worse; For me to say, that, waving this determination, he remaines possessed of the promises which it produceth, would be to say, that there is no reason why any man should require repentance, as a condition which justifying faith presupposeth. And therefore it is very much to be admired, that those who would seem truly religious, should think it an abridgement to that security and confidence, that peace and joy in the holy Ghost, that boasting assurance, which S. Paul professeth to be the priviledge of true Christians, that they can∣not maintaine it but upon just assurance, that, upon their true conversion to God, there was just ground for it. Nay further, that God invites not men to Christianity upon faire termes, unlesse he allow it. For I demand; Is it not an act of infinite mercy in God, to set up a standard of confidence to all the world, conditionally, that they imbrace those termes which he propoundes, out of his own meer goodnesse? Is it not enough, that be allowes them pardon, upon condition of repentance? That he allowes this to them that have for∣feited their repentance never so often, by repenting them of their repentance? Especially, to them who ground themselves upon their repentance, as the con∣dition whereupon they obtained his favour, can it seem strange, that his favour should become void, when they repent them of their repentance? Some object the case of Caleb and Josua, who, upon preseverance, when theire fellowes fell away, are assured of the land of promise; to argue, that under Christianity, by perseverance in it, a man may obtaine assurance of salvation, such as that which Gods word createth to those who know it to be Gods word, as to that which it assureth. The difference of the case is this; That, they had Gods word for their assurance, which I must needs have grant∣ed in S. Pauls case, had I granted that the assurance of salvation which he pro∣fesseth had been grounded upon a revelation made to him in particular, that he should be saved. But, seeing I have grounded that assurance, which he ex∣presseth, meerly upon that conscience of the common Christianity, which he had; I say, that, supposing Caleb and Joshua to be certaine of their inheri∣tance in the land of promise, by virtue of the promise there recorded (which nothing hinders, to imply that condition of walking according to the Law of God, upon which it is made) It is enough, that the Gospel can assure us of eternall life, upon supposition of that disposition of mind, upon which S. Paul assures himself of it. For if it be said, that, he who assures a man, of Gods grace upon condition of doing what he can to hold it, assures nothing, seeing it is agreed upon, that he which doth no more then he can shall certainely fall from it; The answer is easie, that nothing can be more injurious, then to mea∣sure that which man can do, when, by the grace of God he hath been resolved
to Christianity, (and thereupon hath received of God the promise of the ha∣bituall assistance of his Spirit, for the performance of that which he hath un∣dartaken upon confidence of Gods assistance) by that which no man by meet nature is able to do. For these promises being past upon supposition of that weaknesse and perversenesse by nature which they come into the world with▪ it cannot be imagined, that man can become void, by the meanes of those subreptions and surprises of native concupiscence, to which all men are liable. Though, if a man shall openly transgresse his Christianity, in that, which, he must needs know, that it cannot stand with it; or, if by continued negligence, he cast off that regard that he hath professed to it; can any reason be imagined, why God should continue his favour, or the inward effects of it; but that which all men have, to reconcile the present love of sinne to the promises of the word to come? Wherefore, though I cannor allow, that saying, which the Schoole hath al∣lowed in many Doctors; Facienti quod in se est Deus largitur gratiam; Un∣lesse it be restrained to him that complies with the helps of preventing Grace; whom, I am perswaded, God will not faile to bring to the state of Grace, by following helps of Grace; Yet there is another saying of the Schoole which I do utterly allow: Deus neminem deserit, nisi desertus; That God leaves no man that leaves not him first; Because it is evident in reason, that the promise of the holy Ghost must come to nothing, unlesse it may be held upon such con∣ditions, as are possible to him that comes to be a Christian with originall con∣cupiscence; That is to say, so, as not to forfeit it upon those surprises and sub∣reptions, which morally no man can avoid; but, upon departure from that which a man upon deliberation had professed afore. He that considers how many times God in the Old testament, delivers the Israelites from those oppres∣sors, to whom he had given them up for their transgressions of his covenant; will never believe, that, upon every thansgression of Christianity, he will break with those that sincerely desire to continue in his favour, upon condition of it. And he that considers, that it is not commendable amongst men, to break off friendship upon every offence, with them whom a man hath entertained it with in matters of privacy, and a long time; will never apprehend, that the Scrip∣ture, representing the friendship of God with his children according to his Gospel, by the patern of that love which the best men show to those whom they intertaine friendship with, doth intend to expresse him disobliged upon every offense. But, unlesse we thinke it commendable for God to love men more then righteousnesse, for the love of Christ, to whom the same righteousnesse is no lesse deare then to God; will never thinke it agreeable to the honor of the Gospell, to propose the reward of that righteousnesse which it requireth, but, upon supposition of performing of it. Certainly Cel∣sus had done the Christians no wrong, in slandering them, that they received all the wicked persons whom the world spued out, into an assurance of ever∣lasting happinesse; nor could Zosimus be blamed, for imputing the change of Constantine the Great, to a desire of easing his conscience of the guilt of those sinnes which Paganisme could show him no means to expiate; had the Christians of that time acknowledged, that they tendred assurance of pardon to any man, but, upon supposition of conversion from his sinne. These thinges supposed, it will be easy to resolue, that, the assurance of salvation which the Gospell inables a good Christian to attaine, is not the act of justifying Faith, but the consequence of it. Indeed, if a man were justify∣ed by believing that he is justifyed; so farre as a man hath the act of justifying Faith, so farre he must necessarily rest assured, not onely of his right to sal∣vation at present, but of his everlasting salvation in the world to come. But, neither is that opinion, which maketh justifying Faith to consist in the trust and confidence which a Christian reposeth in God through Christ, for the obtaining of his promises, liable to the horrible and grosse consequence of the same. To exclude all Christians from salvation, that are not as sure that they
shall be saved, at they are of theire Creede, is a consequence as desperate, as it is grosse, to make that assurance the act of justifying Faith. The true act of justifying Faith, which is constancy in Christianity, the more lively and reso∣lute it is, the more assurance it createth, of those consequences which the Gos∣pell warranteth. For, no man is ignorant of his owne resolutions. Nor can be lesse assured, that it is Gods Spirit that creates this assurance, then he is assured, that his owne resolusions are not counterfeit. And therefore, his trust in God, not as reconcileable, but as reconciled, must needes be ans∣werable. And, the same trust may warrant the same assurance, though, not of it selfe, but upon the conscience of that Christianity whereupon it is grounded. And, by those things which were disputed, not onely during the Council of Trent, but also since the deree thereof, it is manifest, that the Church of Rome doth not teach it to be the duty of a good Christian, to be allwayes in doubt of Gods grace; But, alloweth that opinion to be maintain∣ed, which maketh assurance of salvation attainable upon these termes; and therefore incourageth good Christians to contend for it. As for the assurance of future salvation, which dependeth upon the assurance of preseverance till death, or, a mans departure in the state of Grace, you see S. Paul involveth all Christians in it with himselfe, by saying; I am perswaded, that neither life nor death—shall bee able to separate us from the love of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord; And therefore, I conceive, is was a very great imperti∣nence to dreame of any privilege of immediate revelation, for the means by which he hadde it. Whosoever is a Christian, so farre as he is a Christian, hath it. Adouble minded man, that is unconstant in all his wayes; as S. James speakes (that is who is not resolved to live and dy a good Christian) cannot have it; Whosoever hath that resolution, in as much as he hath that resolution; that is, so firme as his resolution is; so firme is his assurance. For, know∣ing his owne resolutions he knowes them not easily changeable, in a water importing the end of a mans whole course: And therefore, knowing God unchangeable while he so continues, is able to say full as much as Saint Paul saith; I am perswaded, that neither life nor death shall be able to separate e from the love of God in▪ Christ Jesus. As for the sense of the primitive and Catholick Church, (putting you in mind of that which I said before, to show, that it placeth justifying Faith in professing Christianity, the effect whereof in justifying must needes fail, so soon as a man faileth of performing that Christianity, in the profession where∣of his justification standeth) I shall not need to allege the opinions of particu∣lare Fathers, to make evidence of it, having Lawes of the Church, to make evidence, that those who were ruled by them must needs thinke the promises of the Gospell to depend upon the Covenant of our Baptisme; and therefore, that they become forfeit by transgressing the same. The promise of persever∣ing in the profession of the Faith untill death, and of living like a Christian, was allways expressely exacted of all that were baptized, (as now in the Church of England) And upon this promise, and not otherwise, remission of sinne▪ right to Gods kingdome, and the Gift of his Spirit, was to be ex∣pected. As, if it were not made with a serious intent at the present, bap∣tisme did nothing but damne him that received it; So, if it were transgressed by grosse sins, not to be imputed to the surprizes of concupiscence. For, the condition failing, that which dependeth upon the same must needs faile. For the means by which they expected to recover the state of Grace thus forfeited, we have the Penitentiall Canons (which, as they had the force of Law all over the Church, all the better times of the Church; So, I show from the begin∣ning, that they had theire beginning from the Apostles themselves) to assure us, that all beleived that, without which there could be no ground for that which all did practice. Can any man imagine, that the Church should ap∣point severall times, and severall measures of Penance, for severall sinnes to be debarred the Communion of the Eucharist, and to demonstrate unto the Church, by theire outward conversation, the sincerity of theire conversion
to theire first profession of Christianity; had not all acknowledged, that the promises of the Gospell, forfeited by transgressing the profession of baptisme, were not to be recovered otherwise? And that, the deeper the offense was, the more difficulty was presumed, in replanting the resolution of Christianity in that heart, which was presumed to have deserted it, according to the mea∣sure of the sinne whereby it had violated the same? This is enough to pre∣scribe unto reasonable men, against such little consequences, as now and then are made, upon some passages of the Fathers, which, upon by occasions, seeme to speake otherwise. S. Augustine is the maine hope of the cause, so farre as it hath any joy in the consent of the Church. But, what joy they can have of S. Augustine, may easily be judged, by his opinion of the VII. to the Romanes, and the difference which I have observed betweene it and theirs. For, what can any man imagine to be the reason, why he should understand. S. Paul to speake onely of the surprizes which the regenerate are subject to, remaining regenerate; but, because he was assured that they remaine not such, when they fall away to these grosse sinnes, which no man is surprized with? And, he that shall take the pains to peruse what S. Augustine hath written in his bookes de correptione & gratia, And de predestinatione sanctorum, may justly mervaile, how any man could come to have such an opinion of S. Augustine. Besides, in his worke de Civitate dei and in many other places, he hath so clearly expressed himselfe, that unlesse a man resolve, not to distinguish be∣tweene the state of grace, and the purpose of God to bring a man to everlast∣ing life, (which, he that useth the common reason of all men cannot but distinguish) it is a mervaile how S. Augustine should be taken to say, that the state of grace cannot become voide, because, it is true, he sayes so of∣ten, that the decree of predestination cannot become voide. S. Gregory is taken for one of the same opinion, because, expounding the words of the Prophet Jeremy, Lament. IV. 1. How is gold obscured? the pure masse chan∣ged? The stones of the Sanctuary scattered in the head of every street; Con∣cerning Christians that fall from theire profession, according to the true rea∣son of the mysticall sense; he hath these wordes; Aurum quod bscurari po∣tit, aurum in conspectu dei nunquam fuit. That gold which could be darkned, was never gold in Gods sight. But is it not easy to understand, that the sight of God is that freeknowledge, which the decree of predestination either sup∣poseth or produceth? And, that those whom God oreseeth to fall from theire Christianity were never gold in his esteeme, in regard of it? As I said afore, that he never knew them, whome, he ever knew, that they would not ever continue his. And, seeing S. Austine expressely distinguished between sonnes of God according to that which they are at present, and▪ according to Gods foresight and purpose; it will be necessary consequently, to distinguish upon the attributes of members of Christ, and of his Body, ingrafted into Christ, and his disciples; That, those are truly called such according to S. Austine, that shall continue such for everlasting; though, those that shall not so conti∣nue are so for the present, according to S. Austine. As it is peremtorily evi∣dent, by one exception; in that he maketh the difference between some of them, who have the gift of perseverance, and others that have it not, to consist in this; That, some are cut of by death, while they are in that estate, others are suffred to survive till they fall from it: A thing many times repeated in the bookes aforenamed, and which could not have been said, but by him that held both for the present to be in the state of Grace; Nor could he indeed dispute of perseverance▪ not supposing the truth of that, in which he requireth Grace to persevere. I acknowlege to have seen the Preface to one of the Volum that I spoke of, and in it some pretense, of making S. Austine, and S. Gregory espe∣cially, for the contrary purpose. But I doe not acknowlege to have found any thing at all alleged there, that had not been fully answered before it was alleged there, in Vossi his Collections Histori Pelagianae libro VI. Ths. XII-XV. And therefore I will discharge my selfe upon him in this point, rather then repeate breifly, in this abridgement, that which he hath fully said there. For, you
shall find also there, upon what termes, and, by what means, Christians may and doe overcome that anxiety of mind, which, the possibility of fall∣ing from Grace may affect them with, according to the Fathers; Even the same as according to S. Paul, whose assurance needed no revelation of Gods secret purpose; but the knowlege of that resolution, which Gods spirit had settled in his spirit; which, beeing assured that God will not forsake, while he forsakes not God, assureth him, that, by Gods helpe, he will not forsake God. And not onely he, but all, whom S. Paul comprises in the plurall us, as grounded like S. Paul. Otherwise, that a Christian, from the first instant of his conversion, should be able to say so; that, whosoever is saved, before death must say so out of the same confidence, knowing by faith that he is pre∣destinate; as it is meere frenzy once to imagine, so never did any of the Fathers maintaine. Onely, whereas the author of that Preface, acknowledging, that the Dominicans and Jansenians, (who hold up the Doctrine of S. Austine concerning the Grace of Preseverance) suppose neverthelesse, them to be regenerate, that are not predestinate, nor shall be saved; imputes it to the abominable fictions of implicite saith, and the efficacy of the Sacraments, in exhi∣biting and convaying the Grace which they seale; I would not have him thinke the efficacy of Baptisme can be counted a fiction, by any but fained Christans. Of the Sacraments, I say nothing in this place: For, I need not so much as suppose what a Sacrament is; And, whether Baptisme be a Sacrament or not, (though a thing that no man questions) is nothing to my present pur∣pose. That God contracteth with man for the promises of his Gospell, upon condition of Christianity; and, that this contract is not onely solemnized but inacted by receiving Baptisme; is not now to be proved, having been done from the beginning of this book. And, he that would be free of that which he contracteth for by his Baptisme; whereby he holdeth his title to all that the Gospell promiseth; would make that step to the renouncing of his Christiani∣ty. What implicite Faith should pervert the understanding of Doctors, whose Faith is explicite in all maters of Faith, I understand not; unlesse he meane, to acknowlege that which is most true, that there never needed any expresse decree of the Church in this point, (as in other points questioned by Pelagius) because never any man held otherwise. If this be the implicite Faith which he means, because the whole Church allwayes held it, but never decreed it; I shall agree to it, but not, that any Christian can be seduced by following it. Jovinian we reade onely of, confuted in this opinion by S. Jerome, not con∣demned by the Church; because he could never make it considerable, and so dangerous, to the Church. But in very deed, implicite Faith here sig∣nifies nothing, being onely imployed to make a noise, for a reason of that, for which no reason can be rendred▪ How that can be thought to be the sense of S. Austine, which never any of his followers, all zelous of his Doctrine, in the matter of Grace, could find in his writings. And therefore, the whole Church before the Reformation, and, since the Reformation, all that adhere to the Confession of Auspurg, in this point, are in the balance a∣gainst Calvine and his followers. As for the Church of England, if we con∣sider matter of right; That is, what ought to be the sense of the Article, which alloweth Penance, because men may cast off the Holy Ghost, which they have received; it is manifest, that the addition of neither totally, nor finally, is a Glosse that distroyes the text. For, that facility of returning to Grace once received, which, frequent custome, even of supernaturall actions, disposeth men to, may remaine, when the Gift of Gods spirit is forfeit; and, though God may as well continue the assistance of it, totally forfeited, as he did first, give the helpe of it; yet is all title to the promises of the Gospell totally forfeit: And that finally, to those whom God hath not appointed the Grace of Perseverance, whom, had he cut off at another time, they had been saved, according to S. Austine. Besides, making justifying Faith to consist in trust in God, according to the Article and Homily, it will be utterly unreasonble to imagine, that this trust, which is not attained but
premising repentance, should not faile, when that repeatance is recalled by sinne. But, making it to consist in the trusty undertaking of Baptisme, accor∣ding to the Service and Catechisme; it is a meer contradiction to imagine that it can stand intire, supposing such sinne. This for the sense of the Church of England, in point of right. In point of fact, as there have been allwayes those that have understood the article according to that Glosse which destroyeth the text; so is that force, whereby they have prevailed to destroy the Church of England, with all, no means to prevent the damntion of theire soules, that give themselves up to be taught according to it. CHAP. XXXII. How the fullfilling of Gods Law is possible, how impossible▪ for a Christian. Of the difference between mortall and vniall sinne. What love of God and of our neighbour was necessary under the Old Testament. Whether the Srmon in the Mount correct the false interpretation of the Jewes, or inhanse the obli∣gation of the Law. Of the difference between matter of Precept and matter of Counsail; and the Perfection of Christians. IF it be the marke of a good resolution, that it assoileth all difficulties inci∣dent to the question that is resolved; I shall not doubt that this will prove such, by the ready means which it furnisheth, to resolve those endlesse dis∣putes which depend upon the premises: As, in the first place, whether it is possible for the regenerate to fullfill the Law of God in this life, or not. For, supposing that which hath been said▪ the resolution is unavoidable; That, if we consider the originall Law of God, (which, under the Gospell, continueth the rule of that righteousnesse which we owe) it is not possible that mn, coming into the world with his originall concupiscence, should fullfill it, by doing every thing according to it: But, if we consider the termes of the Covenant of Grace, (which is the Law, by which, God hath declared that he will proceed with all them that are under it) that no man can be saved but by fullfilling it. The reason is cleare on both sides. For, seeing that originall concupiscence remains in them who are regenerate by Grace; and, that it is confessed on all handes, that, by the means thereof, all doe commit sinne; either there is no Law of God which that sinne breakes, (and so it is no sinne, which we suppose to be sinne) or, that Law is not fullfilled which that sin violateth. On the other side, if God, of his Grace, in considera∣tion of our Lord Christ, and his meris and sufferinges, hath declared him∣selfe redy to accept of all them that returne to him by true repentance, and serve him in the profession of Christianity, with that new obedience which it requireth; either the Gospell is false, which tendreth remission of sinnes and everlasting life upon condition of this new obedience, or, whosoever fails not of the condition, cannot come short of fulfilling of that Law. For, every contract is, by the nature thereof, a Law to the parties that make it. And, though the Covenant of Grace, according to which our Lord Christ will judge, is meerly Gods Law, because he chuseth the termes upon which he inacteth it with these that are baptized; (and declaring them, becomes ingaged to stand to them, before man ingageth) yet he becomes further ingaged by our imbracing the termes which he proposeth; and much more, by our ideavors, in forcing our naturall weaknesse and crookednesse to performe wha we undertake, and by the performance which these indea∣vors produce. And, if among civile men, friendship long exercized suffer not a man that stands upon his credit to breake upon ordinary offenses; we see the reason, why God so often helpes his ancient people, in respect of that Co∣venant, which they, for their parts, had made voide and forfeit: And there∣fore, how much more he obligeth himselfe to passe by those faillrs and weak∣nesses,
which Christians indeavor to overcome, and cannot fully doe it. It is indeed most manifest, that the Gospell requireth of Christians the full inno∣cence, and holinesse of Paradise; all that the first Adam was created to, be∣cause created in it. But it is manifest also, that they who undertake to be Christians come into the world with concupiscence; and therefore cannot undertake never to sinne) though they may undertake to persecute and to cru∣cify theire owne inclination to sinne, and to deny themselves things other∣wise Lawfull, when they find themselves subject, thereby to be seduced to sinne. And it is likewise manifest that our Lord Christ, who shall judge all men according to theire workes, shall not judge the workes of Christians according to that which they might have done, had not Adam failed; But, according to that which every one in his estate may attaine to, in the perfor∣mance of his Christianity. Here is then the ground, why, those thinges that are done against the Rule which the Gospell proposeth, out of invincible ig∣norance, or out of meer surprizes of concupiscence, (though, for the mat∣ter of them, contrary to that Law which the Gospell inacteth for the Rule of theire actions) cannot, by the Gospell, be imputed to Christians, striving toward that perfection which Christianity importeth. For, those who doe not study to mortify the concupiscence, whereby they have been seduced to sinne; to watch over theire thoughts, whereby, they knew, they may be sedu∣ced to sin; cannot be understood so to doe. And therefore, though sins of invin∣cible ignorance, and upon meer surprize of concupiscence, are sinnes against the Originall Law of Paradise, and the directive part of Christs Law, which revives it; Yet are they not sinnes against the Covenant of Grace, con∣tracted upon supposition of Originall sinne▪  nor against the vindi∣cative part of Christs Law, according to which he will judge Chris∣tians. Certainly, it is a grosse inconvenience, to acknowledge any thing to be sinne, which no Law of God forbiddes. That venial sinne should be beside the Law of God, but not against it, would make it no sinne; which, nothing but the transgression of the Law determineth 1 Joh. III. 4. Rom. IV. 15. For, why is any thing sinne, but, because it ought not to be done? Or, why ought it not to be done, but, because it is Gods will that it should not be done? Or, what would God have done that is not a Law to his creature? Therefore, all sinne, transgresseth that will, whereby God would not have that done, which, it doing, transgresseth his Law. On the other side, how clearly agreeth it with the goodnesse of God, how necessarily followeth it upon that Grace which his Gospell publisheth, that those who are called to it, supposing them obnoxious to that concupiscence, which will certain∣ly induce them to sinne, notwithstanding the Grace whereby they are rege∣nerate, should neither forfeit their estate in it, by every sinne which they com∣mit, nor, by any sinne which they forsake by timely repentance? There∣fore, how exact so ever that obedience is, which the Gospell requireth at our hands; So long as it leaveth him that returneth by repentance, from that sinne whereby he faileth of it, right of being reestated in his reconcilement with God; It is manifest, that his estate in the promises of the Gospel is not forfeit by falling into sinne, but by persevering in it. How much more, when it is acknowledged on all hands, that there are in the World so many meanes to divert our mindes from the true end and rule of our doings, so numberlesse snares for our inclinations▪ (naturally biassed towards that which seemeth best for the present) that no Christian can keep an exact account of the occasions, whereby he findeth himself to fail of that righteousnesse which he aimeth at; how much more, I say, is it to be presumed, that the grace of the Gospell reacheth further then any mans repentance, and, in consideration of our Lord Christ, accounteth not that to be a breach of Covenant, which, onely the ge∣nerall study of new obedience extinguisheth? In this consideration, if any man will say, that some sinnes are veniall others mortall, in regard of those terms of reconcilement with God, which the Gospel proposeth; (which as
no sinne voideth if repentance follow, so, those sinnes which the present weak∣nesse of our mortall nature cannot easily avoid, must not be thought to infring) he shall say no more then the Gospel of Christ will warrant, by necessary con∣sequence. But, whether any sinne be originally veniall, by that first Law of God, the transgression whereof it is; as it manifest, that we are not inabled by the Scriptures to dispute, (tending onely to reveal, by degrees, Gods pur∣pose of dealing with man under sinne, which the Gospel at last hath clearly set forth) so it is certaine, that it no way concernes, either my purpose, or any mans salvation, to determine. And this destinction of Gods Law is founded upon the expresse words of S. Paul Rom. IV. 27. where he saith, that glory∣ing is excluded by the law of Faith, not by the Law of workes. And S. James, 11. 12. So speak ye and so do ye, as those that shall be judged by the Law of liberty. For, those terms which God hath proposed to Christians, whom he hath freed from sinne, are that very Law of Christianity, whereby, those that are so freed shall be judged, whether they have walked in the freedome to which they were called or not; the originall Law, which differenceth good from bad, being set aside, as to the purpose of giving sentence by it. And, upon these termes, whosoever dieth in the state of Gods grace fulfilleth Gods Law, obtaining the promise which the Gospel tendreth, by fulfilling the condition which it requireth. But, where as it is further questioned among the Schoole Doctors, whether, according to the ordinary measure of Gods Spirit which the Gospel bringeth, it is possible for the regenerate to live without sinne, and that di∣stinguishing whether without mortall sinne, or whether without veniall sinne; (because I have allowed the distinction in some sense, and to some purpose) Having allready answered that which was necessary to be satis∣fied, I am not solicitous of the rest. The Church supposed the Faith secured, when it was resolved, against Pelagius; That the Law is not to be fullfilled without the Grace of Christ. For the rest. S. Austine was tender of denying, that a Christian may live without sin, by Grace. For what may it not doe? Yet, could have no good opinion of him that should thinke himself the man that lives without sinne. S. Jerom, with many of the Fathers, found it an in∣convenience to grant, that God commandeth impossibilities; And there∣fore punisheth that, which a man must needes doe. And yet he makes diffi∣culty to grant that a man may live without sinne. The Council of Trent decrees Sess. IV. Can. XVIII. Si quis dixerit, Dei praecepta, homini etiam justi∣ficato, & sub gratia constituto, esse ad observandum impossibilia, anathema esto. If any man affirme; that the commandments of God are impossible for a man that is justifyed, and in the state of grace, to keep; let him be anathema. Thus an opi∣nion, when Pelagius was condemned, becoms an article of Faith, by the Coun∣cile of Trent. But my opinion is not pressed by the decree. For, having ex∣cepted invincible ignorances, and meer surprises of concupiscence, because the Gospel supposes concupiscence, the commandments of God may be possible, and yet not possible for a man, whose intentions are distracted about many, to avoid all sinne. And it followes in the decree of the Council Can. XXII. Si quis, hominem Jemel justificatum, dixerit, posse in tota vita, peccata omnia etiam venialia, vitare; nisi ex speciali privilegio, quemadmodum de beata virgi∣ tenet Ecclesia; anathema sit. If any man say, that a man once justified may avoid all, even veniall sinnes, through all his life; unlesse by speciall privi∣ledge, as the Church holdeth of the blessed Virgine; let him be anathema. What Church holdeth that the blessed Virgine never sinned, I know not. That the Catholick Church holds it not, is evident by the opinions of doctors of the Church to the contrary, which you shall find, with the rest which I have alled∣ged in this point, in Vossius his Collections Historiae Pelagianae libro VI. Parte I. But Andreas Vega, who maintaines stiffely, that a Christian may live all his life without sinne, will have much ado to shelter himself from this anathema. Thus farre, then, I quarrel not the Council of Trent. And, those who have
the II. Councile of Orange at their fingers ends, whensoever the absolute effi∣cacy of grace is questioned, will be ashamed to refuse the last Canon of it, which saith; Hic etiam, secundum fidem Catholicam credimus, quod, accepta per Bap∣tismum gratia, omnes baptizati, Christo auxiliante, & cooperante, quae ad salu∣tem pertinent, possint ac debeant, si fideliter laboraro volueriut, adimplere. Here also, we believe, according to the Catholick faith, that, all that are baptized, ha∣ving received grace by baptisme, may and ought to fulfill those things which be∣long to their salvation, if they will faithfully labour it. Which is no more then to say; That they have sufficient grace to preserve them from falling away; Or from falling into those sinnes, which forfeit the state of Grace. Though, I easily yeild, this possibility is rather naturall than morall: And that, con∣sidering the many opportunities and provocations even to those sinnes, which the occasions of the world present the inclinations of Concupiscence, with it is, in the judgement of discretion impossible, that a man should not forfeit the state of grace, though absolutely there is nothing to inforce, that it must neces∣sarily come to passe. And truly the Prophet Davids prayer; To be cleansed from secret sinnes, but to be preserved from presumptuous sinnes, Psal. XIX. 12, 13. showes difference enough between the kindes: But the obtaining of this prayer, not to fall into any presumptuous sinne, depends upon that diligent watch, which even the regenerate may neglect to keep over themselves. Now, for him that shall have committed this forfeit, though the promise of the holy Ghost, and the habituall assistance thereof, is thereby voide; yet, the know∣ledge of Christianity, that is, the obligation and matter of it, and that facility of living the life of a Christian which custome leaves behind it, remaining; the actuall assistance of the H. Ghost, which alwaies accompanieth the preach∣ing of the Gospel, cannot be wanting, where so great effects of it are extant, to procure the recovery of him that is fallen away. Whether they shall take effect or no, it is in the justice and mercy of that Providence which onely ma∣keth them effectual. The wisdome of God, which shall laugh at the calamities, and mock when the feares of them come, that refuse when it calls, and regard not when it stretcheth out hands, Prov. I. 22—representeth the condition of those that forfeit the Promise, exceedingly terrible, in that they are fallen under Gods meer mercy; though it be granted, that they want not sufficient helps to re∣store them, till they be come to the end of their race. But, in very deed, the hardest of this point is, to give account how this holds under the old Law, how any man could be saved by fullfilling that Law, which, the Gospel declars to be taken away, because no man could be saved by fulfilling it. To which my answer must be, according to the supposition premised, con∣cerning a twofold sense of Moses Law, that is to say, a twofold Law of God, under the Old Testament; that it is no marvaile, if the civile happinesse of Gods ancient people, (which the Law of Moses, in the litteral sense, tendred for the reward of it) were to be obtained by worshipping the onely true God, and that civile conversation according to it, which that people, of their naturall freedome, were able to performe. True it is indeed which S. Peter saies, Acts XV. 10. that ither they nor their Fathers, were able to bear the burthen of Moses Law: And that, for that reason, which, not onely Origen, but divers others of the ancient Fathers, have alledged against the Jewes, that there went so many scruples to the precise observation of it, as it was not possible for any people in the world to overcome. For, there being such variety of cases, in∣cident to the observation of such variety of precepts, as no man could further be secured in, that he proceeded according to the will of God, then, as the determi∣nation of those, whom God, by the law of Deut. XVII. 8-12. XVI. 18. had refer∣red it to, might secure him; And, that alwaies new cases must needs prevent new determinations, of necessity, the precise observation of Moses law, even outward∣ly, and, in the literal sense, was in ordinary discretion thing impossible. Which is effectuall indeed to convince the Jewes, that God never was so in love with their Law, as to accept them for precisely keeping of it, even in the world to come: But provided it for an outward and civile discipline, to countenance
the inward godlinesse and righteousnesse of the heart, till he should think fit, openly to inact it for the condition of the world to come; In the the meane time, having tendered the Law for a condition, by which they might hold the land of promise; it is manifest, that the obtaining of it depended not upon that precise observation of all scruples, which, the nature of the subject ren∣dred, in humane reason, impossible: But that, in case they worshipped God alone, and observed the precepts of the Law with that dilligence, which a rea∣sonable and honest man would use in that case, the promise must become due. Whereby the law, in this sense, is a fit figure to represent, both the impossibi∣bility of Gods originall Law, and the gentlenesse of that dispensation thereof, which the Gospel importeth. As for the inward and mysticall sense of Moses Law, it is manifest, that, the countenance which the Law gave true righteousnesse, by inforcing the worship of the onely true God, (together with so many acts of righteousnesse among men, and temperance, chastity, and sobriety) with temporall penalties; With the faith of the world to come, and the doctrine of spirituall righteous∣nesse of it self acceptable to God, received from the Fathers, and maintained by the Prophets and their disciples, in all ages; maintained alwayes a stocke of such men, as God accepted of, even to the reward of the world to come. In whose condition, notwithstanding we must observe a kind of limitation, or ex∣ception to the temporall promises of the Law, not onely at such time as the people fell away from God, to the worship of Idols; but, in regard of hy∣pocriticall Governors, who, pretending zeal to Gods lawes of sacrifices and ceremonies, and the promises of God due to them in that regard, under that colour took advantage, sufficiently to abuse and oppresse his poor people. For when these cases fell out, the Prophets, whose office it was to reprove such things in Gods name, and their disciples, and followers, must needs fall under great persecution at these mens hands. So that, their right in the land of Pro∣mise turning to a sorry account of happiness, for them, who of all men were the most severe observers of Gods Law; of necessity, the temporal promises there∣of were supplied and made good to them by the hope of the world to come. Which (as Origen wisely and ingeniously observes) if a man well consider, he shall find, that flaw in the promises of the Old Testament to be as a chink, or breach in a wall, through which we may discern the light of the Gospel be∣yond it. For, if the matter be rightly considered, it will appear, that, these hypocri∣ticall Governours of Gods ancient people, which thought the promises of the Law for ever entailed upon themselves and their successors, upon the observing of sacrifices, and other ceremonies thereof, how little soever they minded the true intent and meaning of it; were the true predecessors of the Scribes and Pha∣risees in our Lords time; and the Prophets and their disciples, the forerunners of our Lord, and his Apostles; and, that both persecuted both upon the same score of account. The inward righteousnesse of the heart, which God onely alloweth, being that which both preached and professed, though the former, under that knowledge of God and of his will with the Law, the other, which the Gospell advanceth. And this the true and reall ground, why they, and that which befell them under the Old Testament, do beare the figure of our Lord and his Apostles, and that which befell them by the rulers of the Jewes in the New: According to the words of our Lord Mat. XXIII. 34—where he showeth, that by crucifying himself, and persecuting his disciples, they do but fill up the measure of their Fathers wickednesse. And S. Paul of the Jewes to the same effect. 1 Thes. II. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and please not God, and oppose all men. Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they may be saved. For wrath is come on them to the end. I say then, that, under that dimme light of Gods will which the Saints of the Old Testament injoyed, when the world to come was not yet covenanted for,
nor the sayings and doings of our Lord Christ manifested, to invite to Christi∣anity; it is necessarily consequent, that God should accept of that obedience under the law, which, as it must come from a sincere heart, and studious of pleasing him, so must it needs come short of that perfection which the Gospel requireth. For, as I said before, that love of God with all the heart, and all the soul, and all the might, which the Law requireth, is limited by the pre∣cepts of the law; which, whoso observes with all the heart and so forth must be thought to have performed that love, wherein then the observation of Gods law consisted. As for the precept of not coveting, of which S. Paul sayes, Rom. VII. 7-11. that he had not known concupiscence had not the Law said, Thou shalt not covet: And Saint Augustine observes, that, being joyned to to the precept of loving God above all things, they comprise all Christianity; Though all this be true according to the spirituall sense of the Law, yet accord∣ing to the leter, it cannot be denied, that the last precept of the decalogue forbiddeth onely compassing that which is another mans; Counting his wife in that number, because there was then meanes to compasse another mans wife, without breaking the Law, which allowed of divorces. And therefore this is the sene of that which followeth in S. Paul; Sinne, taking advantage, wrought in me all concupiscence by the commandment. For, without the Law sin is dead. But I once lived without the law; But, the commandment coming, sin revived and I died: And the commandment, which was to life, was found, for me to death. For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and so slew me; All this, I say, as the rest of that Epistle, concerning the inability of the Law to bring us to righteousnesse, is to be understood, of the outward and litterall sense of the law. To wit, that the Israelites, before they received the Law, (and so, other men without the Law) understood not that it was a sinne, but a piece of wit, to compasse a mans wife or goods, without violence, or to com∣mit that uncleannesse, to which the law had assigned no penalty. So the Law being given, and having assigned no penalty to the transgression of this precept; was it marvile, that sin, prevailing over that conviction of the con∣science, which the precept tendered, should seduce a man, to give way to con∣cupiscence, and turn the precept that was given for life to his death? He then, that was not imposed upon with this light of sinne, but received the com∣mandment as Gods, who hath other penalties in store then those which the Law assigneth; if, out of conscience to God, he observed the Laws of his wor∣ship from the heart, if he kept all that, which not onely the penalties assigned by the law, but the will of God declared by the precept, convinced him to take hold of his conscience; is it not reason to conclude, that he fulfilled that measure of spirituall righteousnesse, which God for that time, required of them whom he assured of the world to come, upon condition of such obedi∣ence? Which if it be so, that obligation to this righteousnesse, which was so declared under the Law, is that Law of spirituall obedience, which God judgeth those by, whom for that time, he accepted unto the reward of the world to come. As for the precept of loving our neighbour as our selves, having showed, that it concerned onely Israelites under the Law, I have also, by the same meanes, showed, that they were to detest the Gentiles as Idolaters, that detestation be∣ing the meanes to keep them up to the service of God, from falling away to Idols; Whereupon, as, by the Law, he that fell from the Law, and seduced his kindred to do the like, was to find no maner of pity, at the hand even of his brethren, Deut. XIII. 8. So also, it is provided by the Jews Constitutions, that they shall observe no rule of common equity, in seeking evidence against such a one, to bring him to conviction, and to make him an example. And as for those hypocrites, which, under pretense of the outward and carnall observati∣of the Law, persecuted the preachers of true spiritual righteousnesse (the Pro∣phets of Old, and our Lord and his Apostles, who pretended to carry it unto the Gentiles, whom they hold themselves obliged to hate, as having been once Idolaters) it is visible that those Saints who suffered persecution at their
hands, did not find themselves tied to that measure which the Gospel prescri∣beth, of praying for their enemies to the utmost. This is seen in those curses, which David and Jeremy pursue their enemies with, the Gospel having pre∣scribed for a generall rule to all Christians; Blesse them that curse you, Mat. V. 44. Luke VI. 27. Rom. XII. 14. 1 Pet. III. 9. James III. 9. I deny not that herein, they were figures and forerunners of our Lord and his disciples, and their sayings, prophesies of the curses that should overtake the people of the Jewes, for persecuting them: For I have showed, just now, the ground, upon which this is to be received. But I challenge, that ground also which I setled at the beginning; that, the mysticall sense of the Scripture alwayes supposeth a litterall sense, and that these things cannot be understood to be fulfilled in our Lord Christ, but that first they must have been verified in the Prophets them∣selves: In whome, as it is plaine, that the persecutions for which they curse, did come to passe, so plaine it is, that their curses fell upon their persecutors, For, nothing can be more manifest, then, that the Prophet Jeremy first prayed for the people, that God would not destroy them: And, when their sinnes were so great, that God would not hear him, but commanded him to publish their ruine; that they, thereupon, so hated and persecuted him, that his pa∣tience was overcome, and he prayed to God to punish their ingratitude to him with the judgements which he had denounced. Jer. VIII. 16. XI. 14, 19, 20. XVIII. 16, 17, 18. XVII. 18-23. And it is plaine, that the case is the same with the Prophet David, and that he, receiving evil for good of his enemies, thereupon, proceeds to those prayers which he makes against them Ps. XXXV. 11-14. LXIX. 5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 23-29. CIX. 3, 4, 5-20. And what is the difference between this and that of Elias? Of whom S. James V. 17. sayes, that he prayed that it might not raine, and it rained not for three yeares and six months: So that when he sayes, 1 Kings XVII. 1. there ll be neither dew nor raine upon the earth, but according to my word; He speakes upon the ob∣taining of that prayer of his: For afterwards, the raine came not till he prayed for it, 1 Kings XVIII. 43. Whereupon it followes in S. James; And again he prayed, and the heavens gave raine, and the earth budded forth her fruit. For, by these things you see, that he prayed for judgement upon the Land of Israel, for refusing his prophesies, even as he executed it upon the prophets of Israel, 1 Kings XVIII. 42. And is not the reason the same, when he destroyes two Captaines of fifties with their bandes, by praying for fire from heaven upon them, for taking in hand to execute the command of an Idolatrous King, and coming to seize him 2 Kings I. 10, 12? Is it not the same, in his Scholar and successour Elizeus, when he curses the children of Bethel, for despising of him, being a Prophet of God, whereupon two and orty of them are destroyed with beares out of the forest, 2 Kings II. 22, 23, 24? For, had these chil∣dren been bred in the fear of the true God, and not under Idolatrous parents, it cannot in reason be thought, that they would have reviled one of Gods Prophets, who were held in, and treated with, such reverence, even by the Princes of his people. And truely, when Samson casts away his own life to do mischief to Gods ene∣mies and the enemies of his people, out of this expresse consideration, of being revenged upon them, for putting out his eyes; can any mans heart be so hard∣ned, by misunderstanding the Scriptures, as to say that this can be reconciled with the principles of Christianity, which forbid all revenge? Jud. XVI. 28-31. Rom. XII. 19. Mat. VI. 22, 38-48. It is said indeed, that Samson did this, as a figure of Christ, who killed his enemies, the powers of darknesse, by his death. And it is certainly true. But that will not answer the reason formerly alledged. Whether we say, that Samsons death was a figure of Christs, by the intent of Samson, or by the intent of God, whose Providence so ordered things to come to passe, that his death might figure Christs death; It cannot be said, that the intent of figuring Christs death could make that agreeable to Gods Law, which otherwise was not. Rather we are to advise whether sinfull actions, and not according to Gods own Law, were fit to figure Christ. Nor
will it serve the turne to say, that he did it by the motion of Gods Spirit, which, we are indeed to allow, that the Judges, being Prophets were indowed with. For, it is not to be said, that the Spirit of God moveth any man to do that, which, the will of God declared by his Law forbiddeth. And therefore, the fact of Razias 2 Mac. XIV. 37-46. though not udertaken, with that confi∣dence of doing mischief to Gods enemies, which Samson had by the assurance of his being called to deliver Gods people from them; yet, being done, to de∣prive them of their pleasure they should have, in insulting over Gods people, destroying so faithfull a servant of his, must needs be said to proceed from the the same motive with Samsons; Though I say not, therefore, that this can serve to prove that Book of the Maccabes to be either Canonical or otherwise. Thus much, I conceive, is to be granted, that, the Maccabees taking armes for maintaining their Religion and Nation against the tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, is not to be condemned as against Gods Law, because we see them commended By the Apostle Heb. XI. 35-38. And yet, for Christians to take armes for the maintaining of themselves in the free exercise of their religion, (much more, for the Power of imposing of it upon others) is certainly, con∣trary to the instructions of the Apostles Rom. XIII. 1-6. Titus III. 1. 1 Pet. II. 13-17. as it appears by the practice of all the Primitive Christians, who, maintaining themselves to be for number able to defend themselves by armes against persecution, maintaine withall, that their profession did not allow them so to do. And indeed, though the godly Jewes indured death rather then re∣nounce Gods Lawe, (as the Christians afterwards) yet, a man may see a great difference between the motives of their severall sufferings, if be consider, that they died for the Lawes of their country; (which the heathen themselves have reputed a due consideration for a man to part with his life for, though out of carnall selfe love)▪ ow much more to obey Gods Law, (whom they main∣tained to be the onely true God) by suffering death for the lawes which he had given them? Whereas Christianity requires to be maintained with our lives, though we become ignominious by the Lawes of our Countries for maintain∣ing it. Whereby we see how true it is, that God allowed them some motives of temporall good, to invite them to undergoe the hardship, which the pro∣fession of his Lawes should inferre: Whereas, from Christians he challenges the same constancy, when he allowes no presumption of help in this world, no hope but that of the world to come. Which is, indeed, another strong argument, that God accepted of a lower measure of obedience under the Law, then he requireth, under the Gospel, of Christians: Because, forsooth, he alwayes managed his ancient people (like babes, with the fear of the rod, and the hope of cakebread, so) with the fear and hope of the blessings and punishments of this present world, habituating them to presume of his favour or disgrace, according to the same. Let any man read the book of Psalmes, and consider throughout the whole tenor of it, what presumptions of Gods favour, those who indited them by Gods Spirit do raise upon temporall deliverances, of his disgrace, upon the insultations of Gods and their enemies; and tell me, if it be according to the stile of the Gos∣pell, which alloweth onely, the assurance of Gods providence for subsistence in this world, to perswade us to take up Christs Crosse? Well then saith S. Paul Rom. VIII. 15. Ye have not received any more the Spirit of bondage to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry, Abba, that is, Father. For, those that are led with the hope of temporall promises, (as all must neces∣sarily be led, under that Law which was established upon such) must needs be subject to fear of disgrace with God, whensoever their sinnes allowed not those promises to take place. So then, though they were then partakers of Gods Spirit, as the Prophet Ezekiel showes us XXXVI. 27. XXXVII. 14. XXXIX. 20. Yet, in as much as it is called the Spirit of feare, there is due argument, that, they were not pertaker of that peace and joy in the holy Ghost. which Christi∣ans afterwards were moved with, to indure all persecution for the maintainance of their profession. But, the Apostle pointeth us ou further, the sourse of
this feare, Heb. II. 14, 15. When he saith, that our Lord Christ tooke part f flesh and bloud, that, by death, he might abolish him that had the power of death, ven the devil, and discharge all those, that, through the fear of death, were all their life long subject unto bondage. For, so long as the promises of this life ended in death, and the punishments thereof conducted to it, they who knew that death came into the world upon the transgression of Adam, could not think themselves, discharged of Gods wrath, so long as they found themselves liable to the debt of it. No marvaile then, if the Spirit of God were the Spirit of fear, in them, who saw not as yet the kingdom of death dissolved, by the ri∣sing of our Lord Christ from the dead. Another argument I make from the words of our Lord, when the disciples were ready to demand fire from heaven upon those Samaritanes that received them not, after the example of Elias Luke, IX. 52-56. Ye know not what Spirit ye are of, saith our Lord; For the Son of man came not to destroy, but to save mens lives. Whereby he declareth that, because the Gospel bringeth salvation, whereas the Law wrought wrath, as S. Paul saith, by tendring conviction of sinne, without help to overcome it; Rom. III. 20. IV. 15. VII. 8-11. there∣fore, God requireth under the Gospel, of those that are his, the Spirit that seeketh onely the good of them from whose hands they receive it not; Where∣as, under the Law, even his Prophets, revenged themselves of their enemies, by vengeance obtained at Gods hands. And, by this meanes, we have an an∣swer for that difficulty, otherwise insoluble, in our Lords words, of John Bap∣tist, Mat. XI. 11. Verily I say to you, there never arose among those that are born of women one greater then John the Baptist. But the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater then he. For, if God under the Law required not of his Prophets, that perfection of Charity, which the Gospel exacteth of all Christi∣ans; if, in those things which they said and did by Gods Spirit, they have not expressed it; well may it be said, that the least of all those that belong to the Gospel in truth, which here is called the kingdom of heaven, is, in a respect of so great concernment, greater then the Prophets of the Old Testa∣ment. As for the example of Jael the wife of Eber the Kenite, who, being in league with Jabin and Siera, for the good of Gods people, knocked him on the head, being retired into the protection of her house, and is commended for it by the Spirit of God, in Deborah the Prophetesse. Jud. V. 17-21. VI. 24-28. The instance indeed is difficult enough: And, they that are so ready to con∣demne the fact of Judith▪ in cutting off Holefernes by deceit, and that by the example of her father Simeon, that spoiled and destroyed the men of Sheche, contrary to covenant Judg. IX. 2. Gen. XXXIV. 23. are not advised, how to come clear of it. Suppose there was just cause of hostility between them, a daughter of the house being dishonoured by the Prince of that people. (For, among Gods people, their chastity was alwayes as highly valued, as it was little regarded among Idolaters) Suppose that they condescended to be circumcised, not for love to the true God, but for hope of increasing their own power and riches, by bringing the Israelites under their Government, (as there is ap∣pearance enough in the words of Hamor, Gen. XXXIV. 20, 21, 22.) Yet, a league being inacted upon such a pretense, the zeal of Simeon and Levi, in destroying those that were come under the covering of Gods wings so farre, very well fi∣gures the zeal of the Jewes in persecuting the Apostles, and not allowing the Gentiles any room of salvation, by their own onely true God. And therefore it is excellently observed by S. Jerome Tradit. Hebr. in Genesin, that the Scribes were of the tribe of Simeon, as the Priests of the tribe of Levi, in whom the curse of Jacob by the Spirit of God detesting their fact, (and prophesying the like to those their successors in the case of our Lord Christ and his Apostles I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Gen. XLIX. 5, 6, 7.) was evidently fulfilled in the mysticall sense. The tribe of Levi for gather∣ing of Tithes, and the tribe of Simeon, for imployment of Clarkes and Nota∣ries, dwelling dispersed through all the tribes, as Solomon Jarchi, in his glosse
upon the place literally expoundeth it. But the case of Judeth is the case of a stratageme in professed hostility, which whether Christianity allowe or not, certainly no Law of nations disallowes. And therefore, though she propose to her self the zeale of Simeon and Levi, for the honour of their people, and the successe they had against their enemies; yet if we understand her not to commend the meanes by which they brought it to passe, (to wit, by violating the publick faith) we shall not find her con∣tradict the Spirit of God, which, by Jacob, condemns them for it. As for the act of Jael, it is in vaine to alledge any mysticall sense to justify it, as some would do, unlesse we can undertake, that there was no such thing done in the way of historicall truth; which, I suppose, no man will be so madde as to do. And therefore, if any man will not believe that the Spirit of God in De∣borah extolls onely the temporall benefit, which the people of God reped, by that fact of hers▪ (for which she was alwayes to be famous amongst them) leaving to her self the justification of her conscience; Let him seek a better an∣swer. But he who, transgressing that Charity that is fundamentall in Christi∣anity, (and therefore, without which, no Christian can obtaine the Spirit of God) shall make her example a motive to that, which he cannot justify even in Gods ancient people; Though I allow him to mistake Christians, for Pagans and Idolaters, (whose professed enmity to Gods people, upon the account▪ of Religion, was the ground of that revenge, which they were allowed then to pursue them with) yet I must not allow him to be a Christian, that teaches that wickednesse, which a Jew dare not maintaine. Though it be just with God, to suffer them, that presume of the assistance of Gods Spirit in understanding the Scriptures, before they be principled in Christianity; (which the gift of Gods Spirit to Christians presupposeth) to be led unto such wicked imaginations by reading the Scriptures; as he suffered those, that, setting up their Idols in their hearts, and putting the stumbling block of their iniquities before their faces, came to seek direction from God; to be seduced by the Prophets by whom they should come to inquire, as the Prophe threatneth, Ezek. XIV. 8, 10. As for the fact of David and Husai in ruining of Absalom 2 Sam. XV. 32-37. XVI. 16-19. XVII. 5-14. there is the lesse difficulty in it, because we are not obliged to maintaine the actions of the Fathers to be without sinne, and the Spirit of God doth no where commend it. Which also holds in those officious lies, wherewith, Re∣becca, and the Midwives of the Isralites, and Rahab the harlot, seduced Isaak, and the King of Egypt, and the Rulers of Jericho, to the good of Gods people Gen. XXVII. Exod. I. 15-21. Jos. II. 4, 5. because, whatsoever were the successe which God blessed them with, yet, as S. Augustine observes, its no where said that God blessed them for lying, but for that love to his people, which, though joyned with their own weaknesse, he then rewarded. Though, he that well considers the nature of these acts, (comparing them with these say∣ings and doings of David and Jeremy, of Elias, Elizaus and Samson, which, I have showed, the spirit of God alloweth) will, without doubt, find cause to believe, that the reason, why their acts, which were joyned with such infirmi∣ties, were blessed by God, at that time, is to be drawn from that measure of knowledge, which the meanes allowed by God at that time afforded; and the obligation which God required at their hands, proportionable to the same. From the premises we may proceed to resolve that endlesse dispute, concerning the intent of our Lords Sermon in the Mount, whether it was to take away those alse glosses, which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the Law of Moses; (importing, that nothing but the overt act of murder, adulteries, and the like, stood prohibited by it) or, to inlarge it unto a further extent, of forbidding the first motions of concupiscence, in regard of that further light which the Gospel bringeth. For I have showed, that the most difficult passage of all, which saith; Thou shalt love thy neighbour and ate thine enemy, Mat. V. 43. is, according to the practise of the law in David, Jeremy, Elias, and Elizeus,
which is, without question, the best interpreter of the law, and the extent of it. How much more if you translate it, (as questionlesse the Hebrew will al∣low us to translate it) thou shalt love thine neighbour, but mayest hate thine en∣my? For, it is manifest, that, when the fourth Commandment saith; Six dayes shalt thou labour and do all that thou hast to do; the meaning is no more but this, Six ayes thou mayest labour; to wit, as for this commandment. So that, this clause is nothing else, but the consequence of that limitation which the law puts to the precept of loving a mans neighbour as himself; understand∣ing his neighbour to be onely an Israelite, and teaching to pursue Idolaters with all manner of hatred. Now when our Saviour saith; ; his meaning is plain enough, Ye have heard that it was said to them of old; (that is, to the Fathers at the giving of the law) not, ye have heard it said by your Prede∣cessors; to wit, the Scribes and Pharisees, who about some hundred years befor, had begun to glosse the law with their Traditions. Mat. V. 21, 27, 33, 38, 43. The subject matter in all the rest, besides that which I have spoken of, being alwaies the expresse letter of Moses law, no Tradition of the Elders. Yet it is not my intent to say; that▪ our Lords intent is not to clear the true meaning of the law from the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees. For I acknwledge a false glosse of theirs upon Moses law, which, it is the intent not onely of the Sermon in the mount, but of all the New Testament, to clear. I say, the Scribes and Pharisees, taking advantage of the truth of the world to come (which they thought to be covenanted for, and not onely intimated, as the truth is, by Moses law) did inferre the reward thereof to be due to the out∣ward and carnall observation of it. And this is that false glosse of theirs, which, as every where else, so here especially, our Lord cleareth, when he saith; Ʋnlesse your righteousnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. V. 20. But this he doth, by clearly inacting that conversation which the Gospel requireth, whereof the Fathers of the Old law had onely expressed the rudiments and principles, out of that light which the law, joyned with the tradition of the Fathers, and the do∣ctrine of the Prophets, had supplied; Though, so well accepted by God at that time, that he failed not to grant his holy Spirit, to them, who had attain∣ed that measure of righteousnesse. And therefore we are to conclude, that, du∣ring the Lw, there was a sincerity of righteousnesse, consisting in the observa∣tion of the precepts thereof, not out of any temporall respect, or hope of this world; but out of the sense of Gods will, who searcheth the heart, and judgeth the thoughts thereof, according to which, the Prophets of old and their dis∣ciples, as Zachary and Elizabeth in the New Testament Luke I. 6. are to be counted perfect and intire in righteousnesse; Comparing them, forsooth, with the Scribes and Pharisees, and all their sect, who, in all ages of that people, as I have showed, standing so much upon the precise observation of the positive precepts thereof, for their own power and advantage, grossely failed in all per∣formance, where the sincerity of the heart became requsite. But that, when our Saviour saith: Be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect. Mat. V. 48. It is manifest from the premises, that he requireth of Christians that chari∣ty towards God, and all men for Gods sake (or, to speak in those terms which I take to be more generall, that respect to the will of God, and his glory and service, in all our doings) which he did not covenant for with his ancient people. Which point, before I conclude, that we may the better understand, where∣in I make this perfection of Christians to consist, it will be requisite to resolve, whether or no Christians can do more then the law of God requires; and, whe∣ther there are these offices, which the law of God commands not, but the Gospel onely commends, as matters of counsel, to those that aime at perfecti∣on among Christians, not matters of necessity, for all that would onely be sa∣ved; So that, the workes whereby they are pursued must be called workes of supererogation, because, he that does them, layes out more upon Gods service then he is obliged to do. They are the words of our Lord to the disciples,
Mat. XIX. 11, 12. All are not capable of this word. (of not marrying) For, there are Eunuchs which were so born from their mothers wombe: And, there are Eunuchs which were made Eunuchs by men: And, there are Eunuchs that have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven. He that is capable, let him hold this. Here it is said, that God hath made some men of such con∣stitution of nature, that they are able to containe themselves from marriage, and that this is the gift of continence, which whoso hath, falls under a com∣mand of not marrying, whoso hath not, of marrying. But when our Lord ex∣horts those that are able to containe themselves from marriage to strive for that grace, certainely he makes not that a gift of nature, which he would have a man indeavour to attaine. He that is exhorted to make himself an Eunuch, is not so made by God, but from God he hath the grace, to preferre the king∣dom of heaven before, even that content which God alloweth him here; and, if he betray not that grace, by preferring that content before the clearest and securest meanes of attaining it, he will not faile of grace to performe that which he resolves, for Gods sake. And truely it were strange, that the Gospel should make that grace, which conducts to the height of Christianity, to consist in an indowment of nature. But, S. Pauls wordes will take no nay, 1 Cor. VII. 25-28-36, 37, 38. Of Virgins I have no precept of the Lord, but give advise, as having received mercy of the Lord to be faithfull. I think, then, this expedient for the present necessity, that it is good for a man to be thus. Art thou tied to a wife? seek not to be loose. Art thou loose from a wife? seek not a wife. But if thou marry thou sinnest not, and if a virgine marry she sinneth not. Onely such shall have affliction in the flesh. But I spare you. Againe, If a man think he deales unhansomly with his Virgine, if she passe her flour, and so it must be, let him do as he please, he sinneth not, let him marry. But he that standeth firme in his heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath resolved this in his heart, to preserve his Virgine, doeth well. So he that marrieth her doeth well, but he that marrieth her not doeth better. Is the sunshine more manifest then this? A man may resolve either of both, for his daughter a Virgine, (supposing her will to follow his, as, generally the duty of the children is, which S. Paul here supposeth) and not sinne, but do well; yet better in containing from marriage, because of the advantage which that state yeildeth Christianity, as S. Paul showes. Therefore he declares that God hath given no law in it, but, his Apostle gives that advise for the best, which his Lord had done. The same Apostle of Widowes. 1 Tim. V. 5, 9-14. She that is a Widow indeed, and deso∣late hopeth in God, and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day. And, let no Widow be listed under threescore years old, having been the wife of one hus∣band, having a testimony for good works, that she hath bred up her children, enter∣tained strangers, washed he Saints feet, helped the afflicted, followed every good work. But refuse younger Widowes, for, when they grow wanton against Christ, they will marry: Being to be condemned, because they have renounced their first faith. And withall, they learn to be idle, and to go about from house to house; and not onely idle, but tattlers, busie bodies, speaking things unfitting. There∣fore▪ I would have the younger marry. Here is againe a clear case. Timothy is directed to lit some Widowes, for the service of the Church, in the state of Widowes▪ others to refuse. That which commends the one for the prefer∣ment, is, the exercise of those workes which they could not have had opportu∣nity for, in the state of wedlock. That which renders the others dangerous, is, because, for them to desire marriage, is to grow wanton against Christ. Wherefore, when S. Paul would have them to marry, it is not because he de∣nieth in the next words, that state of proficience, which he had acknowledged just afore; but because it is better to hold the mean, then to fall from the high∣est ranck of Christianity. Which serves to resolve his meaning, as well as his Masters, 1 Cor. VII. 1, 2, 6, 7. For that which you writ to me about, it is good for a man not to touch a woman. But because of fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband. But this I speake of indulgence not by command. For, I would all men were even as my self. But, every one
hath his proper grace of God, some thus, some otherwise. Doth not the grace of God, in married people, assit in the offices of Christianity towards those re∣lations which marriage procureth? Correspondently, therefore, the Grace of God in the continent is not a natural temper, obliging them so to live; But, the helps that inable them to discharge themselves like Christians, in a higher rank, among Christians. So that, the perfection of Christianity lies not in the state of continence, but, in the rank of it; That is to say, in hose offices of Chri∣stianity, wherein, their estate gives them opportunity, to be conversant; the state being no otherwise so accountable, then, because there is a presumption that persons are such as they ought to be, and, as their state gives them oppor∣tunity to be. The perfection of Christianity, then, consisteth in the love of God, and in his service, and the service of Christians for Gods sake; That is, in spending a mans life in those offices, in which there is most regard to God, least to our owne temporall interest. But, is it unreasonable to count that a state of perfection, which generally, and in reason, is the meanes for it, because it is found to be practised to other effects? Is it unreasonable to think, that God, who hath need of all states for the service of his Church, and giveth those severall graces, which are requisite to make severall men serviceable for severall states, should not determine by law, but leave to their choice, whom he indues with those graces, that which containes not the work of Chri∣stianity, but, being indifferent by kind, is neverthelesse, by kind, the meanes to procure it? Saint Paul gives this reason, why he wrought for his living, rather then take any thing of the Corinthians, in these termes; It were better for me to dye, then that any man should void that which I glory in. For if I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for necessity lies upon me, yea, woe to me if I preach not the Gos∣pel. For, if I do it willingly I have a reward, if unwillingly, a stewardship I am trusted with. What is then my reward? That I bestow the preaching of Christs Gospel without charge: So as not to use my right in preaching it. 1 Cor. IX. 15-18. The necessity of preaching the Gospell stands in opposition to the preaching of it freely, which is therefore a matter of free choice. The woe to S. Paul is, for not preaching the Gospell, therefore, not for not preaching it for nothing. Wherefore, the reward he meanes when he saith, what is my reward, (that is, wherein lies my claime, my plea, or my preense to it?) is not that which the Gospel covenants for with all Christians. For, that S. Paul was not to faile of, though he preached not for nothing. Seneca saith that a slave may oblige his Master, by doing, not onely what he commands, but what he knowes will please him, though he command it not. Such are not those whom our Lord speakes to, Luke XVII. 6-10. So ye also, when ye have done all things that are commanded you, say; we are unprofitable servants, we have done what we were indebted to do. Ye, that have faith as a graine of must∣ard seed, that is, a small seed of Christianity, to whom the parable there is proposed. For, it speaketh of those who sit down when their master hath supped whereas, there are others, that must sit down with their master Luke XXII. 30. others, that shall sit down as soon as he comes, and himself wait on them, Luke XII. 37. And therefore there are servants of God under the Gospel, that fail not of their wages, but oblige not their Masters goodnesse without promise. A∣bove these wages, is the reward which S. Paul meanes, which though he pre∣tend not, by discharging his trust so cheerfully as to preach the Gospel for no∣thing, (which God commanded him not) he may neverthelesse obtaine his wages by giving a just account of his office. Therefore, the word, , when he saies, , signifies not abusing, but fully using, as in Plato, . He used not the gift aright: And in S. Paul 1 Cor. VII. 29. , they that use this world as not freely using it; Not, as not abusing it; Though it hath been so translated; because the rest of the opposites before runne in the like cor∣respondence; They that have wives, as having none, those that weep as not weep∣ing, those that rejoyce, as not rejoycing, those that buy, as not possessing. So, those
that use this world as not using, or not freely using it. And in the Latine Saint Hierome, Qust, Hebr, in Gen. Sancti Apostoli his fere testimoniis abutuntur quae jam fuerant in gentibus divulgata. The holy Apostles, use (I suppose no man will say Saint Herome meant that they abuse) those testimonies which had been already divulged among the Gentiles. And in Plautus and the civile law, abuti is to spend, which is the full use of things that may be spent. For, seeing Saint Paul, in the beginning of the Chapter, challengeth, that he might have done otherwise as well as the rest of the Apostles; either he might have done otherwise without sin, or he had not that right in point of conscience to God, which he saith, they used without sinne. If then the law of God determine not a man to abstaine from marriage, to abandon the world, and riches of the world, which, he hath just title to; and yet this may be done to oblige God in point of goodnesse, not in point of promise, what is Saint Augustine, fault in saying of Saint Paul, voluit S. Paulus ex Evangelio victum sibi quaerere. Quod maluit operari, amplius erogabat. Saint Paul might have got his living by preaching the Gospel. In that he choosed to work▪ he laid out more in Gods ser∣vice? For, this is not to say, that the love of God, for which he did it, is not commanded; but, that he was not commanded to exercise that love▪ in for∣bearing his due. Therefore, if any man shall teach; the precepts of loving God above all, and all for God, and of mortifying the first motions of concupiscence, together with the particulars, unto which our Lords Sermon in the Mount brancheth those generalls, to prescribe workes of superrogation, and maters, not of precept, but of counsaile, as too many have been allowed, (I say not in∣joyned) to do, in the Church of Rome; worthily in that regard, is this pro∣fessed in the Church of England, to be a blasphemous doctrine. Neither can it appear, that the ancient Fathers ever intended any such sense by it; who, not∣withstanding, all with one voice, agree in the difference between mater of precept and matter of counsell, under the Gospel, which difference Doctor Field, in his learned work of the Church, having acknowledged in the Church of England, no man can justly charge me with novelty, in maintaining of it. Now, though the perfection of Christianity, consist, as hath been showed, in loving God above all, and all for God; or, in resolving to do all in respect of Gods will and for his service; Yet is not this perfection perfectly to be ob∣tained during this life. The reason is manifest: Because it is not morally possi∣ble, that the work of it should not be interrupted by original concupiscence, the mortification whereof, which proceeds by degrees▪ is that perfection which a Christian arriveth at▪ whatsoever he aime at. Saint Paul had gone as farre as another man when he said Phil. III. 13, 14, 15. Brethren, I count not my self to have seized. Onely forgetting that which is behind, and stretching at that which is before▪ according to the mark▪ I drive to the prize of the heavenly calling of God by Christ Jesus. As many therefore as are perfect, let us be so minded And▪ 1 Cor. III. 18. We all, looking, as in a glasse, upon the glory of God with bare face, are changed after the same image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord; To wit, by the same degrees, as the mortification of our own concupiscence makes room for Gods Spirit. And therefore, he saith again of himself, 1 Cor. IX. 26. I therefore so runne, as not without appearance of go∣ing forwards, so fight, not as beating the aire: But I cuffe and inslave my body, least having preached to others▪ I my selfe become reprobate. Notwithstanding the law of Christianity which the Gospel preacheth, supposing this concup∣scence, and providing a right of reestablishment into Gods grace▪ for all that, being cast down in this course, shall returne by repentance; manifest it is, that, though we are not saved by fulfilling the originall rule of that righteousnesse to which the creation of our nature on Gods behalf obligeth us; Yet, by under∣taking and pursuing that perfection, which the profession of Christianity im∣porteth; provided, that we persevere in pursuing it unto the end, though some∣times this pursuit consist in turning from those sinnes, by which we had start∣ed aside. Now the law of Moses is, certainly, a transcript, or rude draught of
this originall righteousnesse due from man to God. And therefore, purposely made so curiously scrupulous, that even the earthly promises of the land of Canaan, and temporall happinesse in it, should not be obtained by the exact observation thereof, as I observed afore. But it was also an intimation of the Gospell of Christ, not onely in the provisi∣on which it made for expiation of transgressions, (the signification where∣of the greatest part never understood) but in those grounds of assurance, which it gave those that should observe it from the heart, as before God, and for his love, of the reward of the world to come. In which regard S. Paul and the Apostles so often alledge the saying of the Prophet Abac. II. 4. The just shall live by faith; and Saint Paul Rom. I. 15. saith, that the righteous∣nesse of God is revealed, by the Gospel, from faith to faith: That is, from the fath of Christ to come, to the faith of Christ come. And Saint John Bap∣tist saith of our Lord John I. 16. Of his fullnesse we have all received, grace for grace: Because the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. So that, though the grace of the Gospel came by Christ, yet it succeed∣ed the same grace under the law, though, as under a fainter light, so in a scars∣er measure. And Saint Augustine rightly accounteth those that attaine tru righteousnesse under the law, to belong to the New Testament, as carnall Christians under the Gospell, to the Od But if the faithfull, at that time, were saved by that scarse measure of righteousnesse, which the faint light they were under required; then were they also saved, though, not by fullfilling the origi∣nall Law of righteousnesse due from man to God, yet, by fulfilling that rule of Evangelicall righteousnesse, which God, under the Law, required at their hands. In which regard, if the Fathers, by things recorded of them in the Old Testament, may be seene to have attained that perfection which Saint Paul calles his glory, in doing that which he was not commanded▪ as a meanes to the discharging of that wherein the perfection of Christians consisteth; that which became mater of precept under the Gospel, is ne∣cessarily to be taken for mater of counsell under the Law. Alwayes under∣standing, that, as those helps of grace, without which, I have showed, that they had not been able to performe such righteousnesse under the Law▪ were granted even then, in consideration, of our Lord Christs interposing his mediation to the redeeming of mankind; so was the righteousnesse then performed, accepted in no consideration, but of the obedience of Christ and his righteousnesse.
CHAP. XXXIII. Whether any workes of Christians be satisfactory for sinne, and meritorious of hea∣ven, or not. The recovery of Gods grace for a Christian fallen from it, a work of labour and time. The necessity and efficacy of Penance to that purpose, ac∣cording to the Scriptures, and the practise of the Church. Merit by virtue of Gods promise, necessary. The Catholicke Church agrees in it, the present Church of Rome allowes merit of justice▪ ANother dispute there is that makes an endlesse noise, never to be decided, but upon this ground, not to be maintained, admitting it. That is, Whether the workes of Christians, merit heaven or not; which I must inlarge into another point, of so neer nature to it, that both may as easily be resolved as the one: Whether the humiliation for sinne, in praying, fasting, giving lmes, by Christians, in confidence of the satisfaction of Christ, to obtaine pardon of God, be satisfactory for sinne or not. For, in as much, as to be free from evill is good, and, to obtaine a discharge from punishment, is as much as to deserve a reward; in so much it is all one to satisfie for▪ sinne▪ so as to be discharged of punishment, and to fulfill an obligation, so as to claime a reward. Whereupon, as I said afore, that, all satisfaction is necessarily of the nature of merit. To this question then, or, to these questions, the answer is necessarily consequent from the premises: That, if we regard the originall law of God, neither can any man make God satisfaction for his sinne, nor me∣rit the reward of everlasting life at his hands; But, if we regard that dispensa∣tion in it which the Gospel preacheth, in consideration of the merits and satis∣faction of our Lord Christ; neither shall any man attain forgivenesse of sinne without making satisfaction for it, nor the reward of everlasting life, without making it due to him by virtue of Gods promise. The proofe of the first point consists in all those passages of Scripture which require repentance as a condition requisite to the obtaining remission of sins, whether in the New Testament, or in the Old: In as much as I have showed, that the promise of the Gospel, were obtained under the Law, upon the same termes and conditions for substance, as under the Gospel; though for the mea∣sure, proportionable to that light of knowledge, and those helpes of Grace, which the dispensation of God under the Old Law afforded. In particular ta∣king notice of the theme of Saint John Baptist, which our Lord also took for the argument of his preaching, Repent, for the kingdome of heaven is at hand; Mat. III. 2. IV. 17. Mark I. 15. which the Apostles also followed, Acts II. 38. III. 19. Upon that ground which Saint Paul also debates, in the beginning of the Epistle to the Romanes; that the necessity of the Gospell and Christiani∣ty is grounded upon a supposition, that both Jewes and Gentiles are liable to sinne without Christ, and, by consequence, to judgement. And againe, of those texts of the Apostles writings, wherein there is mention, or intimation of Penance required or injoyned by them, or by the Church, in their time, for the obtaining of remission of sinnes by the keyes, which I have handled in another place. And thirdly, of those passages which I have quoted in this book, disputing of Justification by faith, to show, that, remission of sinnes done after baptisme is obtained for Christians, by prayer joyned with fasting and giving of almes, to move God to give us pardon, as we forgive or give to our brethren. But this proofe consists also in all those scriptures, which I have alledged, to show that the bloud of Christ and his sufferings, are truly and properly satisfaction for the sinnes of mankind. For, as he that believes this, can by no meanes imagine, that, any man can make satisfaction for his own sinnes, by the originall Law of God; (for then, the coming of Christ had
been in vaine▪ as not necessary, neither had there needed that dispensation in Gods proceeding with mankind upon the originall rule of righteousnesse, which the Gospel declareth) So can he by no meanes imagine, the satisfaction which any man can tender God for his sinne, to import any more, then the fulfilling of that condition which God by his Gospell requireth, to qualify any man that is fallen from Grace by sinne, after Baptisme, for remission of sinne: Because he supposeth aforehand, that the satisfaction of Christs bloud consisteth in obtaining such termes at Gods hands, that, the condition being obtain∣ed, a man should become qualified for remission of sinnes. On the other side, the Gospell importing a promise of remission of sinne, in consideration of the sufferings of Christ, to them that turn by true repentance, to that new life which it prescribeth; It cannot be denied, that those workes, wherein the reality of true repentance consisteth, are properly satisfaction for sinne (as for that re∣spective sinne for which they satisfie) by virtue of that promise, which God by the Gospel declareth, in consideration of Christs Crosse. For, if the Ci∣vilian say true, that to satisfie is no more then to fulfill a mans desire, God by his Gospel requiring nothing else to be performed by us, (that is, by any Christian that is overtaken in the state of sinne) but to turne from sinne; of necessity it followes, that God is satisfied with our repentance, (which other∣wise he would not accept of for payment at our hands) though the satisfaction of Christ is the consideration that makes it acceptable. The mistake seemes to lye in this; that, men take any kind of dis∣pleasure for sinne to be that repentance which qualifieth a man for re∣mission of sinne; presuming that faith alone justifieth, and that the grace▪ which the Gospel tendereth would come to too short an account, if at every instance, a man might not have recourse to the bloud of Christ, for assurance of remission of sinnes. Whereas I have showed, that, in all estates, at any instant, a Christian hath assurance of remission of sinne to be had, upon condition that he see himself qualified for it; But, that absolute as∣surance of remission of sinne actually had and obtained, is not to be had by the Gospel, but upon performing the condition which it requireth, unlesse we would make Christ, the minister of sinne, (as Saint Paul speakes) by saying; that he came to discover a way, by which, standing in the love of sinne, and in∣joying the pleasure of it, we may assure our selves of pardon for it. For it can in no reason be imagined, that he who hath wilfully committed sinne can in∣stantly come to such a resolution of mind, as may reasonably be thought ef∣fectuall, to move him never to do the like any more. Will any body that is capable to consider what a change it is for a man to undertake Christianity, being, by the preaching of it, become convict of that sinne which it pretendeth to cure; will any man say, that it is possible for such a one, at the instant that he is first informed of a thing concerning him so much, to resolve to take the course, overcoming all difficulties, which all the custome of sinne can create? As for him, who, having made profession of Christianity, is notwithstanding overtaken with one of those grosse sinnes, that expresse a formal contrdiction to his profession so made; can he be assured of a firme resolution to stand to all that his Christianity requireth for the future, who sees himself so shame∣fully cast from a resolution solemnly professed, and perhaps grounded in him, by so many yeares practice, as he hath been a Christian? This is the reason why repentance is not to be measured, by a wish that a man had not sinned, (which, those that are not past remorse necessarily have, because they must needs wish themselves at peace with God) nor, by a desire of forgivenesse, (because they must needs wish themselves what the Gospel promiseth) nor, by being sory for the punishment which they have incurred, (for that is not out of love to God, but to themselves) nor, by being onely sory for having of∣fended God; (for who would not wish that he could injoy both the love of God, and the pleasure of his sinne?) In fine, no disposition can qualify a man a convert, or penitent, but that which produceth a change in his actions; And that disposition not being produced, but by frequenting such actions of humi∣liation,
as may settle the impression of it upon a mans Spirit; those actions by which this disposition is wrought, are justly counted satisfaction to God, because they fulfill that which he desireth of a sinner, to qualify him for re∣mission of sinnes. One material difficulty there is, that may be objected against all this, from the Scriptures, especially of the Gospells, and, those manifold invitations, whereby, our Lord wooeth those which are weary of sin, to come to him for their cure; For, in very deed, the Parable of the prodigall representeth God so desirous to be reconciled, that there is no roome left for conditions, limiting the pardon, which is granted before it can be demanded, upon a bare desire expressed by returning home. And the Psalme of David seems to sig∣nifie the same, when he saith; I said I will confesse my transgression to the Lord and thou forgavest the wickednesse of my sin. Psalm XXXIV. 5. Which may be so understood, as if, David onely having purposed to make confession of his sin, God prevented him with pardon before he did it. But to say truth, this is more then the words can beare, because it is said just afore; I made knowne my sins to thee, and my iniquities I concealed not; So as Davids sin was not pardoned before he confessed it, but, having confessed it; upon a grounded re∣solution so to doe, and that, after so much trouble of mind for his sin, as the premises of the Psalme expresse. As for the expressions of our Lord in the Gospell, having showed that it tendreth high promises, but upon conditions proportoinable, considering the present weakenesse of our nature; there is no reason in the world to inferr, that those who have forfeited the promises, by failing of that which they undertake, may as easily promise themselves recon∣cilement with God by repentance, as they are freely invited to be reconciled by Baptisme. For, that which is done in the state of ignorance, is easily passed by, upon condition of amendment. But, where breach of amity may be reproached, (especially tendred by God of meere Grace, and, upon his own charge, as it were, of Christs Crosse) to persume of reconcilement, upon meere acknowledgement of a transgression, were to tread under foot so great Grace. And therefore, that which hath been produced out of the Apostles writings soundeth to an other tune, S. John saith, in deed; If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we confesse our sins, he is faithfull, and just, to remit our sins, and to clense us from all unrighteousnesse. If we say wee have not sinned we make him a lyer, and his word is not in us. Iohn I. 8, 9, 10. For, it appeareth by the premises, that his word concludeth e∣ven Christians to be sinners. For S. Iohn goeth forward and saith; My little children, these things I write to you, that you sin not; And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the pro∣pitiation for our sins. And when David, (who had the spirit of God upon the same termes as Christians, have it, excepting that which hath been excepted, pray∣eth, Psalm XIX. 13, 14. Who understandeth his errours? Clense me from hidden sins. Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, that they beare not rule over me: Then shall I be upright and cleane from great transgressions. He showeth sufficiently the difference between veniall and mortall sins, as to Christians; (which, in case of invincible ignorance, and meere supprize, comes to no sin, as to Christians) But he showeth also, that Christians, neglecting themselves, may come to fall into sins of persumption, which he prayeth a∣gainst. For the rest, the same S. Iohn, incouraging Christians to pray for the sins of Christians, with this limitation, (as I surppose) if, by their advice, they ap∣pear to be reduced to take the cours, which may procure pardon at Gods hands acknowledgeth further, that there is a sin unto death, I say not that yee pray for it; saith he 1. John V. 16. 17. And the Apostle to the Hebrews VI. 4, 5, 6. speaketh of some sin, which, he acknowledgeth not that it can be admitted to penance for the obtaining of forgivenesse; which he protesteth again, Ebr. X. 26.-31. XII. 16, 17. It is commonly thought indeed, that, to deny the true faith, against that light which God hath kindled in a mans conscience, is here∣by declared to be a sin, that repentance cannot cure; Or rather, that God
hereby declareth, that he will never grant in repentance, And truly, that blas∣phemy against the Holy Ghost, which, our Lord saith, shall never he pardoned, neither in this world nor in the world to come Mat. XII. 31, 32. Mark III. 28 29. Luke XII. 10. manifestly consisteth in attributing the works which the holy Ghost did to convert men to Christ, to the devill; being convinced that our Lord came from God, by the workes he did for that purpose. Just as Saint Steven reproaches the Jewes, for resisting the holy Ghost as their Fathers had done, Acts VII. 51. And that there is no cure for this sin, it is manifest, because it consisteth in rejecting the cure. And, apostasy from Christianity, (which is manifestly, the sinne which the Apostle to the Hebrews intendeth) differeth from it, but, as the obligation to Christianity once received differeth from that Christianity, which, being proposed with conviction, a man is bound to receive. But, otherwise not onely the Church, but the Novatians them∣selves supposed, that those who had denied the Faith might recover pardon of God by repentance. Nor can it become visible to the Church, what is that conviction, which, whoso transgresseth, becomes unpardonable, because God hath excluded him from repentance. In the meane time, how difficult the Primitive Church accounted it, to attaine pardon of such sinnes, appeares by the excluding of the Montanists, and Novatians first; then, by the long Pe∣nance prescribed Apostates, Murtherers, and Adulterers, least the admitting of them to Penance might seem to warrant their pardon upon too, light repent∣ance. Saint Paul admits the incestuous person at Corinth, whether to Penance or to Communion with the Church; But upon what termes? Least the offen∣der should be swallowed up with extream sorrow; and, least Satan should ad∣vantage himself against them, should he refuse it. And because, having writ∣ten out of great anguish of heart, with teares, for them who presumed to bear him out in it, he had found them moved with sorrow according to God, to repentance, with all satisfaction, and desire of peace with the Apostle, 2 Cor. II. 1-8. VII. 7-11. For, we understand by Saint Paul 1 Cor. V. 2. 2 Cor. XII. 21. that even the Church themselves, when they shut a sinner out of the Church, did make demonstration of sorrow for his case: And therefore him∣self much more was put to mourning, and to professe by his outward habit, that he thought his sinne incurable, without sorrow answerable to it. And, when Saint Paul commands the Collossians, III. 5. Mortify your members that are upon earth, fornication, uncleannesse, passion, evill desire, and covetousnesse which is idolatry; For which the wrath of God cometh upon the children of disobe∣dience; It is manifest, that he placeth the mortifying of these vices, in the af∣flicting and humbling of our earthly members, wherein the lusts of them reside. Therefore he serves his own body no otherwise, but, striving for the prize of Christians, like one of their Greekish Champions, that would not beat the aire; he beates his own body black and blew, to bring it under servitude, Least having preached to others, himself should become reprobate, 1 Cor. IX. 26, 27. And certainly, if Christianity require this discipline over Saint Pauls body, least he should fall into sinne; it will require very great severity of them that are fallen into sinne, to be exercised upon their bodies, the lusts whereof they have satisfied by those sinnes; to regain the favour, and appease the wrath of God, and to settle that hatred of sinne, and that love of goodnesse, in the heart, which the preventing of sinne for the future necessarily re∣quireth. The practice of the Old Testament sufficiently signifieth the same. Though David, in the Psalme that I mentioned afore, seem to make the pardon of his sin a thing easily obtained at Gods hands; (as it is indeed a thing easily obtained, supposing the disposition which David desired it with; but not, that dispositi∣on, a thing easily obtained) yet you shall find the same David elsewhere, wet∣ting his bed, and watring his couch with his teares, so that his beauty is gone with mourning, his flesh dried up for want of fatnesse, and his bones cleave to his flesh for the voice of his mourning. Indeed he alwayes expresseth his affli∣ction to be the subject of his mourning: But, alwayes acknowledging his sins
to be the cause of those afflictions, which he therefore takes the course to re∣move, by taking this course for his sinnes. The Prophet Esay I. 15, 16. thus calleth the Jewes to appease Gods wrath; Wash ye, make ye clean, remove the evil of your workes from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do good, seek righteousnesse. Sure, this was never intended to be done, by the meer thought of doing it. But, the Prophet Joel having threatned a plague, what doth he prescribe for the cure? And now saith the Lord, return to me with all your heart, with fasting weeping and mourning, and rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God, for he is gracious and mercifull, long∣suffering, great in mercy, and repenteth him of evill. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, invite the assembly, gather the people, sanctify a Congregation, make the old and young, and the sucking infants meet, let the bridegroom come forth of his chamber, and the bride of her closet, let the Priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and say; Spare Lord thy people, and give not thine heritage for a reproach. Joel II. 12-17. Sure, this is something more then not allowing a mans self to sinne, or not liking that which he does when he sinnes; which, no man that ever heard of Christianity can do, till he have contracted such a custome of sinning, that he is not sensible of any remorse for it. And it is a thing most strange, that those who pretend to be the cream of Christianity, should think the sinnes of the regenerate not to forfeit the state of Grace, nor contract Gods displeasure, because they are done with dis∣like. Judas might have robbed the poor so oft, that, at length, he might be without remorse; but certainly he betrayed not his master without reluctation. The regenerate, if truly so, and not hypocrites, must needs find the burthen of sinne which they commit aggravated, by the grace which they had received afore; And therefore, must needs find themselves obliged to a deeper measure of humiliation, to expiate their ingratitude, and to recover the favour of God, which they had forfeited, by abusing it afore. This seems, in my opinion, to perswade a good Christian, that workes of humiliation and Penance are requi∣site to recover the state of Grace, and to render God againe propitious to those that have fallen from the grace of their Baptisme; As that which I said afore seemes to show, that it is not prejudiciall to the satisfaction of our Lord should be satisfied by such meanes. Now, the originall and generall practice of Gods Church punctually agre∣eth with that which hath been said. Our Lord preacheth repentance, but ad∣mitteth all that professe it to be his disciples, not taking cognizance what they had been, professing to become such as he requireth for the future. So his Church, knowing that there is no sinne so deep that his bloud cannot wash away, admitteth all to Baptisme; declaring, that without repentance, it avail∣eth onely to their damnation, but demanding no visible satisfaction of it, in them that were not hitherto of the Church. But, those who falsify the profes∣sion upon which they were admitted to Baptisme, and that so visibly, that the forfeiture of Gods grace is visible by the same meanes; those were so excluded the communion of the Church (which ought to suppose a presumption of the state of Grace, at least, the possibility of it) that at the first, the greatest que∣stion was, whether they should be admitted to any hope of reconcilement by the Church or not; As it appeareth by the breaches of the Montanists and Novatians, and partly of the Donatists, and Meletians. If this admission were granted, it was onely to this effect, at the beginning, that they might ten∣der the Church satisfaction of the sincerity of that sorrow, wherewith they pretended to satisfy God; that is to appease his wrath, and to recover his grace. Those who think Penance was injoyned to no other effect, in the an∣cient Church, then to make satisfaction for the scandall which the notorious∣nesse of sinne had contracted; are as farre wide of the truth, as those who think it onely made satisfaction for a debt of temporall punishment; the staine of sinne, and guilt of eternall punishment, being abolished by submitting it to the Keyes of the Church, out of that sorrow which they call Attrition, which they will have to be changed into Contrition, by the humility of that
confession which submitteth a mans sinne to the keyes of the Church. In what sense, attrition may be said to be changed into contrition, by the ministery of Penance, I shall have occasion to debate againe in the third Book. For the present, I must not forget the ground which I have presupposed, that the Gos∣spel is presupposed to the being and constitution of the Church. And therefore, that remission of sinnes by the Church, and the ministery of Penance in the Church, supposeth the accomplishment of that condition, and the production of that disposition, which, by the Gospel, qualifieth for remission of sinne. Neither can the ministery of the Church be otherwise necessary, then as it may be effectuall to produce the same. How, in the Penitent, that sorrow for fear of punishment, which the first sight of sinne necessarily causeth, (which is at∣trition in their termes) is changed into that sorrow for having offended God, which the love of God causeth; is to be understood, I conceive, by that which I said afore. That the ministery of the Church, cannot supersede or dispense with the meanes whereby that change is brought to passe; as the argument proposed evidences by the Scriptures; So, from the Tradition of the Church, I conceive, I have peremptory evidence. For, those that deferred their Penance till danger of death, then, confessing their sinnes, submitted to the keyes of the Church, though they were not refused reconcilement in that estate, though they were admitted to the communion of the Eucharist, yet their salvation re∣mained questionable, in case they survived not to perform their Penance. This you shall find at large in Saint Augustine Homilia XLI. ex L. though some attribute it to Saint Ambrose; But you have it in Saint Augustine againe, de Tempore sermone LVII. And, when it is found in a letter of Faustus, in answer to Paulinus of Nola, it cannot be excepted, that Faustus is a suspected author, because of his opposition to Saint Augustine; in a point, wherein, it is evident that he concurreth with Saint Augustine. But, in the fourth Councill of Carthage also, Can. VII. and VIII. those that submit to Penance, and re∣ceive the Eucharist, in danger of death, are not to think themselves acquitted of their sinne, if they survive, sine manus impositione; That is, without per∣forming their Penance; during which, they were, at the service of the Church, prayed for, with imposition of hands. And therefore, he who having thus submitted to Penance, and received the Eucharist, recovered, might be pro∣moted to the Clergy, according to the IV Councill of Toledo Can. LIII. and Concil. Gerund. can. IX. Whereas, whosoever had done Penance in the Church, could never be admitted to the Clergy afterwards. Because, such a one had not been properly under Penance, the sinne that is supposed in the case of the former Canon not being specified, but onely generally confessed for sinne. Whereby it appeareth sufficiently, that, in regard it is possible, the sorrow wherewith a man submitteth to Penance in that case should be so sincere as to obtaine pardon at Gods hands, therefore the communion was not refused: But, in regard of the doubt that remained in the businesse, the Church warranted not the pardon, till satisfied of his conversion, by the per∣formance of his Penance. And therefore it is manifest, that the ancient Church did not believe attrition to be changed into contrition by submitting to the Keyes of the Church; making question of the salvation of those upon whom the Keyes of the Church had passed, because the operation of Penance injoyn∣ed was prevented by death. And so, the practice of the ancient Church con∣curreth with the doctrine of the Apostles, to assure us of the necessity and effi∣cacy of the works of humiliation and mortification for sinne, in appeasing the wrath, and recovering the favour of God, in obtaining forgivenesse of sinne, and restoring to the state of Grace, which, the ancient Church calleth satisfying for sinne. By the same meanes it remaines manifest, that these satisfactions are neither injoyned grievous sinners by the Scriptures, nor notorious sinners by the Church, out of any intent of extinguishing a debt of temporal punishment, re∣maining after the sinne is pardoned. That God, when he gave the Gospell, might have reserved a debt of temporall punishment, upon them whose sinne he
pardoneth by virtue of it, I question not. That he hath reserved it, can ne∣ver be proved; the penalties which he exerciseth his children with, being ra∣ther chastisements of love, then revenges of wrath. That this debt, if not extinguished here, by satisfaction injoyned in Penance, remaines for Purgato∣ry in the world to come, I cannot here dispu, not having yet considered the effect of the keyes of the Church in Penance. And therefore, for the ground of it, which must come from hence, I shall conclude according to the premises. That the condition which the Gospel requireth, to bring a man to the state of Gods grace, for remission of sinnes, and right to everlasting life, in point of conscience as to God (as well as in point of profession, as to the Church) is presupposed to every mans being a Christian, and a member of the Church. With this difference, indeed, between them that are invited by the Church, to be Christians, and them, who, being Christians, shall relapse to those finnes which by their Christianity they professe to forsake: That, to those that are without, the cure of sinne is tendered meerly as Physick, which the Physitian hath no meanes to constraine a man to take, but his own interesse; But, to those that are within, out of that authority and jurisdiction, which the Corporation of the Church foundeth. The last resolution whereof, though it end in the interest of a mans own good, which moveth him to professe Christianity; yet, that profession having ingaged him to be a Christiane, by it he standes bound to stand to the judgement of the Church, in all things within the authority of it. Now, if the Church ought to presume that, he who is admitted to the communion thereof is qualified for remission of sinne, before he be restored to it; then cannot a man, by being restored to the communion of the Church, become qualified for it; unlesse it can be said, that, the absolution of the Church can presuppose that which it effecteth which without a contradiction cannot be said. The Church then pardons not sinne otherwise, then, as, by the power of the keyes, obliging the relapsed to use that cure which it prescribeth, upon presumption of the cure wrought, it warranteth pardon, as having effected that disposition which qualifieth a man for it. So that all the satisfaction that the Church can have, that a man is qualified for pardon, proceeds upon a presumption that God first is satisfied, by the conversion of a sinner to that disposition, which he requireth to remission of sin; But evidently, in consideration of our Lord Christ, because by the Gospel, whereof he is the subject. As for the merit of Christian mens workes, in relation to the world to come, if it be considered on one hand, how many wayes the Scripture declareth, that it is impossible for any creature of God to come before hand with him that made it, (because his allsufficience allowes him not capable of any advantage, that he may receive from it) on the other hand, that, by originall concupiscence, we are utterly disabled to satisfie for that, in which we are come behind hand with God, and, for the future, to satisfy that originall rule of righteousnesse due from man to God, which our creation establisheth; I shall not need to use many words in a plaine case, that, by the originall Law of God, no man can merit the reward of everlasting life. But, by the promise of the Gospell, God is tied to reward them with it. For, on the other side, it is most evident, that the Scriptures, as well of the New Testament as of the Old (in which, I have showed how that salvation which we attaine by the Gospel is intimated) that the favour of God, and everlasting life, is the prize of that gole, the crown of that conquest, the wage of that good ight of Faith, which a Christian▪ in this warfare upon earth, professeth. The Scriptures that containe this sense being every where so expresse, and so well known, that I conceive I do the Reader an ease, in sparing him the paines of reading them here againe; after so many canvases. But besides, the maine point, established at the beginning of this Book inforces, inevitably all that this resolution imports. ▪For, if God have, by the Gospell, imposed upon Christians the condition of new obedience, which Christians, through his grace by Christ, are able to tender him▪ to re∣compense
them with such a reward) standes by his free promise ingaged to it, in consideration of that new obedience which he requires. This is the utmost which the name of merit can inforce, understanding it to be ground∣ed upon the promise of God, declared by the Gospell, which, nothing but his own free grace, designed through, and in consideration of our Lord Christ, before all consideration of any new obedience of Christians, (which wholly dependeth upon the same) could ever have moved him to set on foote. For, having said before, that a meritorious cause can have no place in respect of God, otherwise then, as he designes us good in consideration of good, though the good he considers be originally his own gift; (whereas men are obliged, in reason and justice, to reward that▪ good which themselves are pre∣vented with, originally, as to them, moving and obliging them to reward it) but the merit of heaven never so fully ascribed to the workes of Christians, (who are obliged, to understand it so to be ascribed, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace) it can be understood to signify no more, then a quality which it requireth, upon which the reward becomes due, by virtue of that promise which requireth it. And that this is the sense of the Catholike Church, among infinite arguments, this is enough to demonstrate; Because, whereas it is very well known, that the Latine Fathers do attribute the stile and virtue of merits, and meriting at Gods hands, to the workes of Christians, in respect to ever∣lasting life; the Greek Fathers▪ in whose mouthes the word could not be, expressing the same sense, in such termes as their own language affords; (For who ever undertook to show any difference of sense between them?) those of the Reformation have alwayes maintaind, that their sense is the same with the sense of the ancient Church, in the mouth of the Fathers. For if, in their mouth, that word can import no prejudice to Christianity, neither can it im∣port any now, unlesse the signification thereof be futher limited by other terms, which, being added to it, every man will allow, may determine a sense utterly prejudiciall to it. True it is, divers have observed, that the word me∣rr▪ in good Latine (especially of those later ages, in which the Fathers writ) signifies no more then to attaine, compasse, or purchase: Arguing from thence, that the workes of Christians merit heaven, in their sense and language, no o∣therwise then, because they are the meanes by which we attaine it. So Cassan∣der observes that S. Pauls . 1 Tim. I. 13. is, by S. Cyprian, tran∣slated misericordiam merui; not intending to say, that S. Paul deserved that mercy which he professes to have received of Grace: But onely to signify, that he found mercy, and attained it. But, though I should grant, that this word may signify no more in the language of the Fathers; yet the Faith, and the sense, out of which it is evident that they spake, will inforce, that it doth signify as much as I say, when they speak of our coming to heaven by our workes. For, having once resolved, that the Covenant of Grace renders life everlasting due by Gods promise, to those that lve as at their Baptisme they undertook, (though not for the worth of their workes, yet by the mercy of God in Christ, which moved him to tender such a promise) he that sayes, a man attaines hea∣ven by the meanes of those workes which he lives in like a Christian; sayes, that those workes of his do merit heaven, in the sense that I challenge. For, as for those that will have the workes of Christians to merit heaven of their own intrinsicke value; Of those I have already said, that, I conceive, they do prejudice the Christian aith, in not allowing the necessity of Gods grace through Christ, in accepting the condition which the Gospel requires, for such a reward, as the intrinsick value of it cannot deserve, by Gods originall law. For, granting, those helps of Gods grace in Christ, being supernaturall and heavenly, to hold proportion and correspondence with the reward of life everlasting, which is the same; Yet will it not follow, that in all regards, (for the purpose, in that the actions which they produce are momentany, the reward everlasting, which is the consideration S. Paul uses Rom. VIII. 18. 1 Cor. VII. 17, 18.) the correspondence will produce an equality of value. And, though the first principle of them be heavenly and supernaturall, (which
is the help which God for Christs sake allowes) yet, seeing that it comes not immediately to effect, but by the meanes of the faculties of mans soule infected with originall concupiscence; it cannot be said, that they can demand a re∣ward correspondent to heavenly grace, alone when earthly weakness concurres to imbase and allay the value of that which it produceth. But, as it cannot be denied, that the Church of Rome, in which, that Order which maintains this extremity hath so great credit, allowes this doctrine of merit to be taught; yet can it not be said to injoine it: Because there have not wanted, to this day, Doctors of esteem, that have alwayes held otherwise. Among whom I may very well name Sylvius, now or lately Professor of Divinity at Doway, who, in his Commentaries upon the second part of Thomas Aquinas his Sum∣me, expounds that meritum de condigno, which the Schoole attributes to the workes of Christians, to be grounded in dignatione Dei, because God vouch∣safes and daignes, to accept them whose they are, as worthy of the reward; ex∣pressing also the promise of the Gospell, whereby this condescension of God is declared. The Schoole Doctors found out the termes of meritum ex congruo & ex condigno; merit of conguity and condignity; Some of them, because they thought, That the workes of meer nature deserve supernaturall grace, in regard that it is fit, that God should reward him that doth his best, with it; That works done in the state of Grace are worth the Glory of the world to come. But, as the former part of the position which is planted upon these terms is rejected by many; So, they who onely acknowledge meritum congrui, in workes done in the state of grace, (that is to say, that it is fit for God to reward them with his kingdome) say no more then, that it was fit for God to promise such a reward; Which whoso denieth▪ must say, that God hath promised that which it was un∣fit for him to promise. And if the dignity of our works, in respect of the re∣ward, may have this tolerable sense, because God daignes and vouchsafes it; The Councill of Trent, which hath inacted no reason why they are to be counted merits, can neither bear out these high opinions, nor be said to preju∣dice the Faith in this point. For, The kingdom of God is not in word but in pow∣er, if S. Paul say true. And therefore, though I affect not the terme of me∣rit, (which, divers of the Reformation do not reject) Yet can I not think it so far from the truth, so prejudiciall to the faith, as the peevish opinions of those, that allow not good workes necessary to salvation, but as signes of Faith. For, that which necessarily comes in consideration with God, in bestowing the reward, (which, the condition he contracteth for must necessarily do) though it cannot have the nature of merit, (because the Covenant it self is granted meerly of Grace, in consideration of Christs death) yet, it is of necessity to be reduced to the nature and kind of the meritorious cause. Nor can the glory of God, or the merit of Christ be obscured, by any consideration of our works, that is grounded upon the merit of our Lord Christ, and expresseth the tincture of his bloud. The end of the Second Book. Laus Deo.
OF THE LAWES OF The Church. The Third BOOK. CHAP. I. The Society of the Church founded upon the duty of communicating in the Offices of Gods Service. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, among those Offices, pro∣per to Christianity. What opinions, concerning the presence of Christs Body and Blood in the Eucharist, are on foot. IF God had onely appointed the Profession of Christia∣nity to be the condition qualifying for the world to come, leaving to every mans judgment to determine, what that Christianity is, and wherein it consists, which, it is neces∣sary to salvation hee professe, and, what that conversation is which his salvation requireth; There had been no cause, why I should go any further in this Dispute. But, having showed, that God hath appointed the Sacrament of Ba∣ptisme to be a necessary means to salvation, limiting there∣by, the profession of Christianity which hee requireth, to be deposited and con∣signed in the hands of his Church, whom hee hath trusted for the maintaining and propagating of it; I have thereby showed, that hee hath appointed all Christians to live in the Communion of the Church; The effect of Baptisme being, to admit unto full Communion in those Offices, wherewith God is served by his Church. It is plain enough to all that have the use of reason, what that communion of the Church and the Society thereof is able to effect, and hath ef∣fected, in preserving the Rule of Christianity, wherein the salvation of Christians consisteth, free and intire from the infection of mens devices, expresly or by con∣sequence destructive to it, as well as the conversation of Christians from unchri∣stian manners. But, if the Church be trusted, to exact the profession of Chri∣stianity, of all that require, by Baptisme to be admitted unto the Communion of the Church; It must, by consequence, be intrusted to exact of them also, the performance of that which they have professed, that is, undertaken to pro∣fesse. For, the profession being the condition upon which they are admitted to the Communion of the Church, the performance, or at least a presumption of the performance, must needs be the condition upon which they injoy it. Upon this ground, the Church becomes not onely a number of men, but a Society, Corporation, and Communion of Christians in those Offices, wherewith God
hath declared that hee will be served by Christians. For, upon supposition of such a Declaration, or such a Law of God it is, that the Church becomes a Body or Corporation of all Christians, though under several Common-wealths and Soveraignties of this world; As there are in all States several by Corporati∣ons, subsisting by some act or Law of the Soveraign Powers of the same. For, if God had not appoted, what Offices hee will be served with by his people, at their common Assemblies, there could be no ground, why▪ the Church should be such a Society founded by God, there being nothing appointed by▪ God for the members of it to communicate in. But, were there nothing but the Sacrament of the Eucharist acknowledged, to have been delivered by God to his people, to be frequented and celebrated by them at their common Assemblies; that alone would be enough, to demon∣strate the foundation and institution of the Communion and Corporation of the Church by God. For, of a truth, the rest▪ of those▪ Offices, wherewith God requires to be served▪ by Christians, are the same, by which hee required to be served by his ancient people before Christianity, setting aside that difference, with the divers measure of the knowledge of God, in this and in that estate, must needs produce. Though there is no serving of God by the blood of bulls and goats, nor by other ceremonies and sacrifices of Moses Law, under Christi∣anity; Yet were the praises of God, the hearing of his Word read, and the in∣structing and exhorting of his people in it and to it, together with the sacrifice of Prayer, frequented by Gods people under the Law, as still God is served and is to be served with them under Christianity. And, upon this account, I have truly said elswhere, as I conceive it, that the Corporation of the Church is foun∣ded, upon the privilege which God hath granted all Christians, of assembling themselves for the service of God, though, supposing that the Powers of the world should forbid them so to do. For, this privilege consists in nothing else, but in that command which God hath given his Church, of serving him with these Offices. Whereupon it necessarily insues, that, notwithstanding whatso∣ever command of Secular Powers, they are forbidden to serve God, in the Com∣munion of them that are not of the Church; Seeing they cannot be comman∣ded to serve God in the Communion of the Church, but they must be forbid∣den to serve God, in the Communion of them which are not of the Church. And, upon this ground stands all the Power which the Church can challenge, in limiting the circumstances, and conditions upon which men may communicate in these Offices. Which, as it may justly seem, of it self, inconsiderable to the world, and the Powers that govern it; So, when those Powers take upon them to establish the exercise of it by their Lawes; If they maintain not the Church in that Power, which, of right and of necessity it had from God, before they professed to maintain Christianity, they destroy indeed, that, which in word they professe. But, if they take upon them to maintain it in the right, which originally it had, to limit the said circumstances, by such Rules, as, by the act of Secular Powers become Lawes to their people; then must the Power of the Church become as considerable as it is indeed, in all States and Common∣wealths, that retain the Christianity which they had from the beginning, in this point. This being the ground, and this the mater of Ecclesiastical Lawes, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist being that Office proper to Christianity, in or∣der to the Communion whereof, all Lawes, limiting the circumstances and conditions of the said Communion are devised and made; It seems requisite to my designe, in the first place, to void those Controversies concerning the same, which, all men know, how much they have contributed to the pre∣sent divisions of the Church. For, the determination of them will be, with∣out doubt, of great consequence, to determine the true and right intent of those Lawes, which serve onely to limit those circumstances, which are onely the condition of communicating in this and those other Offices; Concerning which, there is no other controversie on foot, to divide the Church, but that which concerns the said circumstances. Now, what differences concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist are mater
of division to the Church, I may suppose all the world knows, the opinion of Transubstantiation being so famous as it is: Which importeth this; That, in ce∣lebrating this Sacrament, upon pronouncing of the words with which our Lord delivered it to his Disciples, This is my Body, this is my Bloud, the substance of the elements, Bread and Wine, ceaseth and is abolished, the substance of the Body and Bloud of Christ coming into their stead, though under the species of Bread and Wine; that is to say, those accidents of them, which our senses wit∣nesse that they remain. In opposition whereunto, some have proceeded so farr, as to teach, that this Sacrament is no more than a meer sign, and the celebrati∣on and communion thereof, barely, the renewing of our Christian profession, of believing in Christ crucified, whom it representeth, importing no spiritual grace at all to be tendred by it from God; Which may justly seem to be the o∣pinion of the Socinians, and properly to give the name of Sacramentaries, to all that professe it. For, in reason and justice, wee are to difference it from the opinion of those, that hold it for a sign appointed by God, to tender the Body and Bloud of Christ, spiritually to be received by it, of▪ as many as with a lively faith communicate in it. Though these also cannot pretend to make it any more than a sign, by virtue of that consecration which makes it a Sacrament; Seeing it is the faith of him that receives it, as they say, which makes it the Body and Bloud of Christ spiritually, though truly and really, to him that so receives it. There is, besides, another opinion, extremely distant from this last, in regard tha, whereas this ascribes the presence of the Body and Bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, to the faith of them that receive it, (which is after the consecration of the Sacrament, in as much as it is exercised in receiving the same) the other extreme opinion, that I speak of, attibutes it to the hypostatical Union of the two natures in the person of Christ, the consequence whereof they will have to be this; That the perfections of the God-head are communicated to the hu∣mane nature, in the person of Christ, exalted to the Power of gathering and conducting his Church, through this world to the world to come: Because this Power, being to be exercised in our nature, requires and imports the attributes of the God-head, to the executing, and in the executing of it. For, seeing the Manhood of Christ cannot communicate with his God-head, in giving this spi∣ritual assistance to his Church, but first it must be present; and, seeing this assi∣stance is given by the Sacrament of the Eucharist; of necessity, they think, the Body and Bloud of Christ must be present in the Eucharist, to give this assistance, by virtue of the hypostatical Union ordained for that purpose. And so, this o∣pinion becomes extremely opposite to the last, because it attributes the pre∣sence, and so the receiving of the Body and Bloud of Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, to that Faith, which takes effect after that consecration which makes the Sacrament: Whereas this attributes the same to the hypostatical U∣nion of the Manhood with the God-head in Christ, taking effect, without ex∣ception, after his exaltation to glory, which, it is manifest, is so long since past and done, before the celebration of it. CHAP. II. That the natural substance of the Elements remains in the Sacrament. That the Body and Bloud of Christ is neverthelesse present in the same, when it is recei∣ved, not by the receiving of it. The eating of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse necessarily requireth the same. This causes no contradiction nor impro∣perty in the words of our Lord. THis being the question wherein I am now to give judgment, and no more required of a Divine, than to give such a meaning to those few Scriptures which depose in it, as may no way contradict the Rule of Faith; I shall, (with∣out considering how to content those factions which these opinions have made) content my self, by delivering that opinion, which I conceive best satisfies the plain words of the Scripture; without trenching upon any ground of Christi∣anity,
within which the meaning of the Scriptures is to remain. I say then first, that, if wee will not offer open violence to the words of the Scripture, and to all consideration of reason, that may deserve to direct the meaning of it, wee must grant, in the first place; That the bodily substance of Bread and Wine is not abolished, nor ceaseth in this Sacrament, by virtue of the consecration of it. And of this, I conceive, the manifest words of the Scripture, wheresoever there is mention of this Sacrament, are evidence enough, Mat. XXVI. 26-29. And, when they were eating, Jesus took bread, and having blessed, brake and gave it to his Disciples, saying; Take, eat, this is my Body. And, taking the cup, hee gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying; Drink yee all of it. For, this is that bloud of mine of the New Testament, which is shed for many, unto remission of sins. And I say unto you; I will not drink from henceforth of this production of the vine, till I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdome. In S. Mark, I can imagine no maer of difference but this, Mark XIV. 24, 25. This is my bloud of the New Testament, which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you, that I will not drink of that which the vine brings forth, till I drink it new in the kingdome of God. In S. Luke thus, XXII. 17-20. And taking the cup, hee said; Take this and divide it amongst you: For, I say unto you, that I will not drink of that which the Vine brings forth, till the kingdome of God come. And, hee took bread, and, having given thanks, brake it, and gave it to them saying; This is my Body which is given for you: Do this in remembrance of mee. Like∣wise also the cup after having supped, saying; This cup is the New Testament in my bloud, which is shed for you. S. Paul, 1 Cor. XI. 23-32. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that hee was betrayed, took bread, and having given thanks, brake it, saying; Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you: This do in remembrance of mee. Likewise also the cup after having supped, saying; This cup is the New Testament in my bloud: This do, so often as yee drink it, in remembrance of mee. For so of∣ten as you eat this bread and drink this cup, yee declare the Lords death, till hee come. Therefore, whoso eateth this bread, or drinketh this cup unworthily, is guilty of the body and bloud of Christ. But let a man examine himself, and so eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For, whoso eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. Therefore many a∣mong you are sick and weak, and many fall asleep. For, if wee did discern our selves, wee should not be condemned. But, when wee are judged, wee are chastised by the Lord, that wee be not condemned with the world. And again, 1 Cor. X. 16, 17, 18. The cup of blessing, which wee blesse, is it not the communion of the bloud of Christ? The bread which wee▪ break, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? For as the bread is one, so wee many are one body: For wee all partake of the same bread. Had not a man as good bid the Scripture be silent, (for hee will believe what hee list notwithstanding the Scripture) as set all this evidence upon the rack, to make it deny that which it cries aloud? For, when S. Matthew tells us, that our Lord took bread, and, having blessed, brake and gave it, saying; This is my Bo∣dy; that hee took the cup, and having given thanks, gave it to them, saying; This is my Bloud; Is it not as manifest, that hee sayes, This bread is my Body, this wine is my Bloud, as, that hee sayes, This is my Body, this is my Bloud? Un∣lesse wee think that This can demonstrate any thing, but that which had been spoke of afore, in the processe, without giving any mark to know, what it is that hee meant to demonstrate. There is none of them that deny this, but will be puzzled, to say himself, what hee would have the Disciples, to whom this is said, understand by This, forbidding them to understand that which went before. In S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul, the difficulty is the same. For is not This of which our Lord speaks, the same that hee took? If you say, not so, because hee gave thanks before hee said; This is my Body, This is my Bloud; at least it must be that which hee broke after hee had given thanks, and that, of necessity, is the same bread which hee took, as the same wine. For, to imagine, that This de∣monstrates bread and wine, which, when hee sayes, is my Body and Bloud, are
then abolished, to make room for the Body and Bloud; is that, which his affir∣mation is will by no means allow, requiring, that which it affirmeth to be veri∣fied for that time which it demonstrateth, or presenteth to the understanding. So that, This must be the Body and Bloud of Christ, at such time as it is This, that is, that Bread and that Wine which Gods word demonstrateth. In fine, whatsoever it is which This may be said to demonstrate, besides Bread and Wine, it will be unpossible to make appear, that the Disciples understood that, which the Scriptures, whereby wee must learn what they understood, expresse not. But this is not all. When S. Matthew sayes; I will drink no more of this pro∣duction of the Vine—(which, S. Luke sayes, that our Lord said before the con∣secration of the Sacrament) either wee must say, that hee repeated the same words, (which is nothing unlikely, seeing the tender of the cup, at which they were said, is repeated by our Lord, as it is agreed upon, that the Jewes at the Supper of the Passeover, did customarily repeat the same; And this answer takes away all imputation of confusion from the text of S. Matthew) But if any man stand upon it, that these words were said onely before the consecration, though they are repeated by S. Matthew after it, at the delivering of the cup; and therefore, that it is not called wine which is in the cup after the consecra∣tion; If hee consider, how pertinently hee makes S. Matthew bring in this saying, upon the delivery of the cup, not supposing that to be wine which was in it, hee will finde himself never a whit easied by that escape. For, how grosse were it for him, to put these sayings together, This is my bloud of the New Te∣stament, which is shed for many to the remission of sins: And, I say unto you, I will drink no more of this production of the Vine—had hee not taken that which was in the cup for wine? The same holds in the words of S. Mark▪ having fol∣lowed S. Matthew in this. So, when S. Paul makes our Lord say; Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; is it not manifest, that breaking is pro∣perly said of bread; of a body of flesh, not without some impropriety, to be understood, by that which is common to bread and to a body of flesh? And, would S. Paul have used a term, which necessarily referrs him that hears it to bread, were it not bread which our Lord brake, after the consecration of the Sacrament, in resemblance wherewith, this body is said to be broken, because it was wounded? But, when the same S. Paul, speaking of that which they take, which they eat, which they drink, (which certainly they do after the consecra∣tion, when it is the Sacrament) saith; So oft as yee eat this bread, and drink this cup, yee declare the Lords death till hee come. Therefore, whoso eateth this bread, and drinketh this cup unworthily, is guilty of the body and bloud of Christ; Is there then any reason left, why wee should not believe bread to be bread, and wine to be wine, when the word of God sayes it, but that, whatsoever the word of God say, wee are resolved of our prejudice? And, when hee saith again, Let a man examine himself, and so eat of the bread and drink of the cup; speaketh hee of eating and drinking any thing else, but that which all Christians receive in the Sacrament of the Eucharist? If any thing can possibly be more manifest than this, it is that which hee addeth, arguing; that all Christians are one Bo∣dy s the bread is one, (to wit, which they eat) because they all partake of on bread. And therefore, when hee saith further; The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the communion of the bloud of Christ? The bread which wee break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? I will not insist upon this; that it is called bread after the blessing, though, S. Matthew observeth, that our Lord calleth it so after giving of thanks; because the cup may be called, the cup of blessing which wee blesse, before the blessing be past and done; But, I say con∣fidently, that; to make our Lord say, that the bread is the communion of the Body, and the cup▪ (that is, the wine that is in the cup which is blessed, for what else can be understood to be in the cup, with correspondence to bread?) is the communion of the bloud of Christ; is to make him say that which hee did not mean, unlesse hee did mean, that that is bread and wine, whereby Christians communicate in the body and bloud of Christ, in the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist.
But, shall this evidence, of the nature and substance of Bread and Wine re∣maining in the Sacrament of the Eucharist even when it is a Sacrament, that is, when it is received, either deface or efface the evidence, which the same Scriptures yield us, of the truth of Christs body and blood, brought forth and made to be in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by making it to be that Sacrament? Surely wee must not suffer such a conceit to prossesse us, unlesse wee will offer the same violence to the manifest and expresse words of the Scripture. For, of necessity, when our Lord saith, This is my body, this is my blood, either wee must make is to stand for signifieth, and, This is my body, this is my bloud, to be more, than, this is a sign of my body and bloud; Or else the word is will inforce, the elements to be called the body and bloud of Christ, at that time, and for that time when they are not yet received; That is to say, whether hee that receives them, who think it for their advantage to maintain, that This is my body and my bloud signi∣fies no more, but, this is a sign of my body and bloud; to advise, how they can ground the true & real participation of the body and bloud of Christ in & by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, upon the Scripture, allowing, no more than the signi∣fication of the body & bloud of Christ by that Sacrament, to be declared in those words of the Scripture, that describe the institution of it. For, that a man receives the body and bloud of Christ spiritually, through faith, in receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is no more than hee does in not receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist, if, by the act of a living faith, wee do eat the flesh of Christ and drink his bloud, as, understanding themselves aright, all Christians must needs do. Un∣lesse wee can maintain, that wee receive the body and blood of Christ, not one∣ly when wee receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist, but also by receiving it, there is no cause why our Lord should say; This is my body, this is bloud; when hee delivered onely the sign of it to good and bad, and therefore, not out of any consideration of the quality of them that received it. And, what a grosse thing were it to say, that our Savior took such care to leave his Church, by the act of his last will, a legacy, which imports no more, than that which they might at all times bestow upon themselves? And, let mee know, whether the Church could not devise signes enow, to renew the memory of Christs death, or, (if that be likewise included) to expresse their profession also of dying with Christ, by bearing his Crosse, if our Lords intent had been no more, than to appoint a Ceremony that might serve to commemorate our Lords death, or to expresse our own profession of conformity to the same? For, certainly, they who make no more of it, whom, I said, wee may therefore properly call Sacramentaries, cannot assign any further effect of Gods grace, for which it may have been in∣stituted, and yet make it a meer sign of Christs death, or, of our own profession to dy with Christ or for Christ. But, if I allow, them that make it more than such a sign to have departed from a pessilent conceit, and utterly destructive to Christianity, I cannot allow them to speak things consequent to their own po∣sition, when they will not have these words to signifie, that the elements are the body and bloud of Christ when they are received, but become so, upon being re∣ceived with living faith, which will allow no more of the body and bloud of Christ to be in the Sacrament, than out of it. For the act of living faith im∣porteth the eating and drinking of the flesh and bloud of Christ, no lesse with∣out the Sacrament than in it. Certainly it is no such abstruse consequence, no such farr fetched argument, to inferr; If this is my body this is my bloud, signi∣fies no more than, this is the sign of my body and bloud, then is the Sacrament of the Eucharist a meer sign of the body and bloud of Christ, without any pro∣mise of spiritual grace; Seeing that, being now a Sacrament, by being become a Sacrament, it is become no more than a sign of the body and bloud of Christ, which though a living faith spiritually eateth and drinketh, when it receives the Sacrament, yet should it have done no lesse, without receiving the same. I will here allege the discourse of our Lord to▪ them that followed him to Ca∣pernaum, John VI. 26-63. upon occasion of having been fed by the miracle of five loaves and a few little fishes; Supposing that which any man of common sense must grant, that it signifies no more, than they that heard it could under∣stand
by it and; that, the Sacrament of the Eucharist not being then ordained, they could not understand that hee spake of it, but ought to understand him to speak of believing the Gospel and becoming Christians, under the allegory of eating his flesh and drinking his bloud. But, when the Eucharist was instituted, the correspondence of the ceremony thereof with the allegory which here hee discourseth is evidence enough, that, as well the promise which hee tendreth, as the duty which hee requireth, have their effect and accomplishment in and by the receiving of it. I must here call you to minde that which I said of the Sa∣crament of Baptisme; that, when our Lord discoursed with Nicodemus of rege∣neration by water and the Holy Ghost, John III. (not having yet instituted the Sacrament of Baptisme in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, nor declared the promise of giving the Holy Ghost to them that should receive the same) it must needs be thought, that hee made way thereby, to the introducing of that Ordinance, the condition and promise whereof, hee meant, by the pro∣cesse of his own and his Apostles doctrine, further to limit and determine. In like maner I must here insist, and suppose, that hee speaks not here immediately of eating and drinking his flesh and bloud in the Eucharist, (which, his hearers could not then fore-tell that hee meant to ordain) but that, the action thereof being instituted, with such correspondence to this discourse, the intent of it may be and is to be argued from the same. Now, I have showed in due place, that the sayings and doings of our Lord in the Gospel are mystical, to signifie his kingdome of Glory, to the which hee bringeth us through his kingdome of Grace. So that, when our Savior fed that great multitude with the loaves and the fishes, which hee multiplied by miracle, to the intent that they might not faint in following him and his doctrine; it is manifest, that hee intimateth thereby a promise of Grace, to sustain us in our travail here, till wee come to our Coun∣trey of the Land of Promise. When therefore hee proposeth the theme of this discourse, saying; Yee seek mee not because yee have seen miracles, (which serve to recommend my doctrine) but because yee have eaten of the loaves and were filled: Labor not for the meat that perisheth, but for that which indures to life everlasting; hee showes two things; First, that his flesh and bloud sustain us in our pilgrimage here, because hee showes, the Manna which the Fathers lived on in the Wildernesse to be a figure of it; Secondly, that they bring us to im∣mortality and everlasting life in the world to come; by expounding the figure to consist in this, that, as they were maintained by manna till they died, so his new Israelites, by his flesh and bloud, by eating his flesh and drinking his bloud which hee was giving for the life of the world, never to dye. Now, wherein the eating and drinking of his flesh and bloud consisteth, hee showes, by his answer to their question upon this; Warning them, to work for the meat that lasts un∣to everlasting life, which hee tenders, and not for that which perisheth. The question is; What shall wee do to work Gods works? And the answer; The work of God is this, to believe in him whom hee hath sent. I have showed in due place, that, the condition which makes the promises of the Gospel due is or Christia∣nity, to wit, to professe the faith of Christ faithfully, that is, not in vain. There∣fore, when our Lord saith; The work of God is this; To believe on him whom hee hath sent; hee means this fidelity in professing Christianity. For indeed, who can imagine, otherwise, that hee should call the act of believing in Christ that work of God, which Christ came to teach Gods people? Hee then that considers the death of Christ, that is to say, the crucifying of his flesh and the pouring out of his bloud, with that faith, which supposes all that to be true, and, by the consideration of it, is induced to resolve and undertake the profession of Christianity; hee it is that eats and drinks the flesh and bloud of Christ, till hee depart from the effect of it; For, no man can be thought to feed upon that which hee vomits up again. Neither can there be found a more exact correspon∣dence, than that which is seen, between the nourishment of the body, in the strength whereof it moves, and those reasons, whereupon the minde frames the resolutions, from which a mans conversation proceeds. And, because God hath promised to give the Holy Ghost to them that faithfully resolve this; and that, as
many as have the Holy Ghost, their mortal bodies shall, by the Holy Ghost that dwelleth in them, be raised to life everlasting, Rom. VIII. 11. therefore, they that thus eat the body and bloud of Christ shall not dy, but live unto everlast∣ing. This being the eating and drinking of Christs flesh and bloud spiritually by Faith; and that, when the Sacrament of the Eucharist is instituted, the effect of it must needs be the same spiritual nourishment and sustenance of the soul, but by a new means, to wit, the receiving of that Sacrament; As the eating and drinking of the flesh and bloud of Christ spiritually by faith presupposes the flesh of Christ crucified and his bloud poured forth; so must the eating of it in the Sacrament presuppose the being of it in the Sacrament, to wit, by the be∣ing and becoming of it a Sacrament. Unlesse a man can spiritually eat and drink the flesh and bloud of Christ in and by the Sacrament, which is not in the Sacra∣ment when hee eats and drinks it, but by his eating and drinking of it comes to be there. Hee therefore spiritually eats and drinks the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Sacrament, who, considering the profession Christ calls us to, with that faith, which supposes him to have signed his calling by finishing his course u∣pon the Crosse, resolves to undertake the same, and, in that resolution partici∣pates of the Eucharist: But, if the flesh and bloud of Christ be not there by the virtue of the consecration of the elements into the Sacrament, then cannot the flesh of Christ and his bloud be said to be eaten and drunk in the Sacrament, which are not in the Sacrament by being a Sacrament, but in him that eats and drinks it. For, that which hee findes to eat and drink in the Sacrament, cannot be said to be in the Sacrament, because it is in him that spiritually eats and drinks it by faith. Either therefore, the flesh and bloud of Christ cannot be eaten and drunk in the Eucharist; or, it is necessarily in the Sacrament when it is eaten and drunk in it, in which if it were not, it could not be eaten and drunk in it. This is further seen by the words of S. Paul, when, inferring his purpose, to wit, that Christians ought not to communicate in things sacrificed to Idols, upon that which hee had premised; The cup of blessing which wee blesse, is it not the communion of the bloud of Christ? The bread which wee break, is it not the com∣munion of the body of Christ? hee addeth, 1 Cor. X. 18, 20, 21. Look upon Israel according to the flesh, do not they which eat the Sacrifices partake with the Altar? What say I then? That an Idol is any thing? Or that a thing sacrificed to an Idol is any thing? Rather, that, what the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice to Devils, and I would not have you partake with Devils. Yee cannot drink the cup of God, and the cup of Devils. Yee cannot partake of the Lords Table and the table of Devils. These words manifestly suppose, the Eucharist to be the communion of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse. For as our Lord saith; This cup is the New Testament in my bloud, or, my bloud of the New Testament; so is it ma∣nifest, that God, in inacting his Covenant, that is his Testament, proceeds, (ac∣cording as the custome was among the most ancient Nations of the world) to solemnize the establishment thereof with sacrifice. I have showed you before, that the Law was covenanted for, with sacrificing Holocausts and Peace-offe∣rings, the bloud whereof was sprinkled on all the People: But the Elders, in the name of the people, feasted upon the remaines, Exod. XXIV. 5-11. And, among the Sacrifices of the Law, those sin-offerings, wherein the Priests shared with the Altar, in behalf of them whose sins they expiated by them; and the peace-offerings, wherein, those that offered them, as well as the Priests that of∣fered them, shared with the Altar, had their effect by virtue of the Law, and the Covenant which introduced it: And therefore they contained a new act, by which the Covenant was renewed, as to the particular purpose of those Sacrifi∣ces, and the effect of them, in them for whom they were made. Correspon∣dently, the Covenant of Grace being inacted by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, as to Gods part, (that is to say, so farr as to oblige God, to grant re∣mission of sins and life everlasting to all those, that are baptized into the faith∣full profession of Christianity) is renewed in the Consecration and Communion of the Eucharist, whereby that Sacrifice is renewed and revived unto the worlds end. So that, as those who eat of the Sacrifices of the Altar, (whether by the
Priests or by themselves) did feast with God, whose Altar had received and con∣sumed a part of those Sacrifices; So, those that communicate in the Eucharist, do feast upon the Sacrifice of our Lord Christ on the Crosse, which God is so well pleased with, as to grant the Covenant of Grace, and the publication thereof, in consideration of it. This, being evidently that correspondence, which the discourse of S. Paul requires, remains manifestly proved by the same. Though of a truth, the words of our Lord when hee saith; This is my bloud of the New Testament which is shed for you; Or, This cup is the New Testament in my bloud which is shed for you, cannot otherwise be understood, than by taking, This cup, or This which our Lord speaks of, to stand for the action of giving and receiving the Sacrament, not for that which is given and received in it and by it. For otherwise, how should a Cup, or that which is in it be a Testament? But, in as much as the Communion of the Eucharist proceeds upon supposition of the Covenant of Grace, and therefore imports a profession, both on Gods part, and on his that receives it, of performing the condition to which respectively they binde themselves by the same; In that regard, nothing can be more pro∣perly said, than, that God tenders, by that Sacrament, all that the Gospel pro∣mises, and man, by receiving it, the Condition which God covenants for at his hands. Which, whether you call the New Covenant or the New Testament it maters not, an heir, upon condition of performing the will of the dead, being in the same state with him, that contracteth upon articles. But, there is as much said, when our Lord saith onely; This is my body which is given for you; if it be rightly understood, that is, supposing the body of Christ to have been given to be sacrificed for us upon the Crosse. For hee that tenders this to eat, thereby declares, that hee incites to the profession of that Covenant, which otherwise appears to have been inacted by that which hee tenders. The same sense is contained in S. Pauls words, 1 Cor. V. 8, 9. Christ your Passe∣over is slain for you. Let us therefore feast, not with old loven, nor with the leven of malice and deceit, but with the unlevened bread of sincerity and truth. For, if wee consider the circumstance of time and place, which our Lord took to institute the Sacrament of the Eucharist, just when the Paschal Lamb was eaten, how shall wee deny, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse to have been as presently re∣ceived there, as the Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb was the subject and occasion of the Feast, at which hee ordained it? But the discourse by which the Apostle perswades Christians to separate themselves from the Jewes, Ebr. XIII. 10-16. is most pertinent to this purpose, as that which is not to be understood other∣wise. Though, when hee saith; Wee have an Altar whereof those that serve the Tabernacle have no right to eat; I allow, that, by an Altar hee means metony∣mically a Sacrifice. For, proving his intent, by instancing in those Sacrifices for sin, the bloud whereof was carried within the vail, being, by the Law, appointed to be burnt without the Camp, or City Jerusalem, hee supposes them to figure our Lord Christ, who suffered without Jerusalem; Inferring thereupon, that they ought to go forth of the communion of the Synagogue, though they were to suffer persecution at the hands of their brethren for it. But when hee pro∣ceedeth; By him therefore let us offer to God, the sacrifice of praise continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his Name: And to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased; Either wee must conceive him to return to his purpose, and to show, what Sacrifice hee meant when hee said; Wee have an Altar, of which, they that wait upon the Tabernacle have no right to eat; Or, wee can give no reason, what hee meant to argue, that the Jewes have no right to the Sacrifice of Christ on the Crosse, which Christians pretend not to eat of in any Sacrifice, but in the Eucharist. And surely, if wee consider but the name of Eucharist, wee cannot think it could have been more properly signified, than by calling it the sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips that confesse the Name of God; For, when hee proceeds to exhort, not to forget communicating their goods, do wee not know, and have wee not made it to appear, that this must be, by their oblations to the Altar, the first-fruits of their goods, whereof, the Eucharist being first con∣secrated,
the rest served the necessities of the Church? Which, as hath been showed, was the original of all Consecrations, and Dedications, that have been made in Christianity. If, therefore, the eating of the Sacrifice of the Crosse, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, mean no more but the signifying and the fi∣guring of that eating of the Sacrifice of the Crosse, which is done by a lively Faith, (that is, by every one, that considers the death of Christ with that Faith, which▪ supposing all that the Gospel sayes of it to be true, resolves faith∣fully to professe Christianity) the question is, why the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist was instituted by God, why in those elements, and to what purpose, seeing, without Gods appointment, men could have done it of themselves, to the same effect. But, if it be manifest, that, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, God pre∣tends to tender us the communion of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, then is there another presence of the body and bloud of our Lord in the Sacra∣ment, beside that spiritual presence in the soul, which that living faith effecteth, without the Sacrament, as well as in the receiving of it. Which kinde of pre∣sence, you may, if you please, call the representation of the Sacrifice of Christ, so as you understand the word representation to signifie, not the figuring or resem∣bling of that which is onely signified; But, as it signifies in the Romane Laws, when a man is said, repraesentare pecuniam, who payes ready money: Deriving the signification of it à re praesenti, not from the preposition re; Which will import, not the presenting of that againe to a mans senses, which once is past, but, the tendring of that to a mans possession, which is tendred him upon the place. That this is the intent of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, one perem∣ptory argument there remains, in the words of S. Paul, when hee sayes; Whoso eateth this bread and drinketh this cup unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ. For, neither can it be said, that the Apostle, by way of hyperbole, calls the slighting of Gods ordinance, which hee hath appointed to signifie Christs death, the crucifying of our Lord again: Because, it is manifest, that his menace is grounded upon a particular consideration of the nature of the crime, not up∣on that, which is seen in every sin. Renouncing Christianity indeed is truly the crucifying of Christ again, as the Apostle shewes Ebr. VI. 6. and unworthily re∣ceiving the Eucharist is, by just construction, the renouncing of Christianity, be∣cause that is it, which renews the bond of observing it; But otherwise, it were too cold an expression, to make S. Paul call it the crucifying of Christ, for that which is common to all sins. Nor would it serve the turn. For, when it fol∣lows; Hee that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body; Unlesse a man discern the Lords Body where it is not, of necessity it must there be where it is discerned to be, not made to be there, by being discerned to be there. It will now be objected, that I hold things inconsistent, and state such a sense of our Lords words, as makes contradictories true. For, if bread and wine, re∣maining bread and wine, can be also the body and bloud of Christ, (that is, un∣lesse, granting them to be that which they are, wee deny them to be that, which is not that, which wee grant them to be) there will be no cause why wee should believe any thing to be that which it is, more than that which it is not; All dif∣ference being a sufficient ground of that contradiction, which denies any thing to be that which differs from it, that is, which it is not. The difficulty of an∣swering this is the same which every man findes, when hee is put to prove that which is most evident, or to make that clear by words, which all mens common sense admits. Supposing the bread and the wine to remain in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as sense informs, and the word of God inforces, if the same word of God assirm there to be also the body and bloud of Christ, what remaineth, but that bread and wine by nature, and bodily substance, be also the bodily flesh and bloud of Christ by mystical representation, (in that sense which I determined even now) and by spiritual grace? For, what reason can be imagined, why, the material presence of bread and wine in bodily substance should hinder the my∣stical and spiritual presence of the body and bloud of Christ, as in a Sacrament, whereby they are tendered of grace to them that receive? Shall they be ever a
whit the more present in this sense, if the substance of bread and wine be abo∣lished than if it be not? Certainly, unlesse wee believe the spiritual grace of Christs body and bloud in the Sacrament of the Eucharist to possesse those di∣mensions, which the Elements hold, (and, if so, then are they not there Sacramen∣tally and mystically, but bodily and materially) wee can give no reason why the bodily presence of the Elements should hinder it. So farr is this from being strange, to the nature and custome of humane speech, that, supposing the invi∣sible presence of one thing in another, and with another, which is visibly pre∣sent, it cannot otherwise be expressed, than by saying; this is that; though eve∣ry man know, what distance there is between their natures. The Dove, in the which the Holy Ghost was seen to come down and rest upon our Lord, the fiery Tongues, in which the Holy Ghost rested upon the Apostles, the fire and the whirlewinde in the which Gods Angels attend upon him and upon his com∣mands, (in regard whereof it is said Psalm CIV. 4. Hee maketh his An∣gels Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire) are they not as truly said to be the Holy Ghost, or those Angels, as the Holy Ghost, or those Angels, is said to come down, to rest, or to move, because those things rest and come down, or move, whereas the Holy Ghost otherwise can neither rest nor come down, nor those Angels move, as the fire or the winde moves, in which they are? I know it may be said, that neither the Dove, nor those Tongues are called the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; Nor do I intend to build upon any supposition that they are. This I say, whosoever understands the capacity of words, serving for instruments to signifie mens mindes, may firmly conclude, rhat they may as well be said to be the Holy Ghost, as it may be said, that the Holy Ghost came down, because the Dove came down. For, can there be any occasion for a man of sense to conceive cloven Tongues of fire to be the God∣head of the Holy Ghost, because they are called the Holy Ghost, in regard they are used to demonstrate the presence of it; when no man complains, that any man of sense hath occasion to mistake the God-head to move, because the Holy Ghost is said to come down in the bodily shape of a Dove? I know it may be said, and is said, that, in the Text of the Psalm that I quoted, it is not to be translated winds but spirits, or spiritual substances, because the Apostle, having alleged it, to show the difference between them and our Lord Christ, Ebr. I. 7, 14. inferreth, that they are ministring Spirits; signifying thereby, not winds, but that which Christians signifie by the name of spiritual substances. And I yield, that they are so called, (not onely in the common language of Christians, but in the Apostle also here, and by our Lord, speaking in the common phrase of Gods people, when hee saith; A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as yee see mee have, Luke XXIV. 39.) upon occasion of that appearance of Gods majesty, which is either presented to, or described by the Prophets in the Old Testament, with his Throne attended by Angels, the visible signs of whose presence are whirlewind and fire. So, in the place quoted, Psalm CIV. 2. That puts on light for a robe; stretches the heavens as a curtain: laies the beams of his chambers in the waters, makes the clouds his chariot, and walks upon the wings of the winde. Whereupon followes; That makes his Angels Spirits, or Winds, and his Mi∣nisters a flame of fire; which answers winds, not spiritual substances. Compare the description of Gods appearance, Psal. L. 3. Our God shall come and shall not keep silence, a consuming fire shall go before him, and be very tempestuous round a∣bout; either with the visions of the Prophet Ezekiel I. and Daniel VII. or with the description of the same laid down, Psalm XVIII. 10-14. and you will have reason to say as I do: Especially when you reade; Hee rode upon a Che∣rub and did fly, hee came flying upon the wings of the wind; where, a Cherub in the first clause, is the wind in the second; The same sense being repeted, ac∣cording to the perpetual custome of the Psalms. So, when Angels appeared in the shape of men, was it not true to say, this is an Angel, but wee must sup∣pose the nature of man abolished? If the Holy Ghost and Angels be of spiri∣tual nature, the flesh and the bloud of Christ bodily, then are they at as great distance, from the Dove, from the Tongues, from the Fire, from the Wind, from
the men in which they appeared, as the flesh and bloud of Christ from the ele∣ments of the Eucharist. Nor is the mystical and Sacramental presence, of the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, ever a whit more destructive to the bodily presence of the elements, then the invisible presence of the Holy Ghost or Angels, to the visible presence of those things in which they were. Nay, if I may, without offense, allege that which is most pertinent to this purpose, not being usually alleged in it; That maner of speech which all orthodoxe Christi∣ans use, in calling the person of our Lord Christ either God or Man, (according to the nature which they intend chiefly to signifie) or, in ascribing the proper∣ties of each nature to the said person, respectively to the subject of their speech, hath no other ground than this which I speak of. For, all affirmatives, Philoso∣phers know, signifie, the subject that a man speaks of to be the very same thing with that which is attributed to it. As, when this wall is said to be white; this wall is the same subject with this white. Therefore, when a thing is said to be that, which, in nature, wee see, it is not, (as, when a mans picture is said to be hee) the saying, though extremely proper, if you regard what use & the elegance of speech requires, is unproper to the right understanding of the nature of the things wee speak of, though, a man would not be so well understood common∣ly, if hee should go about to explain his meaning by more, or other words: As I conceive, I am not so well understood in writing thus as our Lord was, when hee spoke the words that I indeavor to clear. When therefore, the properties of the divine nature are attributed to the Manhood of our Lord, supposing, as all good Christians do, that neither natures nor properties are confounded, what can wee say but this; That, by such attributions as these, in the Language of his Prophets the Apostles, God would have us understand a supernatural con∣junction and union of two natures, in one person of our Lord? And, what shall wee then say, when the name of Christs body and bloud is attributed to the bread and wine of the Eucharist, but, that God would have us understand a supernatural conjunction and union, between the body and bloud of Christ, and the said bread and wine, whereby, they become as truly the instrument of con∣veying Gods Spirit, to them who receive as they ought, as the same Spirit was alwaies in his natural body and bloud? For, it maters not, that the union of the two natures is indissoluble, that of Christs body and bloud onely in order to the use of the elements, that is, speaking properly, from the consecration to the receiving. The reason of both unions being the same, that makes both super∣natural, to wit, the will of God passed upon both, and, understood by the Scri∣ptures to be passed upon both, though to several effects and purposes. Therefore, I am no way singular in this sense. All they of the Confession of Auspurg do maintain it before mee, and think it enough to say, that it is an un∣usual or extraordinary maner of speech, when one thing is said to be another, of a several kinde and nature, but which, the unusual and extraordinary case that is signified, both expounds and justifies. They indeed maintain another reason of this presence, and therefore another maner of it; For, if, by virtue of the hypostatical union, the omnipresence of the God-head is communicated to the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, then is the flesh and bloud of Christ there, not onely mystically, but bodily. But if, supposing both the elements and the flesh and bloud of Christ bodily present, it may neverthelesse truly be said; This is my flesh, This is my bloud; How much more, if, as I say, the elements onely be there bodily, but the flesh and bloud of Christ onely mystically and spiritually? And therefore I finde it reasonable for mee to argue, that the sense of so many men, both learned and others, understanding the words of our Lord in this sense, ought to convince any man, that it is not against common sense, and therefore, tending so much to make good the words of our Lord, and the holy Scripture, it not to be let go. I do not intend, neverthelesse, hereby to grant, that the sense of these words; This is my body, this is my bloud; for, This is the signe of my body and bloud; is a true sense, because abundance of learned as well as ordinary people take it so to be. But, well and good, that it might have been maintained to be the true sense of them, had no more been expressed by the
Scripture in that businesse. For then, I suppose the sense of the Church (of which I say nothing as yt) could not have evidenced so much more, as, I have deduced by consequence from the rest of the Scripture. But, the mystical pre∣sence of the Body and Bloud of Christ in the Eucharist being further deduced from the Scripture by good consequence, I conceive, the common understanding of all those men, who, granting that, do not grnt the Elements to be abolish∣ed, sufficient ground for mee, that the signification of these words, This is my body, this is my bloud, inforceth it not. Whereas, on the other side, the sub∣stance of the Elements is not distinguishable by common sense, from their ac∣cidents (for, whether the quantity and the mater be all one or not, whether, beside the mater and accidents which the quantity is invested with, a substantial form berequisite, is yet disputable among Philosophers) And therefore, no reason can presume, that the Apostles, to whom these words were spoken, did understand This of which our Lord speaks, to signifie the sensible accidents of bread an swine, severed from the material substance of the same. I may there∣fore very well undertake to say, that this sense of the words is more proper, than, conceiving the substance of bread and wine to be abolished, the effect of grace to the Church remaining the same. For, the property of speech is not to be judged by the signification of a single word, but by the tenor of the speech wherein it stands, and the intent of him that speaks, declared by his actions, and the viible circumstances of the same. Now, our Lord, having taught those to whom this was spoken, that the eating of his flesh and drinking of his bloud is done by living faith; must be supposed, by appointing this Sacrament, tendring his flesh to eat and his bloud to drink, to limit and determine an office, in the doing whereof, his flesh and bloud is either eaten and drunk, or crucified, accor∣ding to the premises. If then, the eating and drinking of his flesh and bloud out of the Sacrament be meerly spiritual, by living faith, shall not the presence thereof in the Sacrament be according? Shall it not be enough, that they are mystically present in the Sacrament, to be spiritually eaten by them that re∣ceive them with living faith, to be crucified of them that do not? Is it any way pertinent to the spiritual eating of them, that they are bodily present? Is it not far more proper to that which our Lord was about (tending, without que∣stion, to the spiritual union which hee seeks with his Church) that hee should be understood to promise the mystical, than the bodily presence of them in the Sacrament, which is nothing else than a Mystery, by the proper significati∣on and intent of it? I grant an abatement of that, which the terms of body and bloud were originally imposed to signifie, being, without question, that which is visible and subject to sense. But if the nature of the action which our Lord was about, of the subject which his words expresse, be such as requires this abatement, then cannot the original sense of these words be so proper for this place, as this abatement. Here I will observe, that the Council of Trent it self, Sess. XIII. cap. I. speaketh so warily in this mater, as not to exclude all maner of tropes from the right sense of these words, saying; Indignissimum sanè flagitium est, ea à quibusdam contentiosis & pravis hominibus, ad sictitia & imaginarios trapos, quibus veritas caernis & sanguinis Christi negatur, contra uni∣versum Ecclesi sensum detorqueri. It is indeed a very great indignity, that they are, by some contentious and perverse persons, wrested aside to contrived and imagi∣nary tropes, whereby the truth of Christs flesh and bloud is denied, contrary to the whole sense of the Church. They were wiser than to impose upon all their Di∣vines a necessity to maintain, that there is no trope in the words; This is my cup of the New Testament; which so many of their Predecessors had granted, because it could not be denied. Which being granted, must needs take place in This is my body; by necessary consequence. And surely, the common prin∣ciples of Grammar and Rhetorick will inforce it, when they inform us, that tropes are used as cloaths are, either for necessity, because there are more things (much more conceptions) than words to signifie them; (For, thereupon, necessity constrains to turn a word to signifie that, which it was not at first intended to signifie, and that is a trope) Or for ornament, to expresse a mans mind, with
more elegance. Compare then our ordinary way of expressing the conceptions of the mind by words, which is common to all Languages, which our ordi∣nary way of expressing the objects thereof to our minds, by the said concepti∣ons; If a word be diverted to signifie that conception, which it was not first imposed to signifie, because there was no other at hand imposed to signifie the present conceit, Logick and Grammar will make this a Trope, though Rheto∣rick do not, because it was not used for ornament, but for the necessary cloth∣ing of a mans mind in terms intelligible. The trial whereof is, if, the subject you speak of cannot truly be said to be the thing which is attributed to it: As the bread and wine, which our Lord blessed, cannot be said to be his body and bloud. For, if the subject mater, signified by the Scripture elsewhere, require, that the body and bloud of Christ be thought present, then is the property of the terms to be abated, so as they may serve to signifie that presence; Voiding all dispute concerning the signification of words (which those that hold Tran∣substantiation could never, nor never will agree upon among themselves, because it stands upon terms of art, the use whereof no mans conceit can over-rule) that which the necessity of our common Faith requireth, being once secured, as here. For, the reason being rendred, why the Eucharist was instituted, and why it is to be frequented, notwithstanding that the Body and Bloud of Christ may always be eaten and drunk by a living Faith; (to wit, because the reviving of our Christianity, by receiving the Sacrament, reviveth the promise of Christs body and bloud, being the means to convay his Spirit) it will not concern the purpose thereof, that it should be present by Transubstantiation, abolishing the nature of the Elements. For, though it hath been boldly said, by those who dispute controversies; That the body of Christ is really and substantially resi∣dent in, and united to our bodies; That Grace and Charity, cooled by sinne, are inflamed in the Soul, by the body of Christ immediately touching our bo∣dies; That the seed of our resurrection is thereby sowed in our mortal bodies: First, none of this is true, unlesse you understand it with the same abatement; That the body of Christ received in the Sacrament, by the body of him, whose Soul hath living Faith in Christ, is the seed of the life of grace and glory, both to his soul and body; Because, otherwise a dead faith should receive the same. Secondly, none of this would hold, if Transubstantiation be true; because rendring the body of Christ invisibly present, no mans body whatsoever can immediately touch it. And therefore it is no marvel, that so many excellent School Doctors have acknowledged, that, setting the sense of the Church aside, (of which I will say what shall be requisite by and by) Transubstantiation can∣not be concluded from the Scriptures. Whose judgements I carry along with mee, for the complement of that prejudice which I advance, toward the right understanding of the sense of the Church; To wit, that, whatsoever the present Church may have determined, the Catholick Church did never understand that which the Scripture necessarily signifieth not. Now let us see, what our Lord sayes to his Disciples, being scandalized at those things which I showed you that hee taught them in the Synagogue at Ca∣pernaum, of attaining everlasting life by eating his flesh, John VI. 58-63. Is this it which scandalizeth you? saith hee, What, then, if you see the Son of man ascend where hee was afore? It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth no∣thing: The words that I speak to you are Spirit and Life. The spiritual sense, in which hee commandeth them to eat and drink his flesh and bloud, is grounded upon that difference between the promises of the Law and the Gospel, which I settled in the beginning. For, by virtue thereof, that Manna, which main∣tained them in the Desert till they died, is the figure of his body and bloud, that maintains us not to dye. Whereupon S. Paul saith, 1 Cor. III. 6. The Spirit quickeneth, but the Leter killeth. Not onely because the Law covenants nor for the world to come; But also, because it was no further the means to pro∣cure that righteousnesse which giveth life, then the Spirit of Christ was intima∣ted and furnished, under the dispensation of it; Whereupon S. Paul argues, that the Jews have as much need of Christ as the Gentiles, because the Law is
not able to bring corrupt nature to righteousnesse. Wherefore the reason, why they were scandalized at this doctrine of our Lords, was not meerly because it was difficult to understand (hee having so plentifully expressed his meaning, and inculcated it, by often beating the same discourse there, and otherwise made the condition of his Gospel intelligible to his Disciples) but because it was hard to undergo, importing the taking up of his Crosse, as I have said. For, it is evident by common experience in the world, how men find, or how they plead, their minds to be obstructed in the understanding of those spiritual maters, which, if they should grant their understandings to be convinced of, there were no plea left them, why they should not conform their lives and conversations to that light, which themselves confesse they have received. So that the scan∣dal was the same, that the rich man in the Gospel took, when hee was told, that, besides keeping Gods Commandments, one thing was wanting, to part with all hee had, and take up Christs Crosse, to wit, for the observing of his Commandments. And this scandal hee intends to take away, when hee referres them to his ascension into Heaven, because then, and from thence, they were to expect the Holy Ghost, to inable them to do that which the eating and drink∣ing of his flesh and bloud signifieth spiritually. And his words hee therefore calleth Spirit and Life, because they are the means to bring unto the communi∣on of his Spirit, wherein spiritual and everlasting life consisteth. So that the flesh of Christ being exalted to the right hand of God, and his Spirit, which first made it self an habitation in his flesh, being sent down to make him an ha∣bitation in the hearts of his people; those who, upon faithful consideration of his Crosse, faithfully resolve to undertake it, do, by the Spirit, eat his flesh and drink his bloud. Therefore, when, in correspondence hereunto, hee pretends to institute the Sacrament of the Eucharist, that they, who eat his flesh and drink his bloud in that Sacrament, may eat and drink the same spiritually (as unlesse they crucifie him again, they cannot chuse but do) it behoves indeed, that hee procure the flesh and bloud of Christ to be there, by the operation of that Spi∣rit, which framed them for an habitation to it self, in the womb of the Virgin; (that so, the receiving of his flesh and bloud may be the means of conveying his Spirit) But, how is it requisite, that they be there in bodily substance, as if the mystical presence of them were not a sufficient means to convey his Spirit, which we see, is conveyed by the meer spiritual consideration and resolution of a live∣ly and effectual faith? S. Paul writes thus to the Corinthians; I would not that you should be ignorant, Brethren, how that all our Fathers did eat the same spiritu∣al meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink; For they drank of the spi∣ritual rock that went with them: Now that rock was Christ. 1 Cor. X. 1, 3, 4. The meat and drink of the Fathers in the wilderness can no otherwise be understood to be spiritual, then, as I have proved the Law of Moses to be spiritual; That is, as, intimating spiritual promises, it intimates a contract for spiritual obedience. So S. Pauls argument holds; If they, who were sustained by God in their travel to the Land of Promise, not keeping their Covenant with God, fell in the wildernesse: Then shall it not serve our turn, that, being baptized, wee are fed by the Eucharist to everlasting life, if wee perform not that, which, by our Baptism, wee undertake. The Rock, then, and the Mnn were spiritual meat and drink, because they signified the flesh and the bloud of Christ crucified for us: Which, who so believes, as, thereupon to undertake Christianity, our Lord, when hee had not yet instituted the Eucharist, promiseth, that hee shall be nou∣rished by his flesh and bloud to life everlasting. The effect of which promise all Christians find, that, by the assistance of his Spirit, overcome the world in approving themselves Christians. When our Lord annexed the promise of his Spirit to his Baptisme and Eucharist, by instituting those Sacraments, hee tied the spiritual eating and drinking of his body and bloud to the Sacramental, in respect of all them, whom, the affirmative Precepts of using those Sacraments should oblige. Christ, then, was the food and the drink of them, who attain∣ed Salvation under Moses Law; because, by the faith of Christ to be crucified they were saved, as wee by the faith of Christ crucified: But, to follow God in
hope of Salvation by Christ to come, is not the same, as, to undertake that Chri∣stianity, which, by his coming hee hath taught us. The signs of good things to coed onely those that were led by the promise of them; The rest found by them onely the nourishment of their bodies, in their travel to the Land of pro∣mise. But when our Lord, having promised his flesh and bloud, for food to those Souls, that should conform themselves to his Crosse, instituteth the Eu∣charist, and confineth the spiritual eating and drinking of his flesh and bloud to it, so far as the precept thereof obligeth; Shall hee not be understood to pro∣mise his body and bloud, by that Sacrament, without which, hee will not grant it to those, that are tied to the Sacrament and neglect it? The presence of his body and bloud in the Sacrament is that, which makes good the promise of his body and bloud, made before the instituting of the Sacrament, to them, who are obliged to use the Sacrament by the institution of it. CHAP. III. That the presence of Christs body in the Eucharist depends not upon the living Faith of him that receives, but upon the true profession of Christianity in the Church that celebrates. The Scriptures that are alleged for the dependence of it upon the communication of the properties. They conclude not the sense of them by whom they are alleged. How the Scripture confineth the flesh of Christ to the Heavens. IF these things be true, it will be requisite that wee acknowledge a change to be wrought in the Elements, by the consecration of them into the Sacra∣ment; For, how should they come to be that which they were not before, to wit, the body and bloud of Christ, without any change? And in regard of this change, the Elements are no more called by the name of their nature and kind, after the consecration, but by the name of that which they are become. Not as if the substance thereof were abolished, but because it remains no more con∣siderable to Christians, who do not, nor are to look upon this Sacrament, with any account of what it may be to the nourishment of their bodies, by the nature of the Elements, but, what it may be to the nourishment of their Souls, by the Spirit of God assisting in and with his flesh, mystically present in it. But, this change consisting in the assistance of the Holy Ghost, which makes the Ele∣ments, in which it dwells, the body and bloud of Christ; it is not necessary that wee acknowledge, the bodily substance of them to be any way abolished. Nay, as I am perswaded, that the presence of Christ in the Eucharist cannot be bet∣ter expressed, than by that term which the Council of Trent useth, calling it a Sacrament, and saying that the flesh and bloud of Christ is Sacramentally there; So, there is nothing more demonstrative to mee, that no such thing as the abo∣lishing of the Elements is revealed by the Scriptures, than that the sense of them is so fully satisfied by this term. So that, the anathema which it decreeth against them that do not believe them to be abolished, can by no means be grounded upon the Scriptures. Nor do I think the term any lesse fit or service∣able, because it serves them to signifie the Local presence of Christs body and bloud, under the dimensions of the Elements, the substance of them being gone. For, I shall not be obliged to grant, that the Sacrament of Christs body and blood can properly be understood, supposing the sign and the thing signified to be both the same subject; the dimensions of the Elements being become the dimensions of Christs body and bloud, and by the means of them, all the bodi∣ly accidents of the Elements subsisting in the same. And therefore, the Sacra∣mental presence of Christs body and bloud cannot properly be maintained, un∣lesse acknowledging the true being and presence of the thing signified, wee acknowledge also the sign to remain. But if a man demand further, how I un∣derstand the body and bloud of Christ to be present in or with or under the Ele∣ments, when I say, they are in, and with, and under them, as in and with and under a Sacrament mystically; I conceive I am excused of any further answer,
and am not obliged to declare the maner of that which must be mystical, when I have said what I can say to declare it. Onely I will take leave to tell him, that hee will remain neverthelesse obliged to believe the truth, both of the sign and of the thing signified (and that by virtue of the Sacrament, that is, of the consecration that makes it a Sacrament; not of the faith of him that receives it) though I answer not all that hee demands, upon the question; What the Sacramental presence of the body and bloud of Christ, in or with or under the Elements of the Eucharist, signifies. I would now consider wherein the Consecration of the Eucharist consists, that I might thereupon inferre, what kind of presence it inforceth. But I hold it fit, first to set aside those two opinions, the one whereof, I said, ascribeth it to the Faith of them that receive, being accidental to the Consecration, and not included in it; The other, to the Hypostatical Union, and that communication which it inferreth between the properties of the united natures. That which I have already said, I suppose, is enough to evidence the mystical and spiritual presence of the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Elements, as the Sacrament of the same, before any man can suppose, that spiritual presence of them to the soul, which the eating and drinking Christs flesh and bloud spiritually, by living Faith, importeth. Onely, that I may once conclude, how faith effecteth the Sacramental presence in the Elements, as well as the spiritual in the Soul; I will distinguish between the outward profession of Christianity, which maketh us Members of Gods visible Church; and the inward performance, or faithful purpose of performing the same, which makes a man of that number, whom God owns for Heirs of his Kingdome, whether you call that number an invisible Church or not. And then I say, that it is the visible profession of true Christi∣anity which makes the Consecration of the Eucharist effectual, to make the bo∣dy and bloud of Christ Sacramentally present in the Elements of it; But, that it is the invisible faithfulnesse of the heart, in making good, or in resolving to make good the said profession, which makes the receiving of it effectual, to the spiri∣tual eating and drinking of Christs body and bloud. For, supposing that God hath instituted and founded the Corporation of his Church, upon the precept, or the privilege, of assembling to communicate in the offices of his service, accor∣ding to Christianity; Whensoever this office is rendred to God, out of that pro∣fession which makes men Members of Gods Church, there the effect followes, as sure as Christianity is true: Where otherwise, there can be no such assurance. But, if eating and drinking the body and bloud of Christ, in this Sacrament, un∣worthily, be the crucifying of Christ again, rendring a man guilty of his body and bloud; then is not his flesh and bloud spiritually eaten and drunk, till living faith make them spiritually present to the Soul, which the Consecration maketh Sacramentally present to the body. And, it is to be noted, that no man n say, that this Sacrament represents, or tenders and exhibites unto him that recei∣veth, the body and bloud of Christ (as all must do, that abhorre the irreverence to so great an Ordinance, which the opinion that it is but a bare sign of Christ crucified necessarily ingendreth) but hee must believe this; Unlesse a man will say, that, that which is not present may be represented, that is to say, nrd and exhibited presently down upon the place. It is not therefore that living faith, which, hee that receiveth the Eucharist, and is present at the consecrating of it, may have and may not have, that causeth the body and bloud of Christ to be Sacramentally present in the Elements of it: But, it is the profession of that common Christianity, which makes men Members of Gods Church; In the u∣nity whereof, wheresoever this Sacrament is celebrated (without enquiring, whether those that are assembled be of the number of those, to whom the King∣dome of Heaven belongs) thou hast a Legal presumption, even towards God, that thou receivest the flesh and bloud of Christ, in and with the Elements of bread and wine, and shalt receive the same spiritually, for the food of thy Soul, supposing that thou receivest the same with living faith. For, one part of our common Christianity being this; That our Lord Christ instituted this Sacra∣ment, with a promise, to make, by his Spirit, the Elements of bread and wine
Sacramentally his body and bloud; so, that▪ his Spirit that made them so (dwell∣ing in them, as in his natural body) should feed them with Christs body and bloud, that receive the Sacrament of them with living faith; This institution be∣ing executed, that is, the Eucharist being consecrated according to it, so sure as Christianity is true, so sure the effect follows. So that, the faith which brings it to effect, is the faith of them, who, believing Gods promises, proceed to exe∣cute his Ordinances, that they may obtain the same. Whereas, those that would have justifying faith to consist in believing a mans own Salvation, or the decree of God peremporily passed upon it, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist to be appointed for a sign to confirm this faith (which is nothing else but the revela∣tion of this decree) are not able to say, how the signifying of the eating of Christs body and bloud conduces to such a revelation as this, or, why any such thing is done, which conduceth not to the purpose. Besides that, having show∣ed, wherein justifying faith indeed consists, I have, by that means, made it ap∣pear, that the Sacramental nourishment of the Soul, is the means of the spi∣ritual nourishment of the Soul, as well as the resemblance of it. Here, indeed, it will be requisite to take notice of that which may be objected for an incon∣venience; That God should grant the operation of his Spirit, to make the Ele∣ments Sacramentally the body and bloud of Christ, upon the dead faith of them who receive it to their condemnation in the Sacrament, and therefore cannot be said to eat the body and bloud of Christ (which is onely the act of living faith) without that abatement which the premises have established; To wit, in the Sacrament. But all this, if the effect of my saying be throughly considered, will appear to be no inconvenience. For, that the body and bloud of Christ should be Sacramentally present, in and under the Elements (to be spiritually received, of all that meet it with a living faith, to condemn those for crucifying Christ again, that receive it with a dead faith) can it seem any way inconsequent to the Consecration thereof, by virtue of the common faith of Christians, pro∣fessing that which is requisite to make true Christians, whether by a living o a dead faith? Rather must wee be to seek for a reason, why, hee that ateth this bread and drinketh this cup unmorthily, should be guilty of the body and bloud of Christ, as not discering it, according to S. Paul, 1 Cor. XI. 27, 28. unlesse wee suppose the same Sacramentally present, by virtue of that true Christianity, which the Church professing, and celebrating the Sacrament, tendeth it for spiritual nourishment to a living faith, for mater of damnation to a dead faith. For, if the profession of true Christianity be, as of necessity it must be, mater of condemnation to him that professeth it not truly, (that is to say, who, pro∣fessing it, doth not perform it) shall not his assisting the celebration and conse∣cration of the Eucharist produce the effect of rendring him condemned by him∣self (eating the body and bloud of Christ in the Sacrament out of a profession of Christianity, which spiritually hee despiseth) for not fulfilling what hee pro∣fesseth? Or that living faith, which concurreth to the same as a good Christian should do, be left destitute of that grace, which the tender of the Sacrament promiseth, because the faith of those who joyn in the same action is undiscerna∣ble? Certainly, if the Sacramental presence of Christs body and bloud, tendring the same spiritually, be a blessing or a curse, according to the faith which it meets with; it can by no means seem unreasonable, that it should be attributed to that profession of Christianity, which makes it respectively a blessing or a curse, according to the faith of them for whom it is intended. As for that opinion▪ that makes this presence to proceed from the Hyposta∣tical Union passed so long before, it stands upon those Scriptures, which seem to signifie, that those properties, wherein the Majesty of Christs God-head consists, are really communicated to this Manhood, in the doing, and for the effecting of those works, wherein that assistance▪ and grace, and protection, which hee hath promised his Church upon his Exaltation, consisteth. S. Paul writeth to the Co∣lossians, that; It pleased▪ that all fulnesse should dwell in Christ, (in whom dwell∣eth all the fulnesse of the God-head bodily, as hee expresseth himself more at large, Col. II. 9. that they by him might be filled) and by him to reconcile all things t
himself, making peace by the bloud of his Crosse, by him I say, whether things on earth or in the Heavens. And you, being once estranged, and enemies in your mind, through evil works, yet now hath hee reconciled through the body of his flesh, by death, to present you holy and without spot, and blamelesse before him. Here, it is plain enough, that our Reconciliation is ascribed to the flesh of Christs body, (as to his bloud after, in whom wee have Redemption, even the remission of sins by his bloud, Col. I. 14, 19-92.) to wit, for the fulnesse of the God-head, dwelling bodily in Christ. When our Lord saith; all things are delivered mee by my Fa∣ther, Mat. XI. 27. in order to the revealing of his Gospel, that is, to the making of it effectual; When hee saith; All power in heaven and earth is given mee; Mat. XXVIII. 18. a question is made, how given, if a necessary conequence of the Hypostatical Union? I answer; Because the exercise thereof was limited by the appointment of God, and the purpose for which hee caused the Word to dwell in our flesh; which, though of force to do all things, should not have had right, in our flesh, to execute that which God had not appointed. And therefore is our Lord Christ justly said, to receive that power of God, which, by degrees hee receiveth commission to exercise. The sitting of Christ at the right hand of God, I have showed, that the Apostle makes an argument of divine power and authority, dwelling in our flesh, in the person of Christ, Heb. I. 3. Acts II. 33. V. 31. Eph. I. 20-22. where S. Paul ascrbies the filling of the Church, a work of God alone, to it. And, as hee sits on Gods own Throne, so he shall judge all as man, saith our Lord, John V. 21, 22, 23, 26-30. and raise them up, and quicken them, to that purpose. For, the Throne of God, on which Christ is set down, is the Seat of his Judgement. And therefore, as I live saith the Lord (God in the Prophet Es. XLV. 23. Christ in the Apostle Rom. XIV. 11.) to mee shall every knee ow, and every tongue shall give glory t God. To the same purpose is all that you read of anointing our Lord Christ with the Holy Ghost, given him by God without measure, saith the Baptist, John III. 34. if you understand it, not of the habitual graces poured forth upon the Manhood of Christ, from the fulnesse of the God-head dwelling bodily in it, (of the truth whereof, neverthelesse, there is no disputes) but of the very Ma∣jesty of the God-head, communicated unto it in the person of Christ, as, of a truth, I have said that they are to be understood. In fine, not onely the erit, but the applcation thereof, that is, the effecting of the cleansing of our consci∣ences from sin, is ascribed unto the bloud of Christ, Ebr. IX. 14. 1 John I. 7. How, or in what regard, but because, by the eternal Spirit hee offered up himself blamelesse to God, as the Apostle saith? In which regard onely it is, that our na∣ture in Christ is honoured with the worship due to God, because, being for ever inseparable from the God-head of the Word, it is not to be appreheded, or figured so much as in the imagination, but as the flesh of the Word. This is a brief of the Scriptures which they allege, to inferre that▪ seeing hee hath promised to feed his Church with his flesh and his bloud in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which cannot be unlesse they be there; And, seeing the like works are performed and executed by the flesh, that is the Manhood of Christ, through the virtue of the God-head united unto it; Therefore it is to be believ∣ed, that, by communication of the Majesty of the God-head to the flesh of Christ, it becomes present, wheresoever his promise, and the comfort and strengthen∣ing of his Disciples (which is the work of his Mediators Office, whereunto, by sitting down at Gods right hand he is installed) requires the presence of it. If it be said, that, by this position, the attributes and properties of the God-head are placed in the Manhood, as their own proper Subject, into which they are transferred by the operation of the God-head; (not devesting it self of them, but communicating them to the Manhood, to be thenceforth properties really residing in it, and therefore truly to be attributed to it) I must do them right, and acknowledge that they utterly disclaim this to be their meaning; Confes∣sing thereby, that if it were, they could not avoid the imputation of Eutyches his Heresie, condemned by the great Council of Chalcdon; the confusion of the natures remaining unavoidable, when the properties of the God-head, being
communicated to the Manhood, in this sense, can be no more said to remain the properties of it. I undertake not thus much for the rest of their Divines, who are commonly called Ubiquitaries, because they are supposed to teach; That the oni-presence of Christs God-head is communicated to his flesh, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, so that, the body and bloud of Christ, being every where present, necessarily subsisteth in the dimensions of bread and wine in the Euchrist. This opinion I hold not my self any way obliged here to pute, further than by barring it with this exception; that it taketh away that supposi∣tion, upon which the whole question, concerning the consecration of the Eucha∣rist, ndeth; To wit, that, seeing the presence of Christs body and bloud in the Sacrament cannot be attributed to the invisible faith of him that receives, it is necessarily to be attributed to the vible faith of the Church that celebrateth. For, according to this oinion, it is manifest, that the said presence can no way depend upon any thing done by the Church in celebrating the Eucharist, being aleady brought to passe, and in being, when the Church goes about it. And this is all the argument that I will use against this conceit, that all the premies require (and so will also all that which followeth) the presence of the body and bloud in the Eucharist to be of an other nature, and otherwise effected, an can be understood to belong to the Elements, by virtue of the Hypostaical nion; Though wee suppose, that which cannot be granted, that by virtue thereof hey are every where. Which therefore, whether their Divines do really beleve, or onely in words, I will not here dispute. Thus much I can say, that, by the a∣greement of the Churches pretending the Confession of Ausburg, conernng the Articles once in difference among them, contained in the Bo knon by the name of Liber Concordiae, they are not tied to maintain so much. For, it is there openly protested, not onely in the Preface, but chiefly, in the eighth Ar∣ticle, concerning this point, p. 769, 787. that they do not believe the properties of the God-head to be transfued into the Manhood, nor that the Manhood of Christ is locally extended all over heaven and earth, but that Christ by his Omni∣potence, is able to render his flesh and bloud present where hee please; Espe∣cially, where hee hath promised the presence thereof, by inituting the Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist. And Chemnitius therefore, one of the be learned of their Divines, in a Book writ on purpose to set forth the grounds of their opini∣on, concerning the communication of attributes, expresly onneth himself to these terms, as you may see, cap. XXX. p. 205, 206. declaring his meaning, by the comparison of iron red hot, which, though the fire be so in it that they are not discernable, much lesse seperable, and though they may do the act of both natures at once upon the same subject, by burning and cutting the same thing, remain notwithstanding distinct in their natures. What then would they have? Why, this being set aside, they say neverthelesse, most truly, that, in the whole work of the Mediators office, the divine nature communicateth with the humane; Which, understanding the necessities of Christs Members, both intercedes with God for supply, and supplies the same by the proper will of it, which, his divine will, alwayes concurring, brings to effect. In which regard, it is also most tru∣ly said, that the properties of the God-head do communicate with the Man∣hood, in regard of the concurrence of them, to execute that which it resolveth, being alwayes conformable to the will and decree of the God-head. This in∣deed is no more than the faith of the Catholick Church importeth, nor infeth the Ubiquity or Omni-presence of Christs flesh, as an indowment communicated to reside in it, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, as thenceforth the proper subject of it; But, the concurrence of both natures to the effecting of those works, wherein the Mediators Office is seen, whereupon depends that ho∣nour and worship, which the Mnhood challenges in the person of Christ, as ineparable from the God-head, to which originally that honour is due. And therefore, I shall never go about to return any maner of answer, to any of thoe Scriptures which have been alleged for it, but onely this, that they inferre no∣thing to the purpose in hand. For, if it could be said, that, by virtue of the Hy∣postatical Union (that is, by the will of God effecting it) the immensity of
the God-head were so transfused into the Manhood, as to make it present where∣soever this Sacrament is celebrated (and so, in the Elements of it) then were this an answer to the difficulty in hand; But such a one, as would ingage him that affirms it in the Heresie of Eutyches. But, saying no more than this; That the will of the man Christ concurres with his Divine Power, to do all that his pro∣mises to his Church imports; And that (the effect of this Sacrament importing the presence of his flesh and bloud) it is necessary, that the will of the man Christ, by the Divine Power concurring to the works of it, should make the flesh and bloud of Christ present, wheresoever his Ordinance requires; they cannot say, that Christs flesh is present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, upon those grounds; But, that, by virtue of the Hypo∣statical Union, the will and promise of Christ is executed, by the power of the God-head concurring with it, and which it acteth with. Which is to say, that, not immediately by the Hypostatical Union, but, by means of Christs promise, which must come to effect by the power of the God-head, which the humane will of Christ communicateth with. And truly, I conceive, no man ever was so impertinent, as not to suppose the Hypostatical Union, when there was que∣stion, how the promise of the presence of Christs body and bloud in the Eucha∣rist should come to effect. But, that being supposed, and not serving the turn alone, it remains that wee judge it by the institution of the Eucharist, and the promise which it contains; that is to say, by those Scriptures, out of which the in∣tent of them is to be had, and not by the Hypostatical Union, which being sup∣posed, the question remains neverthelesse. And, by the Hypostatical Union, wee doubt not but our Lord Christ hath power, to represent his body and bloud, that is, to make it present, where hee please; but that must be, not meerly by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, but by doing the same miracle which Tran∣substantiation imports, though it be the Hypostatical Union, that inableth our Lord Christ to do it. For, though there be a difference between the being of Christs flesh and bloud under the dimensions of the Elements, the substance of them remaining, & being reduced, by the power of God, under those dimensions; And, the substance of them being abolished; Yet, I suppose, all men of reason will say, that the Hypostatical Union contributes no more to that than to this. And therefore, not doubting, that the Sacramental presence of the body and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist is a very great miracle, (taking that to be miracu∣lous which requires the infinite power of God to effect it, not that, which con∣tains a visible effect thereof, apt to bear witnesse to that truth, which it is done to confirm) I must remit you to that which hath been already said, to judge, whether the miracle consist in abolishing the substance of the Elements, and substituting the body and bloud of Christ in their stead; Or, in placing the sub∣stance of Christs body and bloud under the same dimensions, in which the sub∣stance of the Elements subsisteth; Or, rather then either of both, that it be e∣nough to ingage the infinite power of God, that, by his Spirit, hee tendreth the flesh and bloud of Christ, so Sacramentally present in the Elements, that who∣so receiveth them faithfully, thereby communicates as truly in the Spirit of God, according to his Spirit, as, according to his body, hee communicates Sacrament∣ally in his body and bloud. Here is the place for mee to allege those Scriptures, which inform us of the true nature and properties of the flesh and bloud of Christ, remaining in his bo∣dy, even now that it is glorified. For, if, in the proper dimensions thereof, hee parted from his Disciples, and went, was carried, or lifted and taken up into hea∣ven, Acts I. 2, 9, 10. 1 Pet. III. 22. Luke XXIV. 50, 51. Mark XVI. 19. If, in the same visible form and dimensions, hee shall come again to judgement, Acts I. 11. 1 Thes. IV. 16. if the Heavens must receive him till that time, (for sure no man will be much tempted with that frivolous conceit, that S. Peters words, Acts III. 21.  are to be construed; whom it behoveth to contain the Heavens; but, whom it behoveth that the Heavens contain; Unlesse it could appear, how S. Peter should understand, the body of Christ to contain the heavens, not the heavens it) sitting at Gods right han till his Enemies be
made his foot-stool, Psal. CX. 1. if, to that purpose, hee leave the world, John XVI. 28. no more to be in it, XVII. 11. so that wee shall have him no more with us, Mat. XXVI. 11. it behoveth us to understand, how wee are informed, that the promise of his body and bloud in the Eucharist imports an exception to so, many declarations, before wee believe it. Indeed, there is no place of Gods right hand, by sitting down at which, wee may say, that our Lords body becomes confined to the said place; But, seeing the flesh of Christ is taken up into Hea∣ven to sit down at Gods right hand; Though, by his sitting down at Gods right hand, wee understand, the man Christ to be put into the exercise of that divine power and command which his Mediators Office requires; Yet his body wee must understand to be confined to that place, where the Majesty of God appears to those that attend upon his Throne. Neither shall the appearing of Christ to S. Paul, Acts XXIII. 11. be any exception to this appointment. Hee that would insist, indeed, that the body of Christ stood over Paul, in the Castle where then hee lodged, must say, that it left Heaven for that purpose. For, that is the miracle which the Text expresseth, that hee was there, whose ascent into Hea∣ven it had reported afore. But, seeing the very body of Christ might, in a vision of Prophesie, appear to Paul in the Spirit, without any contravention to that determination, which the Scripture otherwise had expressed; Were it not mad∣nesse to go about to limit the sense and effect of it, upon pretense of a promise altogether impertinent to the occasion in hand, and every whit as properly to be understood without so limiting the sense of it? This is all the argument that I pretend to maintain upon this consideration: Knowing well enough, that, it is said indeed, that, the flesh of Christ remaining in Heaven in the proper dimen∣sions thereof, which the Exaltation allowes, nothing hinders the same to be present under the dimensions of the Elements, whether the substance of them be there, which Consubstantiation allowes, or whether they be abolished, as Transubstantiation requires. Which hee that would contradict, must enter here into a Philosophical dispute, whether or no, the infinite power of God can bring to passe either or neither of these effects; That is to say, whether it imply a contradiction, that the body and bloud of Christ, (which is as sure in Heaven as the faith of Christ is sure) should at the same time be present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, under the dimensions of the Elements, whether wee suppose the substance of them to be abolished, or to remain present. This dispute I am re∣solved not to touch at this time: Partly for that reason which I have alleged up∣on other occasions; Because, I desire to discharge this Book, being written in our mother tongue, of all Philosophical disputes, tending rather to puzzle, than to edifie the main of those that speak English; Partly, for a reason peculiar to this point, because it hath been argued, that, if wee deny Transubstantiation or Con∣substantiation as contradictory to reason, there can be no cause, why wee should cleave to the Faith of the Trinity, which every man sees to be no lesse contra∣dictory to humane reason, than either of both. For, though I do no ways ad∣mit this consequence, because it is evident, that the nature of bodily substance is far better comprehended by mans understanding, than the incomprehensible nature of God, which, it is impossible to apprehend any thing of, but under the resemblance of something belonging to sensible substance; yet, I am willing to go to issue, without drawing this dispute into consequence, referring to judg∣ment, whether the evidence for Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation be such, as for the holy Trinity, out of the Scriptures. That is to say, whether the presence of the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist is so to be understood, as to void the confining of them to those dimensions, which the Scripture allowes them in Heaven; (And this as necessarily, by the Scripture, as the Scripture ne∣cessarily obligeth to believe the Holy Trinity) When as it may be, more pro∣perly to the nature of the businesse, understood mystically, as in a Sacrament, in∣tended to convey the communion of his Spirit. In the mean time, allowing any man that submits his reason to all that Christianity imports, the sober use of it, in disputing, whether the presence of the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist as Consubstantiation, or as Transubstantiation requires, be contradictory to the evidence of reason or not.
CHAP. IV. The opinion which maketh the Consecration to be done by rehearsing the operative words. That our Lord consecrated by Thanksgiving. The Form of it in all Liturgies, together with the consent of the Fathers. Evidence, that there is no Tradition of the Church for the abolishing of the Elements. COming now to consider, wherein the Consecration of the Eucharist con∣sists, I find no opinion on foot, but that which hath taken possession by the authority of the School-Doctors, that it is performed by the recital of these words; This is my body, This is my bloud; in the Canon (that is, the Canoni∣cal or Regular Prayer for the Consecration of the Eucharist) of the Masse. For, those that have set aside this Prayer, and do not allow the opinion, that these words are operative to the effecting of that, which the institution of the Eucha∣rist promises, though they retain the recital of them in the action, yet have not declared any common agreement, wherein they intend to maintain the Conse∣cration of the Eucharist to stand. And is it not then free for mee to declare, that I could never rest satisfied with this opinion of the School-Doctors, as find∣ing it to offer violence to common sense, and the truest intention of that which wee may see done, in consecrating the Eucharist? For, when our Lord takes the Elements in his hands, and blesses them, (or gives God thanks, over them) then, breaks the bread, and, delivering them, bids his Disciples take and eat them, because they are his body and bloud; is it not manifest, that they are so called, in regard of something which hee had already done about them, when, delivering them, hee calls them, at that present time of delivering them, that which hee could not call them afore, his body and bloud? No, say they, that is easily understood otherwise, from the common customes which men use in ci∣vil conveyances; Nothing being more usual, by several customes of several na∣tions, then, to convey the right and possession of house or land by delivering writings, testifying certain deeds done to that effect; to put in possession of a house, by delivering the key, or the post to be held, or putting into the house; by delivering a turf of the land to be conveyed, to put into rightful possession of the same, adding the like words to these; Here is this house or this land, take it for thine own. But in vain. Those that use this escape consider not, that our Lord said these words; Take, eat, drink, this is my body, this is my bloud, when hee delivered them; So that, if, by saying these words, hee made them that which the words signifie, then, by delivering them hee made them that which they signifie. For so the like words serve, in delivering possession, to expresse the intent of him that delivers it; To which overt act of delivering, the right of possession, and the conveying of it, is as much to be ascribed, as to the words which animate it by expressing the intent of it. Which if it be true, then were the Elements, which our Lord delivered to his Disciples, consecrated by delivering them: And therefore, by consequence, the Eucharist is never consecrated but by delivering of it; Seeing, of necessity, the Eucharist is consecrated by the same means, as the first, which Christ communicated to his Disciples, was consecrated. But this can by no means stand with the intent of them that maintain this opinion, supposing, as they do, that the Sacrament is consecrated before it be delivered to them that receive it. And hence starts another argument. For these words, as they are used in consecrating the Eucharist, are part of the rehersal of that which ou Lord Christ did, when hee consecrated that Eucharist which hee gave his Disci∣ples. And will any reason endure this, that the Eucharist be thought to be con∣secrated, by reciing what Christ said, when hee delivered that Eucharist which hee had consecrated; And not by doing what Christ commanded to be done, when hee appointed it to be celebrated? Certainly, hee that sayes, Christ took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, saying; Take, eat, this is my body; sayes what Christ did and said, before, and when hee delivered it. Hee
that sayes further, that hee said; do this in remembrance of mee, sayes that Christ instituted this Sacrament. But to say that Christ instituted this Sacrament, is not to consecrate that Sacrament which Christ instituted. That is not done, but by doing that which Christ is said to have done. And is not Christ said to have blessed the Elements? Is it not said, that, having taken and blessed and bro∣ken the bread, delivering it to his Disciples, hee affirmed it to be his body at the present when hee delivered it? Can the becoming of it his body be impu∣ted to the taking, or breaking, or delivering of it? Doth it not remain then, that it be imputed to the blessing of it? Here, finding it evident, by comparing the Evangelists one with another and with S. Paul, that blessing and giving of thanks, in this case, are both one and the same thing signified by two words; I must needs inferre, that blessing the Ele∣ments, is nothing else, but giving God thanks over them (which at the present our Lord had in hand) with intent to make them the Sacrament of his body and bloud. The people of God, in our Lords time, were wont to take nothing for meat or for drink, without first giving God thanks solemnly for it, as they had it in hand. You may see how scrupulous they were in this point, by the title of Blessings, the first of the Talmud, where you have those forms of thanks-gi∣ving recorded, and the circumstances at which they were to be used, in receiv∣ing several kinds, which were, some of them, doubtlesse, more ancient than our Lords time. A practice fitting for Christianity to continue, setting aside that superstitious scrupulosity of forms and circumstances, wherein the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees consisted. Therefore S. Paul, withstanding those Hereticks, that taught to abstain from meats which God hath made to be partici∣pated with thanks-giving, by the faithful, and such as have known the truth, 1 Tim. IV. 3, 4, 5. addes for his reason; Because every creature of God is good, and none to be rejected, received with thanks-giving. For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. The word of God inabling Christians to receive it with a good conscience, so as they may expect Gods blessing, which they have desired by their prayers. For, is it not manifest, that, having said, that every creature is good which a Christian receives with thanks-giving; when hee addes, that it is sanctified by prayer grounded on Gods words; hee includes in that thanks∣giving which hee means, prayer to God for a blessing upon it? The creatures of God then are sanctified to the nourishment of our bodies by Thanks-gving, with prayer for Gods blessing; And shall wee think, that that Thanks-giving, wherewith they are sanctified to the nourishment of our Souls, doth not include prayer to the effect intended, that they may become the body and bloud of Christ, which God by this Sacrament pretends to feed our Souls with? And, doth not the execution of our Saviours Institution, when hee sayes, Do this; con∣sist in giving God thanks for the redemption of Mankind, with prayer, that wee may be fed by the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist? Certainly, the word Do this, is that which the whole action is grounded upon, as pretending to exe∣cute it; and therefore the effect of it, so far as consecrating the Eucharist, is al∣ready come to passe when the Church may say; This is our Lords Body, this is his bloud; as our Lord said; This is my body, this is my bloud. But, the strength of this resolution, I confesse, lies in the consent of the Church, and those cir∣cumstances visible in the practice thereof, which, to them that observe them with reason, are manifest evidences of this sense. I have observed, in a Book of the Service of God at the Assemblies of the Church. p. 347-370. the passges of divers of the most ancient Writers of the Church, in which , or giving thanks, is put for consecrating the Eucharist; Unto which adde the words of Ire∣naeus in Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. V. 20. concerning the then Bishop of Rome, Ani∣cetus, when Polycarpus was there,  that is, hee gave way to Polycarpus to celebrate the Eucharist; For, seeing that this Sacra∣ment, that is, the Elements consecrated are called the Eucharist all over the Church from this thanks-giving, the act thereof passing upon them, to give them, by way of Metonymie, this name; What can be more reasonable, than to grant, that it is this act (and not the rehersal of the words of the Gospel, which relate
what our Lord did and said, in instituting as well as celebrating it) by which the consecation is performed; Though, on the oher side, I insist, that these words have alwayes been rehearsed by the Church in consecrating the Eucharist, and ought still to be frequented, and among them, those which our Lord said when hee delivered it; This is my body, This is my bloud; which now the whole School thinks to be the onely opertive words in that change, which the making of the Elemnts to become the Sacrament imports. I have also showed in the same place, that S. Paul, when hee saith, 1 Cor. XIV. 16, 17. For, if thou blesse by the Spirit, hee that fills the place of an Idot, or private peron, how shall hee say the Amen upon this thanks-giving? For hee knoweth not what thou sayest. For, thou indeed givest thanks well, but the other is not edified; by blessing and giving thanks, means the consecrating of the Eucharist: (which, thoe that hd the grce of Languages among the Corinthians, undertook then to do in unknown tongues, and are therefore reproved by the Apostle) Because it may appear, by the constant practice of the whole Church, that it ended with an Amen of the people, which S. Paul therefore calls the Amen, , to wit, that was used in that case. And also, that, when hee writeth to Timothy; I exhort there∣fore, first of all, to make supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanks-givings for all men; For Kings, and all that are in eminence, that wee may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all piety and gravity; hee intends to chrge, that, at the celebrati∣on of the Eucharist, (which here hee calleth Thanks-givings) prayers be made, as for all states of men, so especially for publick Powers and Princes: Because S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and the Author de Vocatione Gentium, I. 12. do ex∣presly testifie unto us, that the custome which the Church then, and always afore and since hath had to do this, came from this Ordinance of S. Paul, and containeth the fulfilling of it. And, because it is manifest, by all the forms of Liturgie, in all Churches, that are yet extant, and by the mention made of the maner of it, upon occasion, in the writings of the Fathers, that the Eucharist was never to be celebrated, without prayer for all states of Christs Church. And this indeed is a great part of the evidence which I pretend. There are extant yet, in seve∣ral Languages, several Liturgies, (that is, forms of that complete Service of God, by Psalmes, and Lessons, and Sermons and Prayers) the Crown whereof was the Eucharist, as that of S. Mark of S. James, of S. Peter, S. Basil, S. Chrysostome, which are the forms that were used in their Churches of Alexandria, Jerusalem, Rome, Caesarea, Constantinople; though not as they had from the beginning appointed, but as Prelates of authority and credit had thought fit to adde to, or take fro, or chnge that which they from the beginning had appointed. There is besides, the Canon of the Roman Masse, (that is, the Canonical or Regular Prayr which the Eucharist is consecrated with) which is the same in Latine, with that of S. Peter in Greek, upon the mater (as of a truth, the Greek is but the Translati∣on of the Latine, it seems, for the use of these Greeks in Italy that follow the Church of Rome) and that of S. Ambrose at Milane, three translated out of Arbik by the Mronites at Rome, the Ethiopick translated into Latine, many Canons (called by them Anaphora) in the Maronites Missal lately printed at Rome in the Syriack, one of the Christians of S. Thomas in the East-Indies in Latine. In all these, you shall observe a Prayer to begin, where, the Deacon formerly saying; Sursum corda; Lift up your hearts; the people answered; Habemus ad Dominum; Wee lift them up unto the Lord. The subject of it is, (at least where any length is allowed it) to praise God for creating the world, and maintaining Man-kind, through his providence, with the fruits of the earth: Then, (after acknowledgement of Adams Fall) for using, first, those means of reclaiming Man-kind unto God, which wee find by the Scriptures, that it plea∣sed God to use; under the Law of Nature first, by the Patriarches; then, under the Law of Moses, by the Prophets; then sending our Lord Christ to redeem the world. Upon which occasion, rehearsing, how hee instituted the Eucharist at his last Supper, prayer is made, that the Holy Ghost, coming down upon the present Elements, may sanctifie them, to become the body and bloud of Christ, so that they which receive them, may be filled with his Grace. This being so vi∣sible
in so many of these Liturgies; shall wee say, that all that followes after the Deacons warning; let us give thanks; makes up that which the ancient Church, after S. Paul, by a peculiar term of art, as it were, calls the Eucharist or Thanks∣giving? Or, that, the Sacrament, which taketh the name from it, is consecrated, onely by rehearsing those words which our Lord said, when hee delivered it; This is my body, this is my bloud? Especially, all reason in the world inforcing, that the presence of the body and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, (being that which God promiseth, upon the observation and performance of his institution and appointment) cannot be ascribed to any thing else. In the Latine Masse, before the rehersal of the Institution, they pray thus; Quam oblationem, tu Deus, in omnibus, quaesumus, benedictam, ascriptam, ratam, rationabilem, acceptabilemque facere digneris: Ʋt nobis corpus & sanguis fiat di∣lectissimi filii tui, Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Which oblation, thou, O God, wee pray thee, vouchsafe to make, in all respects, blessed, imputable, accountable, rea∣sonable, and acceptable; That it may become to us, the body and bloud of thy well∣beloved Son our Lord Christ Jesus. Then after the Institution; Jube haec perfer∣ri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altare tuum, in conspectu divinae Ma∣jestatis tuae; Ut quotquot ex hoc altaris participatione sacrosanctum filii tui corpus & sanguinem sumperimus, omni benedictione coelesti & gratia repleamur. Com∣mand them to be carried, by the hands of thy holy Angel, unto thine Altar that is above, before thy divine Majesty; that, as many of us as shall receive the holy bo∣dy and bloud of thy Son, by this communion of the Altar, may be filled with all heavenly benediction and grace. These two parts of this Prayer are joyned into one, in most of those Forms which I have named, whether before the rehersal of the institution or after it. Onely, in those many Forms which the Maronites Missal containeth, the rehersal of the institution comes immediately after the Peace: Which was, in the Apostles time, that Kisse of Peace which they com∣mand, going immediately before the Deacons warning, to lift up hearts to the Consecrating of the Eucharist; Though those words are not now found in any of these Syriack forms. For, after the institution is rehearsed, it is easie to observe, that there followes constantly (though not immediately, but interposing some other Prayers) a Prayer to the same effect with these two; But in two seve∣ral formes: For, in all of them, saving two or three, (which pray, that the E∣lements may become the body and bloud of Christ, to the Salvation of those that receive, by the Holy Ghost coming down upon them) Prayer is made, that this body and this bloud of Christ may be to the Salvation of the Receivers. Which may be understood, to signifie the effect of both these Prayers, in so few words: But it may also be understood to signifie, that, whosoever framed them, conceived the consecration to be made by the rehersal of the institution premi∣sed. Which if I did believe, I should not think them ancient, but contrived at Rome, where they are printed, upon the doctrine of the School now in vogue. For, in all formes besides, the effect of these prayers is to be found, without ex∣cepting any of those, which, wee may have any confidence of, that they are come intire to our hands. I demand then, whether I have reason to attribute the force of consecrating the Eucharist (upon which the Sacramental presence of the body and bloud of Christ depends) to the recital of what Christ said or did, at his celebrating the Eucharist, or instituting it for the future; Or, to the Prayer which all Christians have made, and all either do make or should make, to the expresse purpose of obtaining this Sacramental as well as spiritual pre∣sence. Hear how Justine describes the action, Apolog. II. . Having done our Prayers, wee salute one another with a kisse. Then, (as I said, that the Peace was next before the Con∣secration) is offered to the cheif of the Brethren bread, and a cup of water and wine mixed. Which hee takes, and sends up praise and glory to the Father of all,
through the name of the Son and Holy Ghost; Giving thanks at large, that wee are vouchsafed these things at his hands (To wit, the means which God used to reclame Man-kind, under the Law of nature and Moses, and lastly, the coming of Christ, and his death, and the institution of the Eucharist) Who having fini∣shed his Thanks-giving and Prayers (for the making of the Elements the body and bloud of Christ by the Holy Ghost) all the people present follow with an accla∣mation, saying, Amen. Afterwards, hee calls the Sacrament, . The food which thanks hath been given for, by the prayer of that word which came from him. That is, which our Lord Christ appointed the Eucharist to be consecrated with; when hee commanded his Dis∣ciples to do that which hee had done. So Origen in Mat. XV. calls the Eucha∣rist, Panem verbo Dei & per obsecrationem sanctificatum; Bread sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. And contra Celsum VIII. Oblatos panes edimus, cor∣pus sanctum quoddam per preces factos. Wee eat the bread that was offered, made a kinde of holy body by prayer. Not that which is grounded upon that Word of God, by which his creatures are our nourishment, (as Justine saith afterwards, that Christians blesse God, by the Son and Holy Ghost, for all the food they take) but that Word of Christ, whereby hee commanded to do that which hee had done. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. III. saith; That the bread is no more common bread, after the calling of the Holy Ghost upon it; Because hee saith afterwards, Cat. Myst. V. that the Church prayes God, to send the Ho∣ly Ghost upon the Elements, to make them the body and bloud of Christ; As I said. So S. Basil calls the form of Consecration, (which, I showed you, hee affirms to come by Tradition from the Apostles, as here I maintaiu it doth)  The words of invocation; To wit, whereby wee call for the Holy Ghost to come upon the elements and consecrate them, de Spiritu Sancto cap. XXVII. S. Gregory Nyssene de vitâ Mosis, saith, the bread is sancti∣fied by the Word of God, which is his Son; But, to say further by what means, hee adds; in virtue of the blessing. To wit; which the Church consecrates the Eucharist with, as our Lord did. Optatus describes the Altars or Communion Tables which the Donatists broke; (For they were of wood, not of stone) Quo Deus omnipotens invocatus sit, quo postulatus descendit Spiritus Sanctus. On which almighty God was called to come down. On which the Holy Ghost, upon demand, did come down. S. Jerome describes the dignity of Priests, Epist. LXXXV. Ad quorum preces corpus Christi sanguis{que} conficitur. At whose prayers the Body and Bloud of Christ is made: To wit, by God. And, in Sophoniae III. Impiè agunt in legem, putantes Eucharistiam imprecantis facere verba non vitam: Et necessa∣riam esse tantùm solennem Orationem, non Sacerdotum merita. They transgresse the Law of Christ, thinking that the Eucharist is made by the words, not the life of him that prayes over it: And that, only the customary prayer, not the works of the Priest are requisite. In fine, as often as you reade mysticam precem, or mysti∣cam benedictionem, when there is speech of the Eucharist in the Fathers, be assu∣red, that which here I maintain is there understood. True it is, Irenaeus V. 2. af∣firmeth, that the Bread and the Wine, receiving or admitting the Word of God (accipientia) become the Eucharist of the Body and Bloud of Christ. But what word this is, hee declares himself further, when hee saith, IV. 34. Panis percipi∣ns invocationem Dei, jam non communis est. The bread that hath admitted the in∣vocation of God, is no more common bread. To wit, that word of institu∣ion, in virtue whereof, the Church calleth upon God, to make the elements his body and bloud. Some of them say it is done by Gods word, as the world was made by it. But, the world was made by the word of Gods command; And in these words, This is my body, this is my bloud; command there is none: In these; Do this in remembrance of mee; there is a command, which includes a warrant or promise; Though the effect of it depend upon the execution of the com∣mand, by the Church; whereas, immediately upon Gods word the world was made. And this is that word S. Augustine meant when hee said; Accedat ver∣bum ad elementum, & sit Sacramentum; The word being applyed to the element, the Sacrament is made: But this application is the execution of Christs Ordinance▪
not, saying that hee said; This is my body, this is my bloud. For hee saith, the body and bloud of Christ is onely that; quod ex fructibus terrae susceptum, ac prece mysticá consecratum, rite sumimus; Which wee duly receive, being taken out of the fruits of the earth, and consecrated by the mystical prayer; which I speak of. De Trinit. III. 4. To the same purpose Epist. LIX. A saying or two of S. Chrysostomes indeed I remember, that name those words, speaking of the con∣secration, as by which the flesh and bloud of Christ became present in the Eu∣charist. In II ad Tim. Hom. II. that, as the words which our Saviour then spoke are the same which the Priest now uses, so is the Sacrament the same, and conse∣crated by Christ as that was. And Hom. de Jud hee saith, to inferre the same; The words are pronounced by the mouth of the Priest, but the elements are conse∣crated by the Power and Grace of God. This is, saith hee, my body; By this word the bread and wine are consecrated. Not by the rehearsing of these words, but by virtue of his command; Do this; And by virtue of that blessing or thanks∣giving, upon which, our Lord affirms the elements which hee had consecrated to be his body and bloud. For, the meaning may well be referred to the institu∣tion of Christ, and the execution thereof by the Church; which S. Chrysostom supposing, may well say, that, upon this affirmative of our Lord; This is my body, this is my bloud; depends the Consecration of the Eucharist; Not as that which effecteth it, but, as that which evidenceth and assureth it, in as much as it was said by our Lord Christ, upon supposition of that blessing or prayer which hee appointeth it to be consecrated with. So the Author de Caenâ Domini in S. Cyprian; that since our Lord said, Do this in remembrance of mee; This is my body, this is my bloud; the bread and the cup, being consecrated by these words, be∣come profitable to the salvation of man. True it is indeed, in as much as the ap∣pointment of our Lord Christ is not completely executed by consecrating the Eucharist, but by respectively delivering and receiving it; you may truly say, that, by virtue of these words, Take, eat, this is my body, this is my bloud; that which every man receives becomes the body and bloud to him that receives it. For, as I have said, that it becomes the sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, in order to our feasting upon it; so is that which I receive, completely and finally, the body and bloud of Christ to mee, when I receive it. But this sense, supposing it al∣ready to be the body and bloud of Christ, to all that communicate in it accord∣ing to Christs ordinance, cannot be to the purpose of them that would have it become such to all that receive it, by virtue of these words, by which it becomes so finally to him that finally receives it. An Objection indeed there is, (but which lies against the other opinion as much as against this) out of S. Gregory, Epist. VII. 64. Indict. II. Orationem verò Dominicam idcirco mox post precem dicimus, quia mos Apostolorum fuit, ut ad ipsam solummodo orationem oblationis hostiam consecrarent. Et valdè mihi in∣conveniens visum est, ut precem quam Scholasticus composuerat super oblationem diceremus; Et ipsam traditionem quam Redempor noster composuit super eus corpus & sanguinem taceremus. But the Lords Prayer wee therefore say straight after the Prayer, because the custome of the Apostles was to consecate the sacrifice of oblation, with that alone. And it seemed to mee very inconvenient, that wee should say over the oblation, the Prayer which a School Doctor had composed; And silence the Tradition which our Redeemer composed, over his body and bloud. For, if the Apostles consecrated the Eucharist by saying the Lords Prayer, as S. Gregory here seems to affirm, thn can there be no Tradition of the Apostles, whereby a certain Prayer is prescribed, as that wherein the consecration of the Eucharist consisteth. Therefore, if it should appear, that S. Gregory did indeed believe, that the Apostles used the Lords Prayer in celebrating the Eucharist, with an in∣tent to consecrate the Sacrament by the same; I confesse, I should rather adhere to S. Basil, affirming, the Apostles to have delivered certain words, (that is, the meaning of certain words) to call upon God, for the consecrating of the ele∣ments into the body and bloud with. For, in so doing, I should not prefer S. Basil, but the whole Church, (the practice whereof, so general, and so original as hath been declared, could have no beginning, but that which our common
Christianity pretendeth, from the Apostles) before S. Gregory. And truly, that the Consecration should end with the Lords Prayer, I do easily believe to come from the practice of the Apostles, so ancient and so general I finde that custom, which S. Gregory maintains. Nor is it any more that S. Jerome hath said in his third book against the Pelagians; though hee is sometimes alleged for that which S. Gregory saith; Sic docuit Apostolos suos, ut quotidie in corporis illius sacrificio credentes audeant loqui; Pater noster qui es in coelis. So taught hee his Disciples, that believers dare say every day, at the sacrifice of his Body; Our Father which art in heaven. By nd by; Paem quotidianum, sive super omnes substantias, ven∣turum Apostoli deprecantur, ut digni sint assumptione Corporis Christi. The Apo∣stles pray for daily bread (or, above all substances) to come, that they may be worthy to receive the Body of Christ. All this concerns the concluding of the Conse∣cration with the Lords Prayer, as it did alwaies conclude. For r ight hee alle∣geth, that, as soon as a man is baptized, coming to the Communion, hee is to say; Forgive us our Trespasses. But, before that form was made which S. Gregory saith Scholasticus composed, (whether hee mean a man of that name, or, as I con∣ceive, some Doctor that professed the Scriptures) if S. Gregory should tell mee, that some other form, to the same effect, was not in use, I could not believe him, believing the premises. The substance and effect whereof, under the name of Eucharistia, or the Thanks-giving) is that which the Church, from the beginning, consecrated the Eucharist with, by the appointment of our Lord, and according to the practice of his Apostles. So Rabanus de Institutione Clericorum I. 32. af∣firms, that the whole Church consecrates with Blessing and Thanksgiving, the Apostles having taught them to do that which our Lord had done. Walafridus Strabus de Rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. XXII. relates two several opinions concerning this businesse, as it appears by his discourse: Et relatio majorum est, ità primis temporibus Missas fieri solitas, sicut modò in Parasceve Paschae (in quo die apud Romanos Missae non aguntur) communicationem facere solemus; Id est, praemiss Oratione Dominicà, &, sicut ipse Dominus noster praecepti, commemoratione passi∣onis adhibitâ, eos Corpori Dominico communicâsse & Sanguini, quos ratio permit∣tebat. And there is a relation of our Predecessors, that in the first times Masse was done, as now on Good Friday, (on which day Masse is not said at Rome) the com∣munion is wont to be made; That is, that, the Lords Prayer premised, and, the com∣memoration of his death applyed, those whom reason allowed did communicate in the Body and Bloud of our Lord. The practice of the Church of Rome here men∣tioned is that which still continues, not to consecrate the Eucharist either on Good Friday, or the Saturday following. For then, Masse is said so late, that it belongs to Easter day. And, on Maundy Thursday, the Eucharist is consecrated and reserved to be received on Good Friday. That any commemoration of Christs death is made at the receiving of it, as Rabanus saith, I finde not. This is certain, that no man imagines, that the Eucharist is consecrated by any thing that is said or done at the receiving of it, but at the Masse on the day before. And this, in the Greek Church, is called , The Liturgy of the elements that were consecrated afore; Which they use on other days besides. There∣fore this opinion, that the Apostles should celebrate so, would import, that they celebrated the Eucharist without consecrating of it; That is, that they never ap∣pointed how it should be consecrated: Which neither Rabanus, nor any of these whose opinion he relates can maintain, Nor, supposing the premises, is it tenable. And therefore, I take the true meaning of S. Gregories words to be laid down in another opinion, related afore by Rabanus; Quod nunc agimus, multiplici oratio∣num, cantilenarum, & consecrationum officio, totum hoc Apostoli, & post eos proximi, ut creditur, orationibus, & commemoratione passionis dominica faciebant simpliciter. That which wee act by an Office compounded of many and divers Prayers, Psalms, and Consecrations: all that the Apostles, and the next after them did plainly, with prayers, and the commemoration of our Lords passion, as it is thought. For, the consecration may well be understood to be made plainly, by prayer, with com∣memoration of our Lords passion; in opposition to that solemnity of Lessons, Psalms, and Prayers, which, at the more solemn occasions of the Church, it was
afterwards celebrated with; Though wee suppose it to conclude alwaies with the Lords Prayer, as S. Gregory requires. And herewith the words of S. Gregory see to agree, when hee aith; Ʋt ad ipsam solummdo orationem: To conse∣crate at or with it alone; not by it alone. But if this opinion cannot passe, (ha∣ving, indeed, no constraining evidence) but that S. Gregories words will needs require, that they conecrated the Eucharist by the Lords Prayer alone; I will will then ay, that the Apostles understood the petition of our dayly bread; as S. Cyprian upon the Lords Prayer doth; To wit, of the bred and drink of the Eucharist, daily celebrated and received. For, supposing this intent and meaning, there is nothing pretended to be done by the consecration, which that Petition signifieth not; Praying, that God will give us this day, the dayly food of our ouls, by the elements presently provided for that purpose. And all this will no way prejudice that which hath been said, of the mater and form of the con∣secration, derived by Tradition from the Apostles, to be frequented at more so∣lemn occaons of Christian Assemblies. For that Assembly, which, believing that Christians are justified by undertaking to professe the Faith, and to live ac∣cording to it, and, that our Lord hath left us his body and bloud of the Eucharist, to convey the Holy Ghost to our ouls, that they may be able to perform what they undertake; should pray the Lords Prayer over the Elements proposed, with that intent; I cannot doubt of their receiving the Body and bloud of Christ. Provided, that, where the occasion will bear more solemnity, the Order of the Church received from the Apostles be not neglected. Whereas, suppo∣sing Christians to believe, that they are justified, by believing that they are justi∣fied, or predestinate, in consideration onely of Christs sufferings, and that the Eucharist is instituted onely for a signe, to confirm this Faith; Though they should regularly use that form of consecration, which, I maintain, to come by Tradition from the Apostles; I would not therefore grant, that they should either consecrate the Eucharist, or could receive the Body and bloud of Christ by it: Sacrilege they must commit, in abusing Gods ordinances to that intent, for which hee never appointed it, but Sacrament there would be none, further then their own imagination. And upon these premises, I am content to go to issue, as concerning the sense of the Catholick Church, in this point. If it can any way be showed, that the Church did ever pray, that the flesh and bloud might be substituted instead of the elements, under the accidents of them, then I am content, that this be coun∣ted henceforth the Sacramental presence of them in the Eucharist. But, if the Church onely pray, that the Spirit of God, coming down upon the Elements, may make them the body and bloud of Christ, so that, they which received them may be filled with the grace of his Spirit; Then is it not the sense of the Catho∣lick Church that can oblige any man to believe the abolishing of the Elements, in their bodily substance; because, supposing that they remain, they may never∣thelsse become the Instrument of Gods Spirit, to convey the operation there∣of to them that are disposed to receive it, no otherwise than his flesh and bloud conveyed the efficacy thereof upon earth. And that, I suppose, is reason enough, to call it the body and bloud of Christ Sacramentally, that is to say, as in the Sa∣crament of the Eucharist. It is not here to be denied, that all Ecclesiastical Writers do, with one mouth, bear witnesse to the presence of the Body and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist. Neither will any one of them be found to as∣scribe it to any thing but the Consecration, or that to any Faith, but that, upon which the Church professeth to proceed to the celebrating of it. And upon this account, when they speak of the Elements, supposing the Consecration to have passed upon them, they alwaies call them by the name, not of their bodily sub∣stance, but of the body and bloud of Christ which they are become. Justine in the place afore quoted; . For wee take them not as common bread
and drink; but, as our Saviour Jesus Christ, being incarnate by the Word of God, hath both flesh and bloud for our salvation, so are wee taught, that this food, which thanks have been given for by the prayer of that Word which came from him, by the change whereof are our bloud and flesh nourished, is both the flesh and bloud of that incarnate Jesus. Where, by comparing the Eucharist with the flesh and bloud of Christ incarnate, (wherein divers of the Fathers have followed him) hee justifies that reason of expounding This is my body this is my bloud; which I have drawn from the communication of the properties of the several natures in our Lord Christ incarnate. But chiefly, you see, the Elements are made the body and bloud of Christ, by virtue of the Consecration, as, by the Incarnation, humane flesh became the flesh and bloud of Christ. So Irenus IV. 34. Quemadmodum qui à terr panis, percipiens invocationem Dei, jam non communis panis est, sed Eu∣charistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrenà & coelesti: Sic & corpora nostra, per∣cipientia Eucharistiam, am non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis bentia. As the bread that comes from the earth, receiving the invocation of God upon it, is not now common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, the arly and the heavenly; So also our bodies, receiving the Eucharist, are not now corrupti∣ble, having the hope of rising again. For hee had argued afore, that, because our flesh is nourished by the body and bloud of Christ, (which, if they were not in the Eucharist, it could not be) therefore they shall rise again. By virtue therefore of the conecration they are there, not by the faith of him tht receives, accor∣ding to henaeus. Tertul. de Resur. cap. VIII. Caro corpore & sanguine Christi ve∣scitur, ut anima de Deo saginetur. The flesh feeds on the body and bloud of Christ, that the soul may be fatned with God. Origen, in diver. loc. Hom. V. is the rst that advies to say with the Cenuion, (when thou receive the Eucharist) Lord I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof; For then the Lord comes under thy roof, saith Origen. S. Cyprian upon the Lords Prayer, having said, that Christ is our bread, makes that the daily bread which wee pray for, to wit, in the Eucharist: And in his book de lapsis, makes it to be invading and laying violent hands upon the body of Christ, for them who had fallen away in persecution, to presse upon the Communion, without Penance going afore. The Council of Nica in Gelasius Cyzicenus II. 30. —Let us not basely consider the bread and the cup set before us, but lifting up our mindes, let us conceive by faith, that there lies upon that holy Table, the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, sacrificed without sacrificing by Priests▪ And that wee receiving truly his precious body and bloud—S. Hilary de Trin. VIII. censuring the Arians, who would have the Son to be one with the Father as wee are, maintains, that wee are, not onely by obedience of will, but naturally uni∣ted to Christ, because, as hee truly took our nature, so wee truly take the flesh of his body in the Sacrament; Our Lord having said, My flesh is truly meat, and my bloud truly drink; And, Hee that cats my flesh, and drink▪ my bloud, dwells in mee, and I in him. And much more to the same purpose; which could signi∣fie nothing, did not our bodies, feeding upon the Elements, feed upon that which is truly the body and bloud of Christ in the Sacrament, or mystically, not by virtue of our feeding which follows, but by virtue of the Consecration which goes before. For, this natural union of the body with that which feeds it▪ serves S. Hilary, for the argument of that unity, which the Son hath with the Father by nature; being the union of our flesh with the flesh of Christ▪ by virtue of our flesh united to the Word incarnate. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. IV. & V. argueth, that Christ, having said of the bread and of the cup, This is my body, this is my bloud; who otherwhiles changed water into wine; wee are not to doubt, that wee receive his body and bloud, under the form of bread and wine. And therefore, wee are not to look on them as plain bread and wine, but as the body and bloud of Christ, hee having declared it. All this, by Sanctification of the Holy Ghost, according to the Prayer of the Church. But I will go no fur∣ther
in reharsing the texts of the Fathers, which are to be found in all books of Controversies, concerning this; for the examination of them requires a volume on purpose. It shall be enough, that they all acknowledg the Elements to be changed, translated, and turned into the substance of Christs body and bloud; though as in a Sacrament, that is, mystically; Yet, therefore, by virtue of the Consecration, not of his faith that receives. On the other side, that this change is to be understood with that abatement, which the nature and substance of the Elements requires, supposing it to remain the same as it was; I will first presume, from those very Authors which I have quoted. For, would not Justine have us take that for bread, which, hee saith, wee are not to take for common bread, when hee saith further, that our bodies are nourished by it, which, by the flesh of our Lord they are not? Would not Irenaeus have us think the Bread to be the earthly thing, as well as the Body the heavenly, when hee saies the Eucharist consists of both? Tertullian, ad Ʋxo∣rem II. 5. perswades his wife, not to marry a Gentile when hee is dead, because, when hee perceives her to receive the Eucharist, and knows it to be bread, hee believes it not to be that which Christians call it. Origen, when hee tells, up∣on Mat. XV. 11. that it was called the bread of our Lor, gives no man, in his wits, occasion to think that the Elements vanish. When hee saith further, that it is not the bread, but that which was said upon it, which profits him that wor∣thily receives it, hee would have us take it for what it was, whatsoever it is be∣come. S. Cyprian saith expresly, that it was wine which our Lord calls his bloud: And that the wine of the Chalice, (to wit, already consecrated) de∣monstrates his bloud; In his Epistle against those who consecrated in water a∣lone. The Council of Nicaea calls it Bread, which the eye of Faith discerns to be the Lamb of God: S. Hilary will have us truly to receive the body and bloud of Christ, as Justine saith, that our bodies are nourished by it; but hee adds in Sacramento, to signifie the abatement which I speak of, that is, mystically, and as in a Sacrament. S. Cyril, when hee saith, wee are not to look upon the Elements as plain, or bare, or simple bread and wine, saith, that wee may look upon it as Bread and wine, though that is not it which profits him that worthily receives it, as Origen said. There are a great many more, that have named and described the Elements, after consecration, by the name of their nature and substance; and say, that the bread and the wine become and are the body and bloud of Christ; Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelph. Irenus V. 2. Clemens Strom. I. Paedag. II. 2. Ta∣tian before Irenaeus in Diatessaron. Constitutiones Apostol. VIII. 12. Tertullian de Oratione cap. VI. contra Marcionem IV. 40. III. 19. Gregory Nyssene de Bapti∣smo. Origen contra Celsum VIII. Athanasius in Synopsi. Eusebius in Paralle∣lis Damasceni. S. Cyril Catech. Mystag. I. & III. Macarius Hom. XXVII. Gau∣dentius Brixiensis in Exodum Serm. II. S. Austine de Civitate Dei XVII. 5. de diversis Serm. XLIV. cap. XXVIII. Sermone LXXXIIII. Sermone LXXXVII. Sermone ad Baptizatos. S. Jer. in Esaiae LXVI. lib. ult. in Jeremiae XXXI. lib. VI. Isidore de Offic. Eccles. I. 18. In fine, the Canon of the Masse it self prayes, that the Holy Ghosts coming down, may make this Bread and this Cup the Body and Bloud of Christ. And certainly, the Romane Masse expresses a manifest abate∣ment, of the common and usual sense of the body and bloud of Christ, unto that sense, which is proper to the intent and subject of them who speak of this Sacrament, when the Church, in the consecration prayes; ut nobis corpus fiat Di∣lectissimi Filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi. That they may become the Body and bloud of thy most dearly beloved Son, our Lord Christ Jesus, to us. No man that understands Latine, and sense, will say, it is the same thing, for the Elements to become the body and bloud of Christ, as to become the body and bloud of Christ to those that receive, which imports no more than tha which I have said. And yet there is no more said in those Liturgies, which pray, that the Spirit of God may make them the flesh and bloud of Christ, to this intent and effect that those which received them may be filled with the grace of his Spirit. For the ex∣pression of this effect and intent limits the common signification of the words to that which is proper to this action of the Eucharist, as I have delivered it. In
the words of S. Ambrose, de iis qui initiantur myst. cap. XI. ante consecrationem alia species nominatur, post consecrationem, caro & sanguis Christi appellatur; Be∣fore the consecration, it is named another kinde: After the consecration▪ it is called the flesh and bloud of Christ. No man that understands Latine can conceive, the word species to signifie the outward appearance, but the substance and nature of those kindes. For so wee call outlandish kindes spices, not the appearance of their outward accidents. And, in the Romane Laws, species an non are the kindes that are stored up; for men cannot live upon the outward accidents of them. Therefore when S. Austine saith; That the Eucharist consists of two things, visibili elementorum specie, & invisibili D. N. J. C. carne & sanguine; hee means, that it consists of the nature and substance of the elements, which is visible, as of the body and bloud of our Lord Christ which are invisible. Again, when S. Ambrose sayes, that they are called the Body and Bloud of Christ, hee sig∣nifies that abatement, in the property of his words, that requires not the ab∣sence of the elements. As when S. Austine sayes, (in Gratian de Consecratione distinct. II. Can. Hoc est) Coelestis panis, qui est caro Christi, suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cùm reverà sit Sacramentum corporis Christi. That heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, is, after the maner of it, called the body of Christ, where∣as it is indeed the Sacrament of the body of Christ. The same abatement it is that S. Cyril afore, Catech. Myst. IV. the Council of Nica, Victor Antioch. in Marci XIV. 22. and Theodoret Dial. III. signifie, when they will us, not to con∣sider the elements, but the things which they signifie. For, does hee that wills us not to consider the bread and wine intend to say, that there is no such thing there? Or, that our interest lies not in them, but, in the body and bloud of Christ which they ender us, well and good; So said Origen afore. The same abatement is signified evidently, by abundance of their sayings, importing them to be called the body and bloud of Christ, as types or antitypes (for type and anti∣type differ not, but as relative and correlative) that is, figures, symboles, images, similitudes, representations, paterns, pledges, and riddles, in fine, as figures or sa∣craments of the same; Not as if they contained not the thing signified, (which I have already settled) but because the heavenly grace hinders not, nor destroyes the earthly nature. This language then is used by S. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. XLII. calling the Passeover a more obscure Type of a Type. By Ephrem de in∣scrutabili naturâ Dei. By Theodoret Dial. I. & II. & III. By the Constitutions of the Apostles V. 13. VI. 29. VII. 26. By S. Basils Liturgy. By Gregory Na∣zianzene again, in Gorgoniam. By Eusebius de demonstrat. Evang. I. 10. V. 3. VIII. 1. By S. Chrysostome in Mat. Homil. LXXXII. By Palladius in the life of S. Chrysostome, Chap. VII, VIII, IX. By Victor in Marci XIV. By Dionysius Ec∣cles. Hierarch. cap. III. By Origen in Mat. Hom. XXXV. By Pope Gelasius de du∣abus naturis Christi. By S. Ambrose de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. IX. de Sacramentis IV. 4. VI. 1. By Tertulliane contra Marc. III. 19. IV. 14, 40. By S. Austine contra Adimantum cap. XII. in Psalmum III. Epist. CLXIII. de Tri∣nitate III. 4. By Facundus Bishop of Hermiana in Africk pro tribus capitulis IX. ult. And truly, the ancient Christians, when they made a scrple of receiving the Eucharist when they were to fast, least they should break their fast by recei∣ving it, (as wee understand by Tertullian de Oratione cap. XIV.) must needs un∣derstand the nature of bread and wine to remain, unlesse they thought they could break their fast upon the accidents of them. Nor would it have been a custome, in some places, to burn the remains of the Sacrament, as Hesychiu in Levit. VIII. witnesseth; or at Constantinople to give them to School-boies, had they not conceived, the change of the elements to be in order to the use of them, and that this use, and that which is done in order thereunto, expireth, when the occasion of giving them to those, for whom the Church interideth them, ceaseth. And upon these premises, I conclude, that, as it is by no means to be denied, that the elements are really changed, translated, turned, and con∣verted into the body and bloud of Christ; (so that, whoso receiveth them with a living faith, is spiritually nourished by the same, hee that with a dead faith, is guilty of crucifying Christ) Yet is not this change destructive to the bodily sub∣stance
of the elements, but cumulative of them, with the spiritual grace of Christs body and bloud; So that, the body and bloud of Christ in the Sacrament turns to the nourishment of the body, whether the body and bloud in the truth, turn to the nourishment or the damnation of the soul. And, upon these terms, if I reade in S. Cyril of Jerusalem, where afore, that the elements in the Eucharist are not bread and wine, I should think my self very simple to imagine, that, therefore, S. Cyril believed Transubstantiation; Knowing, (as any man that pre∣tends to understand the nature and use of language ought to know) that any thing may be absolutely denied to be that, which in some sort it is not, when a man intends to contest, that, in some sort it is not. For so S. Cyril saith; that the elements are not bread and wine, to signifie, that they are not bare bread and wine, but mystically the body and bloud of Christ, that is, as in the Sacrament of it. And, to speak properly, whoso believes Transubstantiation, ought not to believe, that the elements are changed into the body and bloud of Christ, in the Eucharist. For, wheresoever there is a change, there, something of the sub∣ject that is changed ought to remain, though it be not sensible. Whereas, in Transubstantiation, the whole subject of Christs body and bloud is imagined to be substitured in stead of bread and wine, under their dimensions and accidents; Which is, the absolute ceasing of them to be, and the beginning of the thing signified, not absolutely to be, but to be under those dimenions. So that, there remains no subject for that change, which the Fathers understand; the accidents remaining unchanged, the substance of the terms having nothing common, to bear the passion of that change which must be attributed to it. But what can be said to them that affirm, in expresse terms, that the substance of the elements remains unchanged? Who are so many, as may very well serve, to interrupt and defeat any pretense of Tradition, for the ceasing of them. For there can be no pretense, that any thing should belong to the common Faith of the Church, the contrary whereof, it hath been free for men of note and rank in the Church to professe. The Author de Sacramentis in S. Ambrose IV. 4. Si ergò tanta vis est in sermone Domini Jesu, ut incipiant esse quae non rant▪ quantò magis operatorius est, ut sint quae erant, & in aliud commutentur? If then there is that force in the word of the Lord Jesus, that those things should begin to be which were not; How much more is it so operative, that, remaining what they were, they be changed into what they were not? Lanranck, I see, contra Berengarium, hath question∣ed the reading of these words, by saying, that other Copies reade, ut quae erant in aliud commutentur. But I see also, that hee had so little confidence in those Copies, that ee held himself obliged to expound the other reading, and say, that they remain what they were, in their accidents; (Which, whether it serve the turn, let common reason judge.) I see also that Guitmund Bishop of Aversa hath owned Berengarius his reading, de Sacram. III. and therefore have no rea∣son to distrust those who affirm that it is owned by Algerus, Paschasius, Berram, Ives of Chartres, Gratiane, and P. Lombard in their quotations of it. The words of S. Chrysostome, Epistolâ ad Caesarium contra Apollin. are these; Sicut, ante∣tequam sanctificetur panis, panem nominamus; divinâ autem sanctificante gratiâ, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus quidem est ab appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est Demini corporis appellatione, etsi natura panis in ipso permansit, divinâ mundante naturâ. As, before the bread be consecrated, wee call it bread; But, when the grace of God hath sanctified, by the means of the Priest, it quitteth the name of bread, and is held worthy of the title of the Lords Body, though the nature of bread remain in it. So also here, the divine nature cleansing—Cardinal Bellarmine de Euchar. 22. allegeth, that there is no such Epistle of S. Chrysostomes, neither is it found in his works. P. Martyr reports it, as hee found it in a written Copy of the Library at Florence. And it is found in the Bibliotheca Patrum, and in seve∣ral pieces collected by Canisius. What would it, then, avail that it were not S. Chrysostomes, but some other ancient Church Writers? For, neither the mater of the comparison between the inamation and the Eucharist, nor the terms in which it is delivered, will ever render it suspicious to any man, that observes those conceptions and expressions of the Fathers, which I have reported in the
premises. Gelasius de dabus naturis in Christo; Certè, sacramenta qu sumimus corporis & sanguinis Christi divina res est: prter quod, &, per eadem divinae efficimur consortes naturae; Et tamen esse non deinit substantia vel natura panis & vini. Certainly, the mysteries of the body and bloud of Christ which wee receive, is a thing divine: Therefore, by the means of them, wee become also partakers of the divine nature. And yet ceaseth not to be the naue and substance of bread and wine. By and by; Sicut in hanc transeunt, scilicet divinam, Spiritu Sancto per∣ficiente substantiam, permanent tamen in suâ proprietate naturae; As, by the o∣peration of the Holy Ghost, they passe into this, to wit, a divine substance, and yet remain in the property of their own nature; Ephrem Patriarch of Antiochia, in Photius Cod. CCXXIX. . So also the Body of Christ which be∣lievers receive, neither departs from the sensible substance, nor is divided from the intelligible grate. And spiritual baptisme, which becometh and is one whole, pre∣serves the property of the sensible substance: the water I mean; yet looses not that which it is become. This coparison makes mee adde here that passage of those extractions, out of Theodotus, which is found at the end of Clemens Alexandri∣nus; . And the bread (of the Eucharist) and the oile (of the Chrne, which comparison, S. Cyril of Jerusalem uses, in this case) is sanctified by virtue of the Name, (of Christ) remaining the same for sensible substance, (for I confi∣dently maintain, that the negative  destroyes the sense, as the comparison ju∣stifies; for, who sayes, that the oile of the Chrisme, or the water of Baptisme is changed for substance?) but, for force, changed into a spiritual virtue. So also the water, both, that is exrcized, and that which Baptisme is done with, not onely retains the worse, but also receiveth sanctification. Theodoret Dial. I. . Our Lord would have those that receive the di∣vine mysteries, not regard the nature of the things they see, but, upon the change of their names, believe the change which grace effecteth. For, hee who called his natural body corn and bread, and again named himself the Vine, honours the visible Symboles with the name of his body and bloud, not changing the nature, but adding his grace to it. And Dial. II. . For neither do the mystical signes, after consecration, depart from their own nature, but remain in the same substance, and fi∣gure, and form, and may be seen and touched, as afore. The Peface to the Ro∣mane Edition of these Dialogues, aith, that Theodoret uses this language, be∣cause the Church had as yet decreed nothing in this point. An excuse, much like the censure of the Epistles of Isidore of Plusium, printed at Anwerpe, which are licenced, as containing nothing contrary to faith o good manners. For, if the Church is able to make new Articles of Faith, then may whosoever licenses books passe this censure, because, by the act of the Church, making that Faith, which was not so afore, the dead might incurr the contrary censure. But, sup∣posing that the Church is not able to do such an act, that which was not contra∣ry to the Faith, when Theodoret writ it, can never be contrary to it. I will end with Facundus, because the formal terms of my opinion are contained in his words; Sicut Sacramentum corporis & sanguinis ejus, quod est in pane & poculo consecrato, corpus ejus & sanguinem dicimus; non quòd propriè corpus ejus sit pa∣nis, & poculum sanguis: sed quod in se mysterium corporis ejus sanguinis{que} conti∣neant. Hinc & ipse Dominus, benedictum panem & calicem, quem discipulis tra∣didit▪
corpus & sanguinem suum vocavit. As wee call the Sacrament of his body and bloud, which is in the consecrated bread and cup, his body and bloud; Not be∣cause the bread is properly his body, and the cup his bloud, but because they contain in them the mystery of his body and bloud. Whereupon our Lord himself also called the bread and cup, which, having blessed, hee delivered to his disciples, his body and bloud. This is, in few words, the sense of the whole Church concerning this businesse. Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, saith that the Gnosticks forbore the Eucharist, because they believed not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, which suffered for our sins, which the Lord raised again by his goodnesse. But why believed they not this? because they would not believe Transubstantiation, or because they would not believe that our Lord Christ had flesh? Let Tertullian speak; contra Marc. IV. Acceptum panem & distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, Hoc est corpus meum, di∣cendo; id est, figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset cor∣pus. Caeterùm vacua res, quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset. That bread which hee took, and distributed to his disciples, hee made his body, saying; This is my body; That is, the figure of my body. But the figure it had not been, if the truth of his body were not. Otherwise, an empty thing, such as an apparition is, ad not been capable of a figure. For, as Maximus saith, (in the third of those Dialogues against the Marcionists, that go under Origens name) what body and bloud was that, whereof, hee ministred the bread and the cup, for signs and ima∣ges, commanding the Disciples to renew the remembrance of them by the ame? As for that which is alleged out of Irenaeus I. 9. of Marcus the Magician and Heretick; Pro calice enim vino mixto ingens se gratias agere, & in multum extendens sermnem invocationis, purpureum & rubicundum apparere facit, u putetur ea Gratia, ab eis quae sunt super omnia, suum sanguinem stillare, in illius caliem, (l. illum) per invocationem ejus. Making as though hee would give thanks for the cup mixed with wine, and inlarging the word of invocation (by which I said the Eucharist is consecrated) to much length, hee makes it to appear purple and red; That men may think, that Grace drops the bloud thereof, from the Powers over all, into that cup, by the means of his invocation. For, had Ire∣naeus said, that this Magician turned the wine into the substance of bloud, (in truth or in appearance) it might have been alleged, that the Christians, (whose Sacrament this Magician counterfeited, though other Gnosticks, as Ignatius saith, quite balked the Eucharist, and used it not) believed that to be bodily bloud which is in the chalice, and that, therefore hee did it. But when hee saith onely, that hee made it appear purple and red; perhaps hee used white wine, which by juggling hee made seem red; However, there is no appearance, that, because hee made that look red which was in the cup, therefore, those Christians whom hee labored thereby to seduce, did believe, the bodily substance of Christs bloud to be in the Eucharist, in stead of the substance of wine, and, under the dimensions of it. It remains that I take notice, (in as few words as is possible) of those conten∣tions that have passed about this presence, and the dissiculties which Transubstan∣hath found, in getting the footing which it hath in the Western Church. The book which Paschasius Radbertus, Abbot of Corby near Arniens writ, under the Sons of Charles the Great, to prove, that the Body of Christ in the Eucharist is that same which was born of the Virgin, is yet extant. Though, the more curi∣ous finde no such thing as Transubstantiation in it, but rather a conceit of the impanation of Christs body, (if such a hideous term may passe) that is, that, the God-head of our Lord Christ being, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, united to the elements; the body and bloud of Christ is, by the same means, united to the fame. A conceit not farr wide of that which Rupertus, Abbot of Duitsh near Cullen, about the year MCX teacheth, that the bread is assumed by the Word of God to be his body, as that is his body, which was formed of the flesh of the Virgin. Nor is there, in effect, much difference between this conceit, and that of Consubstantiation, (at least according to those that ground it not upon the Ubiquity of our Lords body, but upon his will, executed by celebrating
the Sacrament) or that of some later Greeks. Damasc. de ide Orthd. IV. 14. to contradict the Council of Constantinople against images under Copronymus (which had recommended the Eucharist for the true image of our Lord) maintaineth, that it is not to be called, no is called in S. Basils Liturgy, after the consecrati∣on, the type, figure, image, or antitype of the body and bloud of Christ. Which neverthelesse, Cardinal Bellarmine, de Euchar. II. 15. judgeth not tenable. The II Council of Nicaea that decreed for Images, taking up this mans doctrine, see∣meth to have obliged those that follow to the same terms. That is, as hee there expresseth himself; That God joyns his God-head to the elements, to make them his body and bloud: and that, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, which took him flesh of the Virgin; so that, they are no more two, but one and the same. Thus hee expresseth the change hee pretendeth, which Transubstantiation admits not. The Greeks at Venice, in their answer to the first of XII questions proposed them by the Cardinal of Guise, published by Lionclavavius, will, hereupon, have neither the substance nor the accidents of the elements to remain the same as they were, but to be transelemented, say they, into the divine substance. It would be great skill to reconcile this with Transubstantiation. But, for the opposition made to Paschasius at the time, the book of Bertram (or Ratran) yet extant, the remembrance of John the Irish Scot, one of the learned men of that time, (who is thought, for the hatred of his opinion, to have died by the hands of his Scholars the Monks of Malmesbury) the opposition of Amalarius of Triers, and Rabanus of Mence, (expressed by their sense, in the works extant, de Officiis Ecclesiasticis, and de Institutione Clericorum are sufficient witnesses. The recan∣tation of Berengarius, indited by Cardinal Humbertus, at Rome MLIX. comes not yet home to the businesse, as it lies in the Canon Ego Berengarius. For the Glosse of the Canon Law is fain to advise, that, if it be not well understood, it creates as great an Heresie as that of Berengarius, in that it sayes; That the bo∣dy and bloud of Christ are manged by the hands and broken by the teeth of be∣lievers, not onely in the Sacrament, but in the truth. Which, Mirandula, in his Apology, saith; cannot be clearly understood, but in the way of Damascen and Paschasius. And yet, understanding the Sacrament to consist as well of the thing signified, as of the signe; though the body of Christ is not touched no broke, because the Sacrament is not the body of Christ according to the sensible substance which wee touch and break, yet is it truly touched and truly broken as in the Sacrament, because the Eucharist is truly the body and bloud of Christ, as the Sacrament is, and out ought to be truly that which it signifies and conveyes. But, as it is hereupon, no mervail, that hee was brought to a second recantation, in a Council at Rome under Gregory VII. so is that a premption, that Transubstantiation was not yet formed. And truely, for England, the Pa∣schal Homily of Alfrick Archbishop of Canterbury, together with those Ex∣tractions which you reade out of him, in the annotations upon Bede, p. 332-335. are sufficient evidence of a difference between the sense of that time, and, after that Lanfranck, Berengarius his adversary, was Archbishop of Canterbury. And, Pope Innocent III having inerted the word Transubstantiation in the LXX Articles, which hee proposed to the Council of Lateran in MCCXV. what is the reason why they past not the Council, as Mathew Paris with others testifie, but that they were found burthensom? And, Gregory IX, the nephew of Innocent cent, having contrived these Articles into his decretals, (though under the name of the Council, but of Innocent III in the General Council) though the School Doctors, depending on the Pope for the most part, not on the Council, were content to own them, yet have wee no decree of any Council for them, till that of MDLV under Leo X. For, as for the institution of the Aenians in the Council of Florence, (which, though it use not the term of Transubstanciation, seemeth to come up to the sense) being advanced after the departure of the Greeks, and not voted by the Council, but onely published as the act of the Pope in the Council, it cannot be called the decree of the Council, though done in a publick Session of the Council, in the great Church at Florence. Certainly, ad∣ding to the opinions of the School Doctors, Scotus, Durandus, Ockam, Camera∣censis,
Bassolis, and Gabriel, (besides those, who, living since Luther, have ac∣knowledged the same; Caetane, Fisher, Canus, Suarez, Vasquez, and Bellar∣mine) that it is not to be proved by expresse text of Scripture, nor by reason grounded upon the same; that which hath been alleged; If this be not enough, to evidence all interruption of Tradition, which is pretended for Transubstan∣tiation, nothing is. For, that which Church Writers declare, that they did not believe when they writ, that they cannot declare, that they received of their Predecessors for mater of faith. And, that which at any time was not mater of faith; how farr soever the decree of the Church may oblige particular sons of the Church not to contradict it, for the peace of the Church; yet, at no time can ever become of force, to oblige a man to believe or to professe it for mater of faith. CHAP. V. It cannot be proved by the Old Testament that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice. How, by the New Testament it may be so accounted. Four reasons thereof, depending upon the nature of Justifying Faith premised. The consent of the Catholick Church. The concurrence of the Church of England to the premises. I Come now to the question of the Sacrifice, the resolution whereof must needs proceed according to that which hath been determined in the point now dispatched. For, having showed the presence of the body and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, because it is appointed, that, in it, the faithfull may feast upon the Sacrifice of the Crosse; Wee have already showed, by the Scriptures, that it is the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, in the same sense, and to the same effect, as it containeth the body and bloud of Christ, which it representeth; that is, mystically and spiritually, and sacramentally, (that is, as in and by a Sa∣crament) tendereth and exhibiteth, For, seeing the Eucharist not onely tender∣eth the flesh and bloud of Christ, but separated one from the other, under and by several elements, as his bloud was parted from his body by the olence of the Crosse; it must of necessity be as well the Sacrifice, as the Sacrament of Christ upon the Crosse. And, without all doubt, it is against all the reason of the world to think, that any more can be proved, by any Scriptures of the Old Testament, that are, or can be produced, to depose for the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, than the sense of those Scriptures of the New Testament already handled, (which are in a maner all that have any mention of it) will inferr and allow. There is much noise made with the Priesthood of Melchisedeck, of whom wee reade, Gen. XIV. 19, 24. And Melchisedeck King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, for hee was the Priest of the most High God: And hee blessed him, saying; Blessed be Abraham of the most High God, which owneth heaven and earth; In refe∣rence whereunto the Psalmist, speaking of Christ, Psal. CX. 4. The Lord sware and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck; And the Apostle, taking for granted, that hee is a figure of Christ, in the mystical sense, Ebr. VII. 13. argueth the voiding of the Levitical Law, from the purpose of setting up another Priesthood, declared by the Psalm; But no where, in all that Chapter, which is all spent about the Exposition of it, so much as intima∣teth the Priesthood of Christ to consist in any thing, but in offering up to God in heaven, his own body and bloud sacrificed upon the Crosse, to make expiati∣on for the sins of his people, and to obtain of God, that grace and assistance, that comfort and deliverance, which their necessities from time to time may re∣quire. Be it granted neverthelesse, that, seeing of necessity Melchisedeck is the figure of Christ, those things which Melchisedeck is related to have done are also necessarily figures of things done by our Lord Christ. For, otherwise, were not the mystical sense of the Old Testament a laughing stock to unbelie∣vers, if it should hold in nothing, but that which the Spirit of God hath expoun∣ded in the New Testament, by our Lord and his Apostles? I have therefore, to the best advantage, translated the words of Moses; For (not and) hee was the
Priest of the living God: That whoso will may argue thereupon, that his bring∣ing forth bread and wine was an act of his Priesthood; Which, if I would deny, no man can constrain mee by virtue of these words to acknowledg. But I can∣not therefore allow that Translation which sayes; Obtulit panem & vinum; that, as Priest, hee offered bread and wine in sacrifice to God: The Hebrew word  so evidently signifying protulit not obtulit; hee brought forth, not that hee offered; that hee brought forth bread and wine, to refrsh Abraham nd his people, returning weary from the slaughter of the Kings, (not, that hee offe∣red them in sacrifice to God as his Priest; the mention of his Priesthood rther advancing the reason why hee blessed them, than why hee fed them) As, both Moses in the words next afore, and the Apostle also Ebr. VII. 1. intimateth or declareth the intent why hee brought them forth. Though if I should grnt, that custome which was common to all Idolaters, to have been in fore under the Law of nature, (because wee see it retained and incted by the Law of Moses) not to taste of any thing, till some part of it had been dedicated to God, in the na∣ture of first-fruits, to the sanctifying of the whole, till when it was not to be touched; I say, though I should grant this, for a reson why hee may be thought to have offered bread and wine to God, not why  should be translated protulit, hee brought forth, no man would have cause to thank mee for any ad∣vantage, from thence. For still, the correspondence between Melchisedeck nd our Lord Christ would lye in this; that our Lord, by appointing this Sacrment, brings forth bread and wine, to strengthen the peol of Abraham, in their warfare against the powers of darknesse; as, in the dayes of his flsh, hee fed those that attended upon his doctrine, least they should faint in their travail. Now, this will first inferr, that it is bread and wine which our Lord feeds us with, in the Eucharist; And again, that it hath the virtue of sustaining us, by being made the body and bloud of Christ, as in a Sacrament, by virtue of the consecra∣tion past upon it: Which is all that which I say to a hair; that, by being made a Sacrament, it becomes the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, to be feasted up∣on by Christians. In like maner, be it granted, that the words of the Prophet Malachy I. 11. From the rising of the Sun, to his going down, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure meat offering; For my name shall be great among the Gentiles, saith the Lord of Hosts; is a Prophesie of the institution of this Sacrment, because it is contained in those kindes of bred and wine, which served for meat and drink offerings in the Law of Moses. But, this being granted; what shall wee do with the incense and the meat offering which the Prophet speaks of, unlsse wee say, that they signifie that which corresponds to the met and drink offerings of the Law, and their incense, under the Gospel? And will not tht prove to be the spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which God, under the Gospel, is served with by all Nations? Though, those prayers and pres of God being, by the institution of the Eucharist, limited and determined to be such as the ce∣lebration thereof requires; it is no inconvenience, nay, it will be necessry to grant, that the sacrifice thereof is fore-told by these words, not signifying, ne∣verthelesse, the nature of it to require any thing more, thn is exprssed by the premises. Be the same therefore said, if you please, of all the Sacrifices of the Old Law, of all the Prophesies, in which, the service to be rendred to God in the New Testament is described by the offering of Sacrifices. As for the words of our Lord to the woman of Samaria, John IV. 23. The hour cometh and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; For the Father seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and those that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth; Though I grant, as afore, that this is fulfilled by the celebration of the Eucharist, when once wee suppose our Lord to have li∣mited the worship of God under the Gospel to the form of it; yet, there can be no consideration of a sacrifice signified by these words, which neither sup∣pose nor expresse the sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, the Eucharist no way bearing the nature of a sacrifice, but, as it is the same with it. But, for the same reason, and, by the same correspondence between the sa∣crifices
of the Law and that of Christs Crosse, it may be evident, that it is not, nor can be any disparagement to the Sacrifice of our Lord Christ upon the Crosse, to the full and perfect satisfaction and propitiation for the sins of the world which it hath made, that the Eucharist should be counted the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, mystically, and, as in a Sacrament, represented to, & feasted upon by his people. The Apostle saith; that Christ is gone into no holy place made with hands, figurative of the true, but into heaven it self, to be presented before God for us; Nor to offer himself many times, as the High Priest goes once a year into the Holy places, with that bloud which is not his own; For then must hee many times have suffered since the foundation of the world. But now once, in the end of times is hee manifested, by the sacrifice of himself, to the voiding of sin. And, as it is ap∣pointed for men once to dye, and after that judgment; So Christ, once offered to take away the sins of many, shall appear the second time without sin, to those that look for him to salvation, Ebr. IX. 24-28. But have I said any thing, to cause any man to imagine, that I suppose Christ to be crucified again, as often as the Eucharist is celebrated? Do I say, those that celebrate it are those Jewes that crucified him once? Or do I, or can I imagine them to be Jewes at all, that would have the sacrifice of our Lord Christ upon the Crosse repeated again and again, as legal sacrifices are? Certainly, I will speak freely, neither can they that hold Transub∣stantion be truly said to stand obliged to any such consequence, so long as they acknowledg with all Christians, that the Covenant of Grace is for once settled, by the one Sacrifice of our Lord upon the Crosse. Why? because, though they believe the natural flesh and bloud of Christ, as crucified, to be there, yet not naturally but sacramentally; (that is, in their sense, under the accidents of bread and wine, which is, indeed, and in the sense of the Church, under the species or kinds) which difference is so great an abatement of that common and usual sense, in which, all Christians understand that Christ was sacrificed upon the Crosse, that, all that know it to be their profession, (which all must know, that will not speak of they know not what) must acknowledg, that the repeating of the Sacri∣fice of Christ crucified by the Eucharist, is not the repeating of that Sacrifice by which mankinde was redeemed, otherwise than, as a Sacrament is said to be that whereof it is a Sacrament. What ground and advantage this gives mee, and any man of my opinion, to argue, from those things which themselves acknow∣ledg, that there is no cause why they should insist upon the abolishing of the substance of the Elements in the Eucharist, I leave to them that shall think fit to consider the premises, to judg. But, for mee, who demand no more than this; That, in as much as the body and bloud of Christ is in the Eucharist, in so much it is the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse; I cannot foresee, what occasion slan∣der can have, to pick any such consequence out of my sayings. Certainly, the Sacrifices of the Old Law ceased not to be Sacrifices, because they were figures and Prophesies of that one Sacrifice upon the Crosse, which mankinde was re∣deemed with. And, why should the commemoration and representation (in that sense of this word repraesentation which I determined afore) of that one Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, which mankinde was redeemed with, be lesse pro∣perly a Sacrifice, in dependance upon & denomination from that one, which, the name of Sacrifice upon the Crosse was first used to signifie? For, all conceit of legal Sacrifice is quite shut out, by supposing that Sacrifice past, which the Sacri∣fice of the Eucharist represents and commemorates; Whereas, all Sacrifices of the Old Law, are essentially, (at least to Christians) figurative of the Sacrifice of Christ to come. Indeed, by that which I have said, concerning the nature of a Sacrifice in the Eucharist, as it is intended for Christians to feast upon, it is evident, that this commeorative and representative Sacrifice is of the nature and kinde of Peace-Offerings, which, by the Law, those that offered were to feast upon. I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my vowes now in the presence of all his people: Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; saith the Psalm CXVI. 12, 13. And that, in answer to the question made; What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits that hee
hath done unto mee? At feasting upon the parts, or remains of Peace-Offerings, the Master of the Sacrifice began the Cup of Thanksgiving for deliverance recei∣ved, in consideration whereof, hee payes his vowes; And the Sacrifices which hee payes are called , or Sacrifice of Thanks-giving for deliverance recei∣ved. Is not this the ame that Christians do, in celebrating the Euharist, setting aside the difference between Jews and Christians? Wherefore, I have showed, that it is celebrated, and is to be celebrated, with commemoration of, and thanksgiving for the benefits of God, especially that of Christ crucified. Which thankgiving, as it tends to the consecrating thereof; so, in as much as the con∣secration tends to the receiving of it, another thanksgiving, at the receiving of it, becomes also due, as at feasting upon Peace-Offerings. And hereupon, I have showed, that it is called by the Apostle, the sacrifice of Praise, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to God: And that, hving showed, that Jewes have no right to it as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that is, not to it, because not to the Propitiato∣ry Sacrifice which it representeth; But therefore, that Christins have right to feast upon it, as the Jews upon their Peace-Offerings. But if it be true, as I have showed, that the celebrtion of the Eucharist is the renewing of the Covenant of Grace, which supposeth propitation made for the sins of mankinde, by that one sacrifice which it commemorteth and representeth; the celebration there∣of being commanded, as a condition to be performed on our part, to qualifie us for the promise, which it tendreth to those that are qualified as it requireth; Shall it be a breah upon Christianity, to say also, that it is such a Sacrifice, where∣by wee make God propitious to us, and obtain at his hands the blessings of Grace, which the Covenant of Grace tendreth? This indeed requireth yet further consideration, for what reasons the Sa∣crament of the Eucharist may be accounted and called a Sacrifice, that wee may be able to judge, in what sense, and for what reason it may be accounted Propi∣tiatory and Impetratory, without prejudice to Christianity. First then, let it be remembred, that, by the institution and ordinance of God, those that dedicate themselves to the service of God, in the faith of Christ, by Baptism, are to dedi∣cate their goods to the maintenance of the Communion of the Church in the said service, the chief Office whereof is the celebration of the Eucharist, proper to Christianity, as I showed a little afore. Then, be it observed, that there were two sorts of Oblations commanded by the Law, and practised by Gods ancient people. For, First-fruits, Tithes, and accursed things (that is, things dedicated to God, under a curse upon them that should convert them to any other use, Levi▪ XXVIII.) were not dedicated to be spent upon the Altar in Sacrifices, but, to the maintenance of the Temple, or of them that attended upon the ser∣vice of it. But, seeing wee have now showed, that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice, it followeth, that those Oblations which are dedcated to God to be spent in the celbration of the Eucharist, (in reference whereunto, I have already showed, that all Oblations of Christians are consecrated to God, because dedicated to maintain the Communion of his Church, whereof the Eucharist is that Office which is peculiar to Christianity) are not barely consecrated to God, but to the service of God by Sacrifice. For those things, which, under the Law, were con∣secrated to God to be sacrificed upon the Altar, were not then first offered to God when they were killed, and the parts of them burnt upon the Altar; But, from the time that they were declared Gods goods for that purpose: as by the Law it self may appear, in the precept of the second Tithe, which, for two years belonging to the poor, the third year was to be spent in sacrificing at Jerusalem, and so by Law, and by no mans act, consecrate to the Altar, Deut. XIV. 22-29. In as much then as I have showed, that the Eucharist is a Sacriie, in so much, and for that very reason, that which Christians offer to God for the celebration of the Eucharist is no otherwise a Sacrifice, than those things which were ap∣propriated to the Altar under the Law were Sacrifices, from the time that they were dedicated to that purpose; Saving alwaies the difference between Sacrifi∣ces figurative of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, (such as Christianity supposeth all the Sacrifices of the Old Law to be) and the commemoration and
representation of the same past, which, I have showed that the Eucharist pre∣tendeth. And truly, having showed, that this representative and commemora∣tive Sacrifice is of the nature and kinde of Peace-Offerings, in as much as it is celebrated on purpose, to communicate with the Altar, in feasting upon it; And knowing, that every beast that was sacrificed for a Peace-Offering was attended with a Meat-Offering of floure and a Drink-Offering of wine, which are the kindes in which the Eucharist is appointed to be celebrated; I must needs say; that those species, set apart for the celebration of the Eucharist, are as properly to be called Sacrifices of that nature which the Eucharist is of; (to wit, comme∣morative and representative) as the same are to be counted figurative under the Law, from the time that they were deputed to that use. This is then the first act of Oblation by the Church, that is, by any Christian that consecrates his goods, not at large, to the service of God, but peculiarly, to the service of God by Sacrifice, in regard whereof, the Elemens of the Eucharist, before they be consecrated, are truly counted Oblations or Sacrifices. After the Consecration is past, having showed you, that S. Paul hath appoin∣ted, that, at the celebration of the Eucharist, prayers, supplications and interces∣sions be made for all estates of the world, and of the Church; And, that the Jews have no right to the Eucharist, (according to the Epistle to the Hebrews) because, though Eucharistical, yet, it is of that kinde, the bloud whereof is offered to God within the Vail, with prayers for all estates of the world, as Philo and Josephus inform us; Seeing the same Apostle hath so plainly expounded us the accomplishment of that figure, in the offering of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse to the Father in the highest heavens, to obtain the benefits of his passion for us; And that the Eucharist is nothing else but the representation here upon earth, of that which is done there; These things, I say, considered, neces∣sarily it follows, that, whoso believes, the prayers of the Church, made in our Lords name, do render God propitious to them for whom they are made, and ob∣tain for them the benefits of Christs death, (which hee that believes not is no Christian) cannot question, that those which are made by S. Pauls appointment, at the celebration of the Eucharist, offering up unto God the merits and suffer∣ings of Christ there represented, must be peculiarly and especially effectual to the same purposes. And, that the Eucharist may very properly be accounted a Sacrifice propitiatory and impetratory both, in this regard; because the offering of it up unto God, with and by the said prayers, doth render God propitious, and obtain at his hands the benefits of Christs death which it representeth; there can be no cause to refuse, being no more than the simplicity of plain Christianity inforceth. But whether the Eucharist, as in regard of this Oblation, so, in regard of the Consecration may be called a propitiatory Sacrifice, this, I perceive, is yet a que∣stion even among those of the Church of Rome. For it is acknowledged, that there is yet among them a party, even since the Decree of the Council of Trent, who, acknowledging the nature of a Sacrifice propitiatory in the Eucharist, in regard of the offering of it already consecrated, (according to the order of the Latine Masse) to God, for the necessities of the Church, utterly deny any na∣ture of such a Sacrifice in it, by virtue of the Consecration otherwise. True it is, these men are looked upon as bordering upon Hereticks, in regard they ac∣knowledg no other nature of a Sacrifice, but that, which those who acknowledg no Transubstantiation may grant, without prejudice to their positions. And, if my aim were onely to hold a mean opinion between wo extreams, and not freely to declare what may be affirmed with truth, it might seem very conveni∣ent, to take up that position, for which I may allege a party at present extant, in the Communion of the Church of Rome. But, having resolved to set all regard of faction behinde the consideration of truth manifested by the Scri∣ptures; I stick not to yield, and to maintain, that the consecration of the Eu∣charist, in order to the participation of it, is indeed a Sacrifice, whereby God is rendred propitious to, and the benefits of Christs death obtained for them that worthily receive it; But this, perhaps, neither in the sense, nor to the interest of
them, who make it their businesse to maintain the present abuses of the Church of Rome, by disguising the true intentions and expressions of the Catholick Church. That I may be understood without prejudice in this point, I will lay down the difference of opinion that remains in the Church of Rome nce the Council of Trent, as I finde it reported by Jacobus Bayus, de Eucharistiâ III. 15-18. Hee complains of an opinion, that the nature of a Sacrifice is not seen in conecra∣ting the Elements to become the body and bloud of Christ; but, that they are thereby made fit to be offered, and therefore, there must be some other act, whereby they are offered in Sacrifice. And this they finde in the Canon of the Masse. For, having rehersed the Institution, (whereby the parties agree that consecration is done) it follows; Ʋnde & memores Domine, nos servi tui, sed & plebs tua sancta, ejusdem Christi filii tui Domini nostri, tam beatae passionis, & ab inferis resurrectionis, sed & in coelis gloriosae ascensionis; Offerimus praeclarae Ma∣jestati tuae, de tuis donis ac datis hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immacu∣latam, Panem sanctum vitae aeternae, & Calicem salutis perpetuae. Supra quae propi∣tio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris: Et accepta habere, sicut accepta habere dig∣natus os munera pueri tui justi Abel, & sacrisicium Patriarchae nostrî Abrahae, & quod tibi obtulit summus Sacerdos tuus Melchisedech sanctum sacrificium, imma∣culatam hostiam. Whereupon wee also thy servants O Lord, and holy people, (mindefull, as well of the blessed passion and resurrection from the dead, as the glorious ascension into heaven, of the same thy Son Christ our Lord) Offer to thy excellent Majesty, of thy own free gifts, a pure sacrifice, a holy sacrifice, a spotlesse sacri∣fice, the holy Bread of everlasting life, and Cup of eternal salvation. Ʋpon which vouchsafe to look with a gracious and clear countenance, and accept them, as thou deignedst to accept the gifts of thy just childe Abel, and the sacrifice of our Patri∣arch Abraham, and that holy sacrifice, that spotlesse oblation, which thy High Priest Melchisedech offered thee. Then follows that which I quoted afore; Supplices te rogamus Domine, jube haec perferri—And this they think to be the offer∣ing of the Sacrifice, which the consecration exhibiteth onely to be offered, at the elevation, by these words. But the common opinion is offended at this, for placing the Sacrifice in that act of the Church, which sayes; Wee offer to thee; in which there is onely a general reason of sacrificing, by offering, without chan∣ging that which is offered. And therefore, as offering is nothing but dedicating and presenting to the worship of God, so that, if the substance of the thing be changed in offering it, then is it Sacrificing; Supposing the substance of the E∣lements to cease, and the body and bloud of Christ to succeed; in this doing, this opinion places the nature of the Sacrifice. For, the change of the Elements, saith mine Author, acknowledgeth Gods power, and the dependance uon him, of his creature. And, the body of Christ being under the dimensions of the bread, his bloud of the wine, Christ is present as sacrificed, his flesh and bloud being divided. Wherefore that change, whereby the Sacrifice is produced, suf∣ficeth to the offering of it, which is produced as sacrificed; The power of God being sufficiently testified by the change, though, in sacrificing living creatures, it is testified, by destroying them for Gods service. And this, hee thinks, our Lord signifies, when hee saith; This is my body which is given for you; This is my bloud which shall be poured out for you; For, to whom, but to God? seeing hee saith not, that is given you; But, for you. And, immediately hereupon there is no doubt but it hath the nature of a Sacrifice. The offering whereof must consist in that action which is done in the person of Christ, as the Consecration, they agree, is done, by using the words of Christ. And thus, though this Sacri∣fice by typical, and representative of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, which the parting of his body and bloud signifieth, yet is it neverthelesse a true Sacri∣fice, as the Sacrifices which figured Christ to come, cease not therefore to be true Sacrifices. And from this nature of a Sacrifice hee deriveth the rea∣son why the Table is an Altar, the Church a Temple, the Minister Sa∣cerdos, or one that offereth Sacrifice. I have made choice of this Au∣tho, because I meet not this difference of opinion among them reported
any where else. That which I shall say to him will show what wee are to think of others. For, having maintained, that the elements are really changed, from ordinary bread and wine, into the body and bloud of Christ mystically present, as in a Sacrament; And that, in virtue of the Consecration, not by the faith of him that receives; I am to admit and maintain, whatsoever appears duly consequent to this truth; Namely, that the Elements so consecrate, are truly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, in as much as the body and bloud of Christ crucified are contained in them, not as in a bare sign, which a man may take up at his plea∣sure, but as in the means by which God hath promised his Spirit. But not pro∣perly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, because that is a thing that consists in action, and motion, and succession, and therefore, once done, can never be done again, because it is a contradiction, that that which is done should ever be undone. It is therefore enough, that the Eucharist is the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, as the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse is represented, re∣newed, revived, and restored by it, and as every representation is said to be the same thing, with that which it representeth; Taking representing here, not for barely signifying, but for tendring and exhibiting thereby that which it signifieth. On the other side I insist, that, if sacrificing signifie killing and destroying, in the Sacrifices of the Old Testament, and the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse; it is not enough to make the Eucharist properly a Sacrifice, that the Elements are deputed to be worship of God, by that change which Transubstantiation importeth, and therefore much lesse, not supposing any change in their bodily substance. For, this difference will abte the property of a Sacrifice, the truth of it remaining. I grant, that Gods Power is seen in this change according to the terms already settled; For, what Power but Gods can make good the pro∣mise of tendring the Body and Bloud of Christ, as a visible mean to convey his Spirit? And hee that goes about to make this change, by consecrating the Eu∣charist, must needs be understood to acknowledg this Power of Gods; But this is not that acknowledgment which sacrificing importeth, but that which every act of Religion implyeth. Hee that Sacrificeth, acknowledging that which hee sacrificeth, with all that hee hath, to God, to testifie this acknowledgment, aban∣doneth that which hee sacrificeth to be destroyed in testimony of it. And therefore the Power of God is not testified in this change, as the nature of a Sa∣crifice requires that it be testified: For certainly, hee intends not to abandon his interest in Christ, that consecrates the Elements into his body and bloud. And therefore, the consideration of dedicating the Elements to the service of God in this Sacrament, makes them properly oblations: But the consideration of their being changed into the Body and Bloud of Christ, represented, sacrifi∣ced upon the Crosse, makes them properly no Sacrifice. In the former conside∣ration, being properly Oblations, let them be improperly Sacrifices. For in this sense, in the Canon of the Masse; Te igitur, Clementissime Pater, per Je∣sum Christum filium tuum Dominum nostrum, supplices rogamus ac petimus, uti accepta habeas ac benedic as hc dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata. Wee therefore, humbly beseech and desire thee, most mercifull Father, through Je∣sus Christ thy Son our Lord, to accept and blesse these gifts, these presents, these holy unstained Sacrifices. And not onely here before the Consecration, but just before the Lords Prayer and the Communion; Per Christum Dominum no∣strum: Per quem haec omnia semper Domine bona creas, sanctificas, vivificas, bene∣dicis, & praestas nobis. Through Christ our Lord: Through whom, thou, O Lord, alwaies createst, sanctifiest, quickenest, and furnishest us with all these good things. The repetition of which consideration shows, that they are presented to God, to be consecrated and made the Eucharist, as Oblations out of believers goods: According to the form used in divers Greek Liturgies, from the words of Da∣vid, . Wee give thee thire own of thine own. But, when our Lord sayes; This is my body which is given for you; This is my bloud which is poured out for you; Will any man of sense understand; That is now, by that which here I do, offered up to God for you, and the bloud as poured forth? Or
rather, this is that body and bloud that is given to be crucified, and poured forth for you shortly, upon the Crosse? Let it therefore have the nature of a Sacri∣fice, so soon as the Consecration is past. It shall have that nature improperly, so long as it is not the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse; Though truly, so long as the Sacrament is not empty of that which it signifieth. And, accoring to this truth, true Altars they are, true Temples, true Sacrifices, though improper∣ly, where, and by whom it is ministred. But I will not therefore grant, that this Sacrificing, (that is, this consecrating the Elements into the Sacrifice) is an action done in the person of Christ: Though they are agreed, that it is done by the rehersing of the words of Christ. For, the rehersing of Christs words is not an act done in the person of Christ; Nor do I take upon mee his person whose words I recite. And, I have showed, that the Consecration is done by the Prayers of the Church immediately, though these Prayers are made in virtue of Christs order, commanding to do what hee did, and thereby promising, that the Elements shall become that, which, hee saith, those which hee cone∣crated are. As for the other opinion, (which I am not to be the more in love with, be∣cause I am not satisfied with this) it is to be considered, that the Elements are offered thrice in the Canon of the Masse. The first is that offering which I rehersed last, beginning; Te igitur—going before the Consecration, as  agree. The second is that which this opinion intendeth, agreeing with the o∣ther, that the Consecration is past by rehersing the words of institution. But mine opinion allows not this. For, I conceive the Consecration is yet in doing, till that Prayer be past; Ʋt quotquot ex hâc Altaris participatione Sacro-Sanctum filii tui corpus & sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictione coelesti & gratiâ re∣pleamur. That as many of us as shall have received the Holy body and bloud of thy Son, by this communion of the Altar, may be filled with every heavenly bles∣sing and grace. Which is the later of the two, in which I conceive the Conse∣cration to consist, as, in all other Liturgies, in something correspondent to it. And truly, the very words of the second offering do bear, that the Elements are by it offered to God, not as consecrated, but, as to be consecrated, supposing the blessing of them to be the consecrating of them, as I proved afore. There∣fore the offering, and the presenting of them to God as consecrated, is that which is done by the Prayer which follows; Memento Domine famulorum fa∣mularum{que} tuarum—And, nobis quoque peccatoribus famulis tuis—whereby, the several estates of Christs Church are recommended to God, in virtue and consideration of Christs passion here represented and commemora∣ted. Not that I intend here to justifie that Prayer for the dead, which this containeth; but because (referring that to consideration in due time) all Litur∣gies have a place, where, according to S. Paul, intercession is made for all States of Christs Church, in consideration of the Sacrifice of Christs Crosse repre∣sented by this Sacrament: And because this intercession is properly, the offer∣ing up of the the said Sacrifice to God, for their necessities. And there∣fore, this opinion saith well, that the Consecration exhibiteth onely the Sacri∣fice, to be offered up to God by the Prayers of the Church: But, not by the Prayer which desireth the blessing of the Elements, wherein the consecating of them is contained, (which is that of the elevation, in the Canon of the Masse) but by those Prayers, whereby the effects of Christs Crosse are prayed for, in behalf of his Church. According to which opinion, the consecrating of the Elements will be the Sacrificing of Christ no further, than, as the body and bloud of Christ are thereby represented as Sacrificed. But, there will be no further cause of complaint in this, then there is cause to complain, that there is not such ground for division as the parties would have. For, though there be onely a general reason of offering, no particular consi∣deration of destroying, seen in the act of the Church, offering, either the Ele∣ments to be consecrated, or the consideration of Christs Crosse represented, to render God propitious to his Church; Yet are the consecrated Elements no lesse the Sacrifice of Christs Crosse, than the presence of Christs body and bloud
in them will allow; though in order to that Evangelical banquet upon them, at which, and by which, the Covenant of Grace is renewed. For, the Apostles having made the Eucharist a Sacrifice in this regard, I must not count the making of it one offensive. I say then, that, having proved, the consecration of the Eucharist to be the production of the body and bloud of Christ crucified, or the causing of them to be mystically pre∣sent in the elements thereof, as in a Sacrament representing them sepa∣rated by the crucifying of Christ; And, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse being necessarily propitiatory and impetratory both; it cannot be de∣nied, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in as much as it is the same Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, (as, that which representeth is truly said to be the thing which it representeth) is also both propitiatory and imperatory by virtue of the consecration of it, whereby it becometh the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse. For, is it not all the reaon in the world, that, if the Eucharist be the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, the consecrating of the Eucharist, that is, the cau∣sing of the Elements to become this Sacrifice, should be, and be accounted and called the sacrificing of Christ? And, if the participation of the Eucharist be, as I have showed it to be, the renewing of the Covenant of Grace, (by virtue whereof, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse becomes propitiatory and im∣petratory in behalf of Christians) shall not the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, whereof they participate, be counted propitiatory and impetratory, by virtue of the consecration indeed, though in order to the participation of it? For, if the profession of Christianity be the condition that renders God propitious to us, and obtains for us the benefits of Christs passion; And, that the receiving of the Eucharist is the renewing of that profession, by virtue whereof, the Faults whereby wee have failed of that profession, for that which is past, are blot∣ted out, and wee, for the future, are qualified for the blessings which Christs pas∣sion tendereth; Then is the Eucharist a Sacrifice propitiatory and impetratory, by virtue of the Consecration, though in order to the participation of it. Which, whether those that are so much for the Sacrifice, in the Church of Rome, rest con∣ent with it or not, seemeth to mee so natively proper to the simplicity and ho∣linesse of Christianity, that nothing can be held forth more pertinent to advance the zeal of frequenting, together with the devotion and reverence of communi∣cating in this most precious of Gods Ordinances to Christians. For, what can more oblige a Christian to the frequent and worthy communion of this Sacra∣ment, then to consider, that, by receiving it, hee is re-estated in his right to those promises which the Gospel endreth; provided, that hee, on his part, re∣establish in his own heart that resolution to Christianity, by professing which, hee was at the first estated in Gods Kingdom? Hereupon arises a fourth reason, why this Sacrament is a Sacrifice; to wit, of the bodies and souls of them, who, having consecrated their goods to God, for the celebration of it, do, by receiving it, professe to renew that consecration of themselves to the service of God, ac∣cording to the Law of Christ, which their Baptism originally pretendeth. For, in as much as wee revive and renew the first profession of our Christianity, in re∣ceiving the Eucharist, wee do also, by the same means, offer up our bodies for a living Sacrifice, holy and well pleasing to God, which is our reasonable service of God, as S. Paul commandeth, Rom. XII. 1. And, by that which hath been said, it is easie to resolve that which is further questioned in the School, whether the brea∣king, the pouring forth, the taking and the consuming of the Elements by eat∣ing and drinking belong to the nature of the Sacrifice or not. For, I have al∣ready allowed the consecrating of the Elements apart, to be a necessary ingre∣dient of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, as necessary to represent the Sacrifice of the Crosse. And if men did consider that the Eucharist had never been institu∣ted but to be participated, they would finde it impetinent, to allege any reason why it should be a Sacrifice, that endeth not to the participation of it. There is then, in the Masse, a peculiar ceremony of breaking the Host into the Cha∣lice, not tending to the distributing of it, but, all the portions to be taken by the Priest. Of this I speak not; Otherwise, breaking, pouring forth, distributing,
eating, drinking, are all parts of the Sacrifice; as the whole action is that Sacri∣fice, by which the Covenant of Gace is renewed, restored, and established against the interruption of our failleurs. And now, I confesse, that all they, who do not believe the promises of the Gospel to depend upon any condition to be performed by our free will, quali∣fying us with a right title to them, may very well say by consequence; that it is a disparagement to the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, to make the Eu∣charist a propitiatory and impetratory Sacrifice in behalf of the Church, in that sense, and to that effect as I have said. But, supposing that condition, I challenge all the world to say, wherein any such disparagement lies. For, let any man think either mee, or the Doctors of the Church of Rome so mad, as to ascribe that propitiation, which is once made for the whole world by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, to the representation and commemoration of it, by the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. But, in regard the Gospel requires a certain condition at thine hands, which being not performed, to thee Christ is neither born, nor crucified, nor en again, as S. Prosper saith; And, that the communion of the Eu∣charist professeth the performance thereof, and that truely if it be worthy, (so that the Propitiation wrought by Crosse, thereby becomes effectually thine) in that regard, the Eucharist becomes to thee a propitiatory Sacrifice, by virtue of the Consecration indeed, (which makes the Elements to become the body and bloud of Christ mystically, as in a Sacrament) but yet in order to the participation of i▪ And is not this the applying of the propitiation wrought by the Sacri∣fice of Christs Crosse, when as, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, a man be∣comes intitled to the benefit of it? Nor let any man tell mee, that this appli∣cation is wrought by living faith, as if that were evidence enough, that, not by the Sacrament of the Eucharist: For if, notwithstanding this faith, the Sacra∣ment of Baptism is necessary to estate us in this right, because there is no living faith, without being baptized into Gods Church; By the same reason, supposing the frequentation of the Eucharist commanded for the dayly redressing and maintenance of the same title) of necessity it follows, that the application of that propitiation is to be ascribed to the Eucharist, which is not applicable with∣out it. Again; If S. Paul injoyn the Church, to offer up their Prayers, Sup∣plications, and Intercessions, for all estates in the world, at the celebration of the Eucharist, as recommending them in the name of Christ, there mystically present, in the commemoration of his death upon the Crosse; can it seem strange, that the Prayers which are so powerfully presented, by alleging an Intercession of such esteem, should have a special virtue, and take a special effect, in making God propitious to his Church, and all estates of the same, and obtaining for them those benefits which Christs passion tenders? And if so, is not the Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist a propitiatory and impetratory Sacrifice, by virtue of the Consecration, though in order to the Oblation and presentation of it, by the prayers of the Church, for the obtaining of their necessities? What is there in all this, that the tongue of slander can asperse with the imputation of Pope∣ry, unlesse they will have Popery to be that Christianity, which wee have recei∣ved from our Lord Christ and his Apostles? But, if from hence any man would inferr, that, seeing the Sacrament of the Eucharist, that is to say, the body and bloud of Christ crucified there present by virtue of the Consecration, is a propi∣tiatory and impetratory Sacrifice for the Congregation there present, for their relations, and for the Church; therefore it is so, whether they proceed to receive the Eucharist or not, therefore it is so, whether they proceed to offer up the Eu∣charist present, by their prayers, for the necessities of the Church, or not▪ therefore it is so, whether they pray with the Church or no; the consequence will straight appear to fail; because those reasons which make it such a Sacrifice make it so, in order to the receiving, or to the offering of it by the prayers of the Church, in behalf of the Church. It is well enough known, what opinions and abuses in the use, and concern∣ing the virtue of Masses, had vogue under the dark time of the School, though no authorized by the Catholick Church. For, in regard the Eucharist can pre∣tend
no virtue by the nature of the work, (impertinent to any spiritual effect) but meerly by the institution of Christ; the efficacy thereof, ex opere operao (ac∣cording to the language of those dayes) and by virtue of the very oke, was so extended, as to take effect without any good motion in them tht celebrate it. And the intent of the Priest, (whose act the consecration was tken to be) was thought to extend it, to whom, and to what he pleased. And , so farre from requiring, that any but the Priest should communicate, that even at this day, it is not thought necessary, by the looser sort of that side, that the peo∣ple should understand what the Priest does or sayes, much lsse asst him with their devotions, the intent of the Priest, (which the Canon it selfe alwaies extends to all that are present) serving to give it virtue. On the other side, how hath this been taken & construed? As if every Mass pretended to sacrifice Christ a new, who, by offering himselfe once, hath perfited for ever those who are sanctified, as saith the Apostle, Heb. X. 14. And therefore, as if every Mass did challenge the virtue of Christs sacrifice upon the Cross. And it is true, the properties and efect of things signified, are in some certain sense, truly attributed to the signs. But he that inlarges his Language beyond that sense may give, and he that understands not the limitations requisite, may take offense, when there is no need. Otherwise, the reasons of those limitations are evident enough, to save any sober and charitable men, either from inflaning, or taking up offenses. For, common sense, which tells all men, that what is once done can never be done again, obliges them to understand an abatement in the property of that Lan∣guage, which attributes the sacrificing of Christ to a Priest; because, once done upon the Crosse, it can never be done agin. Neither can it be, in reason, supposed, that he who inflames the improperty of his Language, intends there∣fore to renounce the common faith, concerning the redemption of man-kind by the sacrifice of the Cross. But when all derive all virtue in the Mass from it, to take such Language for equalling the Mass to it, will require a great lust to maintain partiality in the Church. And make but once the consecrating and offering of the Eucharist, for the necessities of the whole Church, by the pray∣ers of those who celebrate it, to be the act of the respective assembly, by the ministry of him whom the Church deputes for the purpose; it will easily ap∣pear what follows. For, the virtue thereof will still be ex opere operato, in op∣position to the Sacraments of the old Old Law: The spirituall intent where∣of not being discerned by all, because not openly preached at that time, the spirituall effect of them could not be attributed to the common work, but to the particular intent of those, that belonged to the Gospel, under the Law, which is a true ground of opposition between opus operatum, and opus operantis; The work meerly done, and done by such a one. Besides, seeing the truth of Christs body and blood, is eaten and drunk by living faith, without the Sacrament; He that believes, that God instituted not the Sacrament to no purpose, though he abhorre to think, that the effect thereof can be had without any good moti∣on, must of necessity allow the devotion which a living faith is exercised with, in assisting the celebration of it, an effect, by virtue of that work, which, with∣out it, it cannot challenge. As for the effect of the Prayers which it is offered with, it is not to be ascribed to the quality of the Priest, and therefore in that regard also it may be ascribed to the work it selfe, not to the quality of him that doth it. But, seeing the common obligation of all Christians, extendeth their Prayers to all necessities of Christs Church; it will not lye in the intent, either of the Priest, or of the whole assembly (whose act more properly it is) to make it more beneficial to particular Christians, then it can be thought, that God ac∣cepteth the charity and devotion of particular Christians more particularly, for their particular relations. As for the mater of private Masses, and the assistance of the people, with their devotion as well as presence, of an unknown tongue in Gods service, of the extending of the benefit thereof, to the dead; Thus much being said generally here, I referre the rest to their own places. In fine, what other reason soever can be pretended (by any that shall make it his interest, to maintain not to excuse the abuses of the Church of Rome) why the Eucha∣rist
should be counted such a Sacrifice; if it be not contained in that which hath been said, will easily be wiped off by that which hath been said. Those Scriptures which wee ground our selves upon, when wee make the Eucharist a Sacrice, be∣ing the onely ground to determine, (though not the onely means to evidence) for what reason, and to what purpose it is to be counted such a Sacrifice. For, how much regard soever wee ought to have to the consent of the Church in this point; (as, without doubt, if in any, then in this) without doubt, the a∣greement and correspondence, visible to common sense, betwen the original practice and sense of the Church, and that which hath been alleged out of the Scriptures, will be evidence enough of the right reason, or reasons, for which the Eucharist is not or is to be esteemed a propitiatory Sacrifice. There is no man can thrust his nose into the writings of the Fathers, even of the first times, but hee shall finde the Oblations of the faithfull, that are once deputed to the cele∣bration of the Eucharist, called Sacrifices in that regard. This consideration therefore, is not owned by them that strive most, to make the Eucharist properly a propitiatory Sacrifice; because, though it have the stamp of primitive Christia∣nity upon it, yet it makes nothing to that purpose. And yet the Msse is never celebrated, but they hea the Oblations of the faithfull called Sacrifices (in the words quoted afore) and that, for the redemption of their souls, for the hope of salvation, for the discharge of their vowes. All which, understanding the renu∣ing of the Covenant of grace by the Communion, is properly true in order to it. As for the sayings of the Fathers, whereby the Eucharist is declared to be a Sacrifice, in regard of the Consecation; I do no way doubt, that they are utter∣ly innumerable. For wheresoever the whole action, including the propitiation which the Church intends to procure by it, is called a Sacrifice, (which is most or∣dinary in the language of the Fathers) there the Consecration cannot be exclu∣ded, though, referring it to the Communion, not the Communion to it, as some would have: For if it be conidered on the other side, that they were all said, at such time as the Communion was no lesse usual than the Consecration thereof; (that is to say, when it was a strange thing to hear of the Eucharist celebrated, and none but the Priest to receive) it will not be strange, that I demand it to be understood, in order to the communion of the same. Especially, when the Litur∣gies themselves, that is, the form of Consecration used in the most eminent Churches▪ (from whom the lesse must necessarily be thought to have received their pattern) do limit the being and presence of Christs body and bloud in the Elements, to the benefit of them that shall communicate; As it appears by the forms of Consecration that have been alleged. And though the Fathers divers times all the celebrating of the Eucharist the death and passion of our Lord, which it commemorates, and, the Sacrifice of his Crosse; S. Cyprian, Epist. LXIII. S. Chrysostome, in Mat. Hom. LXXXIII. in Ala Hom. XXI. in Epist. ad Heb. Hom. XVII. S. Austine, in Psal. XXI. yet, the addition of words which they use, of reasonable and unbloudy, o commemorative, of symbolical, of signe and image, are necessary evidence of an abarement in the property of the words, according to their meaning. Constitutiones Apost. VI. 23. S. Cyprian, Ep. LXIII. Esebius, demonst. Evang. VIII. 1. S. Ambrose, de Oic. I. 48. Macariu, Hom. XXVII. S. Astine, Qust. LXI. ex LXXXIII. contra Fastum▪ XX. 21. de Civ. X. 5, 20. XVII. 17. Dionysius Hierar. Eccles. cap. III. and even the Canon of Msse, calling it a Sacrifice of Praise, for the redemption of souls, that pay their vowes. And therefore S. Ambrose, de is qui initiantur mysteriis cap. VIII. sayes, that Christians then, seeing the Altar prepared, cried out; Thou hast prepared  Table before mee; And in the Fathers, that which is sometimes called an Altar, is other while called a Table, especially with the additions of mystical, holy, spi∣ritual, divine, and others. All abating the property of a Sacrifice, or rather the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, when speech is of the Eucharist. The words of S. Austine▪ Epist. XXIII. are expresse. Nonne semel immolaus est Christus in sips? E amen in Sacramento, non solm per omnes Pasch solemnitates, sed omni dis populis imolar, nec utique menitur, qui interrogatus, um respondet immla▪ Was not Christ in person sacrificed once? and yet in mystery not onely all
the Easter Holidayes, but every day is he sacrificed for the people: Nor shall hee lye, who, being asked, answers, that hee is sacrificed. That truth of a Sacrifice, which serves but to vlye, makes not a proper Sacrifice. And the words of S. Chry∣sostom in Epist▪ ad Heb. H. XVII▪ are not to be oitted. . What then? do wee no offer every day? Wee offer indeed, but, making com∣mmoration of his death. And this is one and not many. How one and not many? Because he was once offered, not) as that which was carried into the Holy of Holies. That is the figure of this, and this of that. For, wee offer alwaies the same, not now one Lamb, and another to morrow, but alwaies the same. Therefore the Sacrifice is one. Otherwise, by that reason, being offered in many places, there should be many Christs. But by no means. But there is one Christ every where, here full, and there full: One Body. As therefore, being offered in many places, hee is one Body, and not many Bodies; So is hee one Sacrifice. Hee is our High Priest, who offered the Sacrifice that cleanseth us. The same wee also offer, that then was offered, that is invincible. This is done in remembrance of that which was then done; For, d this, saith hee, in remembance of mee. Wee make no other Sacrifices as then the High Priest, but the same alwaies, or rather the remembrance of a Sacrifice. Now that, in the sense of the Catholick Church, the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist is a Sacrifice propitiatory for the Church, and imperatory of the necessities thereof, in regard of those prayers wherewith it is offered and presented to God, in virtue of the Sacrifice of the Crosse, which it is mystically; (that is, represen∣teth and commemorateth) a few words will serve to persuade him that knowes the practice and custom of the Church in all ages, at the solemn and regular times and occasions of celebrating the Eucharist, to make mention of all states and qualities belonging to the Church. And not only so, but, upon occasions in∣cident, of going to God, for the necessities, either of the Church, or of particular Christians; to celebrate the Eucharist, with an intent, of presenting and offering the Crosse of Christ there present, for their necessities. You had afore out of Ter∣tul. de Cor. cap. V. Oblationes pro defuncts, pro natalitiis, annuâ die facimus. Wee make Oblations for the dead, for the birth of Martyrs, on the anniversary day. And further, de Exhor. Castit. XI. speaking of him that had maried a second wife; Ne{que} enim pristinam poteris odisse, cui etiam religiosiorem reservas affectionem, ut jam re∣cept apud Dominum, pro cjus spirit postulas, pro quâ Oblationes annuas eddi. Stabis ergo ad Dominum cum tot uxoribus quot in oratione commemoras? Et offeres pro dabus? & commendabis illas duas per sacerdotem de monogamiâ ordinatum, at etiam de virginitate sancitum? circundatum virginibus ac univiris? Et a∣scendet sacrificim tuum liberâ fronte? Et inter caeteras voluntates bon mentis po∣stulabis tibi & uxori tu castitatem? For, the former thou canst not hate, for whom thou reservest a more religious affection, as received already with the Lord, for whose spirit thou makest request, for whom thou rendrest yearly oblations. Wilt thou then stand before the Lord with as many wives as in thy prayers thou menti∣onest? And wilt thou offer for two? And commend those two by a Priest ordained after one wife, or confirmed of a virgine? compassed with virgines and once maried people? And shall thy sacrifice freely ascend? And, among other affections of a good minde, wilt thou desire chastity for thee and thy wife? I dispute not here how lawfull it is to pray for the dead; which Tertullian touches again de Monoga∣miâ X. de Animâ LVIII. This Tertullian supposes, that, if a Christian have
two wives, hee must offer, that the Eucharist may be celebrated, and that, at the celebrating of it, the Priest may pray for those whom hee mentions, as the oc∣casion of celebrating it. The birth-dayes of Martyrs, that is, the Anniversaries of their sufferings was another occasion of celebrating the Eucharist, as in Ter∣tullian, so in S. Cyprian. Epist. XXXIV. Sacrificium pro eis semper, ut meminiis, offerimus, quoties Martyrum passiones & dies annuâ commemoratione celeban us. Wee alwaies offer sacrifice for them, as you remember, when wee celebrate the year∣ly commemoration of the Martyrs suffering dayes. Therefore, where the ame S. Cyprian forbids offering the names of those that had fallen away in persecution, and offering for them, Epist. IX. XI. hee forbids the receiving of their offerings, and, by consequence, praying for them at the Eucharist. Epiphanius Haer. XXX. speaking of the Patriarch of the Jewes baptized in private: . The said Patriar ain  his hand a very considerable summ of gold, streched out his hand, and gave it to e Bishop, saying; Offer for mee. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. V. Eroe  Then, that spiritual sacrifice, that unbloudy service, being done, (consecrt) over that propitiatory sacrifice, wee beseech God for the common peace of the Churches, for the State of the world, for the Kings, their armies and allies, for the sick, &c. adding, that, praying for the departed, wee offer to God, Christ, crucied or our sins, to render him propitious to them, and to us. Of which effect in due place, the intent hereby appears. For here, as hee calls it a Sacrifice upon the Consecration, so hee plainly sets down, wherein the propitiation which it effect∣eth consists, according to the Catholick Church. For, to say truth, to the purpose in hand, I can produce nothing like that which I have said already, in my Book of the Service of God at the Assemblies of the Church, (to which I remit you for the rest, pag. 370-382.) that, in all the Liturgies, there is a place, where mention is to be made of all States of the Church, for whom the Oblations, out of which the Eucharist is consecrated, are offered. And likewise a place, where, the Eucharist being consecrated, prayer is made, in behalf of all States in the Church; that is to say, the Sacrifice of Christ his Crosse, there present, is offered up, to move God, to grant them all that is desired by the regular and continual prayers of the Church. And among them, there is a special place for those that offer at present. If any man be moved to imagine, that any part hereof is prejudicial to that Reformation which the Church of England professeth, (for, I professe from the beginning, not to be srupulous of offending those that offend it) I remit him to that learned Appendix of Dr Field, to his third book of the Church; the purpose whereof (in answer to the question; where the Reformed Church was before Luther) is, to show, that in this point, as in others there handled, the sense of the whole Church of Christ, even to the time of Luther, and to the Council of Trent, was no other than that which the Church of England embraceth and cherisheth. Thereby to show, that the Reformation thereof never pretended to found a new Church, but to preserve that which was, by taking away those corru∣ptions, which time, and the enemies of Christianity had sown, in the Lawes and customs of it. Which hee doth so evidently perform, in this point, that, I must needs challenge any man, that hath a minde to blast any thing here said, with the stae calumny of Popery, to consider first; Whether hee can prove those things, which, the Authors past exception there quoted declare to be the sense of the Catholick Church, at that time, to contain any thing prejudicial to the Go∣spel of Christ, and that purity thereof which the Reformation pretendeth. And, because I know hee cannot do it, I rest secure of all, blasphemies or slanders, that can be forged upon this occasion: Openly professing, that, those who will not acknowledg that condition of the Gospel, and the promises thereof, which I have demonstrated to be essential to Christianity; it is for their interest, to
defame the sense of the Catholick Church, with the slanderous aspersions of Po∣pery, that so they might seduce miserable creatures to believe, that there is a faith which initles them to the promises of the Gospel, not supposing them con∣verted to the Christianity which it rendereth. For, seeing that propitiation which the Sacrifice of the Eucharist pretendeth is grounded upon this condition of the Covenant of Grace; (as I have showed) it is no mervail if they, who pretend to reconcile the promises of the Gospel to the lusts of the flesh, by which this world is injoyed, indeavor to slander the purity of Christianity with those asper∣sions, which they have seduced wretched people to count odious. In fine, it is not that consideration of a Sacrifice in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which the sense and practice of the Catholick Church inforceth; but the violent interpre∣tations of it which are made on both sides, to both extremities, that can give the leass pretense for division in the Church. For, while on the one side, the sacri∣ficing of Christ a new, is so construed, as if, to doubt of the virtue of it in behalf of all that assist in it, (whether they communicate in it or not, whether their de∣votions concurr to it or not) were to doubt of the virtue of Christs Crosse; it is no mervail if this create so great offense, that the receiving of the Eucharist, nay, the assisting of it with the devotions of Christian people, comes to be a mater of indifference. On the other side, while, the renewing of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Crosse, by that representation thereof which the Eucharist tendreth, for the redressing of the Covenant of Grace between God and those which receive, is construed as prejudicial to that one Sacrifice, whereby our Lord for ever hath perfected those whom hee sanctifieth; no mervail if the very ce∣lebrating of it come to be a mater of indifference, the effect whereof, by be∣lieving that a man is predestinate or justified, is had before and without it. The mater of the Sacrifice then being so great a subject for the diviion, upon so litle cause; it is time for good Christians to awake and look about them, and see, that, the lesse cause there is, the greater good will the parties have to continue at di∣stance: In the mean time, it is the common interest of Christianity, even the means of their salvation, by the worthy frequenting of this holy Sacrament, that suffers. As for the Church of England, I referr my self to the very form of those Lawes, according to which, as many as have received Orders in it, have promised to exercise the Ministery to which they were appointed by the same, and that before God and his Church, at so solemne an occasion, that nothing can be thought obligatory to him that would transgresse it. For, the Offertory which the Church of England prescribeth, if it signifie any thing, signifieth the dedication of that which is offered, as, at large, to the necessities of the Church, so in particular, to the celebration of the Eucharist then and there. At the con∣secration the Church prayeth; That wee, receiving these thy creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy Son our Saviour Christs holy institution, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body and bloud; And after the Communion; Wee thy humble servants, intirely desire thy fatherly good∣ness mercifully r accept this our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: Most hum∣bly beseeching thee to grant, that, by the merits and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his bloud, wee and thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his death and passion: All this, having premied prayer for all States of Christs Church. Which whether it make not the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by virtue of the Consecration, the Sa∣crifice of Christ upon the Crosse, propitiatory and impetratory for them who communicate in it, by receiving the Elements; whether or no, by virtue of this Oblation, propitiatory and impetratory for the necessities of the rest of the Church, as well as the Congregation present; I leave to men of reason, but not to Puritanes, to judge. This I am sure, the condition of the Gospel, (which is the fourth reason, for which, I have showed, that the Eucharist is counted a Sa∣crifice in the sense of the Church) is exactly expressed in the words that follow, to the confusion of all Puritanes, that would have us expect the blessings pro∣mised, from such a kinde of faith, which supposes it not, neither implies ; And e, wee offer and present to thee, O Lord; our selves, our souls and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto thee; humbly beseeching thee, that all we, which be partakers of this holy Communion, may be fulfilled with thy grace and heavenly benediction. For, the reason which obliges us to professe this at recei∣ving the Eucharist, (which is the New-Testament in the blood of Christ) is, be∣cause the promises which the Gospel covenanteth for, depend upon it, as the condition which renders them due. And, upon these premises, I may well con∣clude, that all the reasons, for which I have showed that the Eucharist is a sa∣crifice in the sense of the Church, are recapitulted and comprised in which fol∣loweth; And though we be unworthy, through our manifold sinnes, to offer unto thee any sacrifice; yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, not waying our merits, but pardoning our offences. CHAP. VI. The reason of the Order by which I proceed, brings me to the Baptism of Infants in the next place. The power of the Keyes seen in granting Baptism, as well as in communicating the Eucharist. Why Socinians make Baptism indifferent: Why Antinomians make it a mistake to Baptize. The grounds upon which I shake off both: With answer to some objections. WHen I proposed to write of the Laws of the Church (that is to say, of those controversies concerning the same, which are the subject of divisi∣on in mater of Christian amity to the English at this time) I proposed my subject in aeqivocall terms, till it be further distinguished, that the Laws of the Church may be understood to be those, which God hath given the Church, to conduct the body of the Church in the exercise of their Christianity; And they may be understood to be those, which God hath inabled the Church to give themselves, according to that which I showed from the beginning; That Gods giving such Laws to Christians, as are to be kept and exercised by the communi∣ty of Christians, at their respective Assemblies, is a demonstration, that God hath founded a Society or Corporation under the name of the Church: And that, supposing the Church to be such a Society or Corporation of necessity in∣ferreth; that it is inabled by Gods Law, to give Laws unto it selfe, in such ma∣ters, as, not being determined by Gods Law, become necessary to be determi∣ned, for preservation of the Body in unity, and communion in the offices of Gods service. The Laws, therefore, that God gives his Church, are so farre the subject of this inquiry, as may make it to appear, what is left to the power and duty of the Church to determine. And to this purpose, it seemed requisite in the first place to determine, what the rule of Faith containeth to be believed of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is the ground of whatsoever can be pre∣tended that he hath injoyned his Church, as concerning the frequentation of it; having determined the like afore, not only concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, but also concerning Penance, in as much as they contain qualifications requisite by the Gospel to render the promises thereof due to particular Christians. Whereas the Sacrament of the Eucharist, being, as I said afore, the most emi∣nent of those offices which God hath injoyned to be celebrated by the Assem∣bles of his Church, (having first founded his Church upon the duty and the com∣mand, or upon the charter or priviledge of holding those Assemblies, even when the Powers of the world allow it not) required a teay express, to deter∣mine the true intent why it was instituted; that it might the better appear in due time, how those circumstances in the celebration of it, which are a great part of the subject of that division which prevails among us in point of Christi∣anity, may best be determined to the intent of Gods Law: And also, that the true intent of other Powers given the Church (evidently ending to the main∣tenance of Christianity, and the purity thereof, but, alwaie with a respect to the unity of the Church, in the communion of those offices whereof this is the chief) might the better be estimated, by a right understanding of the end which they seek. You have then the first, that is, the original and primitive, and
also if you demand that, the prime and chief power of Gods Church, consist∣ing in celebrating the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist. Not in wa∣shing away the filth of the Body, as S. Peter saith (that is, not in ministring the outward ceremony of washing the body with water, or any part of it) but in admitting and allowing that professinn of a good Conscience, which quali∣fies a man to be a member of the Church. For, this allowance is no lesse then a declaration, on the part of the Church, that he who upon these times is ad∣mitted to Baptism, is likewise invested with a right and due title to the promises of the Gospel, remission of snnes, and everlasting life: As it may appear to all that hve contracted with the Church of England in Gods name, that, conti∣nuing in that which they professed and undertook, on ttheir part, at their Baptism, they are ssured of no lesse by the Church. And therefore this is, and ought to be accounted that power of the Keyes, by which men are admitted to the House of God, which is his Church, as S. Paul saith; At least that part of it, that is seen and exercised in this first office that the Church can minister to a Christian. And, seeing no man can challenge the priviledge of that communion, to which he is admitted upon condition of that profession which Baptism supposed, unlesse he proceed to live according to it; it cannot seem strange, that the same should be thought to be exercised in the celebration of the Eucharist, as it is done, with a purpose to communicate the Sacrament thereof to those that receive. I shall desire any man that counts this srnge, to consider that which I quoted even now out of Epiphanius, That the Patriarch of the Jews at Tiberias, being baptized by the Bishop, put a con∣siderable sum of Gold into his hand, saying; Offer for me: For it is written; Whatsoever ye bind on atrh, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye lose on earth, shall be losed in heaven: For so it follows in Epiphanius. And when S. Cyprian blames or forbids offering up the names, or offering up the Eucharist in the names of those that had fallen away from the Church in time of perse∣cution, till they were reconciled to the Church by Penance; doth he not exer∣cise the power of the Keyes, in his hands, by denying the benefit of those Pray∣ers which the Eucharist is celebrated with, to them who had forfeited their right to it, by failing of that, which, by their baptism they undertook? As on the o∣ther side, whosoever the Eucharist is offered for, (that is, whosoever hath a part in those Prayers which it is celebrated with) is thereby declared loose by the Church, upon supposition, that he is indeed what he professes. And what∣soever Canons of the Church there are (of which there are not a few) which take order, that the offerings of such or such shall, or shall not be received; they all proceed upon this suppotion, that, by the power of the Keys, they are to be allowed or refused their part of benefit in the Communion of the Eucha∣rist, and the effects of i. For, not to speak of what is, by the corruption of men; but what ought to be, by the appointment of God, it is manifest, that, the admission of a man to the communion of the Eucharist is an allowance of his Christianity, as conormable to that which Baptism professeth; though, in no sate of the Church, it is a sufficient and reasonable presumption, that a man is indeed and before God, intitled to the promises of the Gospel, that he is admitted to the communion of the Eucharist by the Church; because, whatso∣ever profession the Church can receive may be counerfeit. But so, that it is to be indeavoured, by all means possible for the Church to use, that the right of communicating with the Church in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, be not al∣lowed any man by the Church, but upon such terms, and according to such laws, that a man, being qualified according to them, may be really and indeed qualifi∣ed for those promises which the Gospell tendreth. Which being supposed, every Christian must of necessity acknowledge, how great and eminent a power the Lord hath trusted his Church with, in celebrating and giving of the Eucha∣rist; when he is convinced to believe, that the body and blood of Christ is there∣by tendred him, though mystically and as in a Sacrament, yet so truly, that the spirit of Christ is no lesse really present with it, to inable the souls of all them that receive it with sincere Christianity, then the Sacrament is to their bodies,
or, then the same spirit is present in the flesh and bloud of Christ, naturally be∣ing in the heavens. For, suppose, that by faith alone, without receiving this Sacrament, a man is assured of the spirit of Christ, (as, by faith alone, under∣standing faith alone, as S. Paul meant it, I shall show that he may be assured of it) yet, if he have determined a visible act to be done, to the due performance whereof he hath annexed a promise of the participation of the Spirit of Christ by our Spirit, no lesse then of the body nd blood of Christ Sacramentally present by our bodies; And, if he hath made the doing of this a part of the Christiani∣ty, which, under the title of Faith alone, inileth to promises of the Gospell; (for who can be said to professe Christianity, that owneth not such an Ordi∣nnce, upon such a promise?) Then hath he determined and limited the truth of that faith, which onely justifieth us, at the beginning of every mans Christiani∣ty to the Sacrament of Baptism, but in the proceeding of the same, to that of the Eucharist. These being the first Powers of the Church, and, having resolved from the beginning, that the power of the Church extends to the deterining or limiting of any thing requisite to the communion of the Church, the determi∣nation or limitation wherof (by such an act as ought to have the force of Law to them that are of the Church) becomes requisite▪ to the communion of Christians in the offices of Gods service in unity; I cannot see any of the con∣troversies, whereby we stand now divided, that can deserve a place in our consi∣deration, before that of the Baptism of Infants. For, as it is a dispute belong∣ing to the first and originall power of the Church, to consider whether it extend so farre, as (when it is acknowledged that there is no written Law of God to that purpose) that it may, and justly hath provided, that all the Children of Christian Parents be baptized Infants; so it will apear to concern their salvati∣on more immediately, then other Laws, limiting the exercise of the Churches power, or the circumstances of exercising those offices of God service which it tendeth to determine, can be thought to do. But Before I come to dispute this point, I will here take notice once more of the Book, called the Doctrine of Baptisms, one of the fruits of this blessed Reformation, commonly attributed to the Master of a Colledge in Cambridge, proving by a studied dispute, that it was never intended by our Lord Christ and his Apostles, that Christians should be Baptized at all: That John indeed was sent to baptize with water, but that the Baptism of Christ is baptism with the Holy Ghost and fire: And, so long as the Ceremonies of the Law were not abolished in point of fact, (though become void in point of right) so long al∣so baptism by water was practised by the Apostles, as by John the Baptist and his Disciples; But that since then, the continuance of Baptism by water in the Church, is nothing else but an argument, that it hath been destitute of Baptism by fire, which is the Holy Ghost, which this Reformation, or, forsooth, this Dog∣matist pretends to. Which opinion obliges to mention again that of Scinus, who allows no further of Baptism, then of an indifferent Ceremony, which the Church may use still at pleasure, to solemnize the profession of Christianity, when a man is converted from Infidelity to it; (as it was prescribed by our Lord, to signifie the washing away of sinne from those, who, having been Jews and Gentiles, were converted to be Christians) But, that the obligation there∣of is utterly ceased in respect of those, who, being born of Christians, and bred up in the Church, have, by the exercise of that Christianity which their yeares intitles them to▪ made continual profession of it. These two opinions, like Samsons Foxes, though ied together by the tails to set the Church on fire, yet may proceed upon severall grounds. For, we know that Socinus, denying Ori∣ginall sinne, hath reason enough to reject the baptism of men, as well as of Infants; as not acknowledging any thing but the will of man requisite to make him a good Christian, and consequently, suspending the premises of the Go∣spel onely upon that act thereof, which resolveth a man to become a good Chri∣stian. Which how well it agrees with Sovinus his acknowledgement of the gift of the Holy Ghost, promised to them that have made this resolution, to able them to perform it, is clear to them who shall have perused the premises
to give sentence. As for the other opinion last mentioned, I must professe, that I do not take upon me, that it is his work who is said to be the Author of it, though I name him upon common fame, as an instance to evidence, that there is no Church of God in England, by the present Laws, when there is no means to bring to light the Authors of such pestilent Doctrines; and when those who pretend to be an University, do acknowledge such a man Master of a Colledge, (partly of Divines) as, if they were an University, they ought not to acknow∣ledge as a Christian; to wit, belonging to the communion of the Church. For, though I mean not to charge him with this Book, yet, so long as he owns all that he is charged with by Rutherford, the Scots Presbyterian; I do charge him with the Heresie of the Antinomians, which here I mention, because it seems reasonable to conceive this opinion to be a branch of it: wherein, how well he is reuted by his adversary, how clear his adversary is of the same blame, is to be judged by that which I have determined, concerning the condition of the Co∣vennt of Grace. For the Heresie of the Antinomians consisting in voiding the condition of the Covenant of Grace, it is free for them to make the justificati∣on of Christians to go before justifing faith, being nothing else, but the reve∣lation of Gods mercy which he hath form everlasting for the Elect, whom he, determining to save, sent Christ to redem them alone. It seems therefore very consequent in reason to this position, (if that operation of the Spirit, which they pretend, admit any dispute of reason about their positions) to say, that, the gift of the Holy Ghost being due to the Elect by virtue of Christs merits and sufferings, provided for them alone, and imputed to them alone from ever∣lasting, to the remission of sinnes; There can be no reason why Baptism should be requisite. Those that are not elect, not standing in any capacity, either of ad∣mitting the Gospel, or attaining the promises of it: those that are, being from everlasting estated in the right of them. Now, if that Presbyterian make justify∣ing faith to consist in the knowledgs of mans Predestination to life, in consi∣deration of Christ sent for him, revealed to him by Gods Spirit, but limited to take effect upon the said revelation of it; (as I have said that some of them do) then I referre my selfe to that which I have said already, to show this opi∣nion to be no lesse destructive to Christianity then the former, but not so agree∣able to it self, nor to reason, to make remission of sins and salvation, (appoint∣ed them meerly in consideration of Christ) to depend upon the revelation of Christ to them, altogether impertinent to any act required of them to procure it. But, if he make justifying faith to consist in a confidence in God, (such as men may have, that are assured of remission of sins, and of life everlasting, not supposing on their part any condition of turning from the world to God, as re∣quisite by the Gospel) I referre my selfe still, to that which I have said, to show how this is destructive to Christianity. But, why those that have these opinions, should neverthelesse maintain the necessity of Baptisme, whereof they have no reason to give according to the Scriptures, I confesse I am to learn. For if we believe Christianity to come from God, (and therefore all the Laws of it) how shall we believe, that, for one of these Laws, he hath provided, that all that will be saved be baptized, having given assurance of remission of sins, and salvation, without consideration of it, or dependance upon it? He that comes to be Bapti∣zed, either have saving faith, or not; if he have it, he hath it never the more for be∣ing baptized, being such an assurance, as no man may doubt in, without failing of all Gods promises; If he have it no, can baptism bring it? unlesse we say with the Church, that the promise of the Holy Ghost depends upon it: which he that saith, (if he will give a reason of what he saith) must have recourse to the condition of the undertaking and professing of Christianity, in consideration whereof, God hath promised the gift of the Holy Ghost, to inable Christians to perform that which they undertake. This is then to say, that, though I take notice of these Heresies in this place, where I purpose to speak of the power of the Church in baptizing, yet I hold not my selfe obliged to say any more, for the rooting of them out, or preventing them, then I have said, in demonstrating the nature of the Covenant of Grace.
For, I have showed on the one side, that the condition required on our parts to undertake, if we would be intitled to the promises which it tendreth, consisteth in an act of our free choice, whereby the course of our lives is dedicated to the service of God, as the end for which wee were made; and that this course is de∣termined by the Law of Christianity, and consequently, the act whereby we undertake to professe Christianity; (called faith by S. Paul) that which intitles us to remission of sins and everlasting life. And I have showed on the other side, that the nature of man, being corrupted by the fall of our first Parents, could not be repaired, but by the second coming of the second Adam; and those helps of grace, which by▪ his obedience in the flesh, he purchased▪ to inable us to im∣brace and undertake the condition proposed, and to proceed in the performance of it, to that which God accepteth. In fine, I have showed, that the Sacrament of Baptism is that visible act, which legally determineth and limiteth that pro∣fession of Christianity which intitleth to the Kingdom of God; as consigning the profession of a Christian unto the hands of the Church, by the means whereof Christianity is conveyed to us: Therefore having showed these things, I have no reason to think my selfe obliged to unty these Cobwebs thred by thred, which I can sweep away at once with this besome. Onely I will stand here so long, as to admire, whether the boldnesse or igno∣rance of these new dogmatists of new Religions be the greater; when I see the baptism of John counted among the Ceremonies of the old Law, for a founda∣tion of this new doctrine of Baptisms, never heard of by any Christian, till this blessed Reformation was on foot: which must be said, à fortiori, of that Bap∣tism by water, which our Lord Christ instituted, by them that esteem it not the same. Is it possible that any man, that believes Christianity to be the Religion now in force to salvation by Gods appointment, in opposition to Judaism, should imagine, that John the Baptist, (sent to declare our Lord to be the Christ that was sent of God to introduce it, to the voiding of Moses Law) should set on foot that Baptism, whereby he prepared his Disciples for Christ, or brought them to Christ, by virtue of that Law which he intended to void? Is it not es∣sentiall to all the observations of the old Law, that they be thought to be figu∣rative of Christ to come, at least supposing Christianity? Can that Baptism fi∣gure Christ to come, the intent whereof supposed him to be already come, pre∣tending to prepare his Disciples to receive him that was come? But, whether we say, the Baptism of Christ was the same with Johns Baptism, or another; to say, the Apostles of Christ, when they baptize, with water, intended to figure that the Messias was coming, from whom they had their commission to Baptize, would be no lesse then a spice of madnesse. I will also stay so long for Socinus, as to answer that suspition which he draws from the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. I. 13.-17. to his purpose; Is Christ divi∣ded? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the name of Paul? I thank God that I baptized none of you but Cripus and Gaius; that no man say, that I baptize in my on name; yet I baptized also the house of Stephans: further, whither I baptized any, I know not. For, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. If there were any thing in these words to intimate, that the precept of baptizing is not of peemptory and perpetuall necessity, then must they sig∣nifie more, then, that it was not necessary that it should be done by S. Pauls own hands, which is all they contain. For, he that would say, that which was not necessary to be done by S. Paul, was not necessary to be done; would de∣serve to be laught at for his pains. The question is then; was any of them whom S. Paul baptized not, left unbaptized, or not? If not; how is it inferred, that a man need not be baptized now, because then they were not baptized by S. Paul? If so, how comes Socinus to grant, that those who were first conver∣ted to Christianity, were to be baptized? And therefore, before Socinus, or any man go about to teach a new Religion, it were fit for him to learn from the custome and practice of the Church, that there is a difference between au∣thority in ordering, and ministery in executing; And, from the custome of the world, that, what a man does by his minister or officer, that he does himselfe
in Law, though another do it in point of nature. Which being supposed, a little reason will serve to inferre, that the Apostles, being principal in the com∣mission of the Gospell, were to be imployed in the principall part of it; that is, in reducing men to Christianity: And therefore, so farre as that required their attendance, inferiour offices, which depended upon their order, were to be left to the execution of their Ministers. But to both these Heresies, I say at once, in the last place, that they belie the very ground which they professe to be Christians. The reason why the motives of faith cannot be doubted for truth, is, because all that are Christians, have taken upon them their Christianity for a Law, and entred into a communion and body of the Church, to live and communicate in the faith and service of God▪ according to certain Laws, upon evidence that they come indeed from God. Therefore, that which all this body hath taken upon it, to observe for Law from the beginning, and constantly ob∣served till Socinus his, or the Antinomians time, that belonged to the matter of Christianity, as evidently, as it is evident, that the motives of Christianity recorded in the Scriptures are true; which are therefore evidently true, because it is evident, that they have moved the world to receive Christianity, which could not have been done, had they been false. For, if all Christians could be decei∣ved, to believe, that their Christianity requireth them to be Baptized, if they will be saved; why might they not be deceived to believe, that those things were truly one, which the Scripture alledgeth to evidence the Gospell to come from God, when as indeed they were not? Which is to say, that who so pre∣tends to void that which the whole Church observeth for a Law, must not think that he can do it, by showing that it is not commanded in the Scriptures; un∣til he can show, that it is come into the Church, not according to right, having been from the beginning otherwise. He must therefore first refuse all that I have said in the first Book, to demonstrate, that the Church alwaies was from the beginning one body, governed by certain Laws, originally proceeding from the Apostles; by whom power was left it, to determine and limite further all that the future estate thereof should require to be further determined, for the maintaining of unity in the communion of the Church. For, granting this, it will be impossible to show, how so great a body should agree to receive that for a Law, and that necessary to salvation, as Baptism hath alwayes been esteemed, which they received not for such at the beginning, from our Lord and his Apo∣stles. CHAP. VII. The ground of baptizing Infants Originall sinne, though not instituted till Christ rose again. No other cure for it. Infants of Christians may be Disciples, are ho∣ly. The effect of Circumcision under the Law, inferreth the effect of Baptism un∣der the Gospel. ANd these same are the reasons that I must have recourse to, now that I come to conclude against the Anabaptists. Our Lord saith to Nicode∣us, Joh. III. 3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, unlesse a man be born again hee cannot se the Kingdom of God. And what this new birth is, he setteth forth in answering that impertinent question, which Nicodemus, not understanding him makes; how a man should come out of his Mothers belly the second time▪ Veri∣ly, verily, I say unto thee; unlesse a man be born of water and of the spirit, he can∣not enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Here I will grant the Anabaptists, that the Sacrament of Baptism is not instituted by these words, but by the act of our Lord after his Resurrection, when he gives his Apostles their Commission; Go, make Disciples all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you, Mar. XXVIII. 18. But for reasons, which perhaps they will not thank me for, though they be not able to refute. As yet, when this discourse was held, it was
not declared, to all that took our Lord for a Prophet, that he was the Sonne of God. Nicodemus himselfe, that comes to him as a Prophet, saying, Master, we know thou art a Prophet come from God: For no man could do the works that thou dost, unlesse God were with him; If he go away instructed, that the same which obliges him to take our Lord Christ for a Prophet, concludes him to be the Christ the Son of God, he is beholden to the freedom of our Lord, in decla∣ring to him the pretense of his coming, by this discourse. But, for the pur∣pose of sending the Holy Ghost, it cannot be imagined, that it was declared from the beginning of our Lords preaching, who reveals not the intent of his death to his Apostles, till he grew towards the time of it; The priviledge of sending the Holy Ghost being part of that state, to which he was to be ex∣alted, rising from death. How then can it be imagined, that our Lord, should, from the beginning of his preaching, appoint all to be baptized in the Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, which is the Sacrament of Baptism that makes us Christians? Certainly, it is not the same thing for John to baptize in the name of him that should come, as for the Apostles in the Name of Father Son and Holy Ghost; Unlesse we think, that all the people of God, who expected a Messias, expected him to be the Son of God, which Christians worship our Lord Christ for, and they crucified him for pretending to be. There is there∣fore no cause why we should offer that violence to the Scripture, Acts XXX. 4. 5. John indeed baptized the baptism of repentance, saying to the people, that they were to believe in him that came after him, that is, in Christ Jesus. And hear∣ing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; which I showed you, is offered by those that would have it to signifie; That those who were baptized by Iohn Baptist, were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. For other an∣swers that are devised, to avoid to clear a Scripture, I count them not worth the refuting, so evidenly they force the express sense of the words. And among them, none more unreasonable, thn that which saith; that these men were not indeed baptized with the baptism of Iohn, though they thought they were: And that S. Paul, when he sayes; John indeed baptized with water, saying to the people, that they should believe in him that was to come, even in Christ Iesus; ar∣gues and perswades them, that they were not, indeed, baptized with the Bap∣tism of Iohn, though they thought they were. For, of all things in the world, could men be deceived, to think, that they professed that which the Baptism of Iohn must oblige them to professe, and did not? Nor can it be said with any ap∣pearance of truth, that Iohn baptizing unto repentance, those whom he sends for the means of salvation, for the future, to him that was to come, did bap∣tize in the Name of the Lord Jesus; in as much as it is necessary to be said, that the Apostles, when they baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts, II. 38. VIII. 16. X. 48. did sufficiently intimate the name of the Fa∣ther, whose Son they preached our Lord to be, and also of the Holy Ghost, whom our Lord had promised to those that are baptized; as Irenaeus, so long since, hath exquisitely cleared the difficulty, how they observed their Commis∣sion of baptizing in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost; Baptizing, as S. Luke reports, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. But of Iohn the Baptist, it is said, Ioh. I. 29-34. That, the morrow after he baptized our Lord, he declared him to be the man that was to come after him, in whose name he had baptized; that he knew him not, but came to declare him; and that by the coming down of the Dove upon him, it was revealed to him, that he should know our Lord to be the man that came to Baptize with the Holy Ghost. Whereby it ap∣peareth, that he cannot be thought to have baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, as that importeth, as much as baptizing in the Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost. For, though it is evident, that Iohn knew our Lord when he came to be baptized, that he knew him to be in the world, from the time that he began to preach, and, that he should baptize with the Holy Ghost; Yet, not knowing the man from the time that he began to baptize; how could he bap∣tize in his name, and, as the Son of God, that was to give the Holy Ghost, be∣fore our Lord himselfe had preached and declared, upon what terms it was to
come? I suppose it is easie enough to distinguish, between baptizing in the name of Christ, and baptizing with an intent, of sending them whom he baptized to Christ, to be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Neither is this to say, that Iohns Baptism availed not to remission of sinnes, for the time that it was on foot by Gods appointment; when as we acknowledge that dispensation of Grace which was intimated and conveyed by the Law, to have been the means to bring some to the righteousnesse of faith; How much more the twilight of the Gospel un∣der John the Baptist? But that, before the Covenant of Grace was published by the preaching of our Lord, and inacted on Gods part, by his death upon the Crosse, (or rather by raising him from death) it was not time to determine that act, by which God intended, that profession which he requires for the conditi∣on of it, should be solemnized and celebrated. Therefore, there came water and blood out of our Lords side upon the Cross, to intimate the ground up∣on which this Sacrament should be in force for the future. And, if this be the condition, upon which the Holy Ghost, which Christ promiseth upon his ascen∣sion, is granted, as I have showed, then can it not be thought to have been in force from any other date, then that of the promise. This is the reason, why I am to expect no thanks from the Anabaptists, for granting, that the Sacra∣ment of Baptism was not in force when these words were said. For, the regene∣ration here required in them, that shall come to the Kingdom of heaven, be∣ing expressed here to be that which the Holy Ghost worketh; and the sending of the Holy Ghost depending upon the profession of Christianity solemnly made by Baptism, from the time that Christianity came in force; Whatsoever Nicodemus understood by being born again of water and the Holy Ghost, af∣ter the institution, they cannot be understood to take effect without it. There were then divers customes of baptizing in force among the Jews, by virtue of the Law. There was a custome to admit Proselytes into the Synagogues, by circumcision, by a sacrifice, and by baptism. And they that look upon this cu∣stome with judgement, cannot doubt, that our Saviour, intending to prescribe a course for the bringing of true Proselytes, which are Christians, into the true Israel of God, which is the Church, made choice of the ceremony of Baptism, because of the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel. In fine, John had taken it up for the fittest expression of that repentance and conversion from those evill wayes, which he charged those that bore themselves high upon the priviledge of Gods people with, which those whom he baptized were to professe. This was enough to make Nicodemus understand by these words, the declaration of a purpose to institute some such Ceremony, as those which he knew to be in use: But when he addeth the Holy Ghost, as a promise annexed to it, he sends us Johns Gospel, to learn further what this promise requires: And therefore, I must resume here that which I observed afore, that our Lord, in∣tending to institute the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for the eating of his body and blood mystically, as in a Sacrament, prepared his Disciples for it, by dis∣coursing to them of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, by considering his doctrine, and turning it to the nourishment of their souls, by taking up his Cross and professing Christianity, Joh. VI. For one egge is not liker another, then, the course he takes here, to intimate what he intended to ordain for the quali∣fying of his Disciples, to be capable of the Holy Ghost, (whereby he declareth a promise) is, to his proceeding in bringing in the other Sacrament. If then our Anabaptists can show us a new Gospel, to assure us of the gift of the Holy Ghost without Baptism, then may they take upon them, to assure us of the King∣dom of Heaven without it. But, if the Kingdom of Heaven depend upon the new birth of the Holy Ghost, and there be no possible means to assure any man of this new birth, without the Sacrament of Baptism; either Infants must be baptized before they go out of the world, or go out of the world without that assurance. Here, I professe, it is all one to me, as to this dispute, whether those whom I dispute with, believe Original sinne or not. For if they believe it not, I remit them to that which I have said, in the second Book, to maintain it. If they be∣lieve
it, I remit them to all that I have said there, to show, that it is not cured by Predestination alone, but by that condition which the Covenant of Grace requireth. To this condition he that is predestinate, is cured of it by his predesti∣nation, which appointeth him the cure. But, not being predestinate to the cure, cannot be presumed to be predestinate to the Kingdom, which supposeth the cure. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, that which is born of the spirit is spirit, saith our Lord. How shall that which is born flesh, be born again spirit? did our Lord promise it any man, that should not first professe Christianity, and be baptized? He that stands upon that, let him dispute with that which I have said in the second Book; let him show me how the Gospel, how Christianity can stand, if the promises of it be assigned to Gods Grace and purpose immedi∣ately, without supposing any condition qualifying for th same. It is plain what will be said; Infants are not capable of making this profession, of know∣ing what it means, of judging that it ought to be made. Therefore not capable of Baptism, or the promises depending upon it, if, in that consideration, they depend upon it. And truly, set aside that consideration, and I do not mar∣vail that man cannot believe, God should make the spirituall and everlasting promises of his Gospel to depend upon a little water, and so many words as it is used with. Besides that, S. Peter, finding it inconvenient to attribute such effects, to laying down the filth of the flesh, establisheth instead of it, the pro∣fession of a good conscience to God, as that to which he would have them ascribed. They then that believe, that God provided and procured the fall of Adam; or, foreseeing the means by which it would come to pass, permitted it no purpose, that, all his posterity being liable to Originall sinne, he might chuse whom he would save, and whom he would damn for it, without respect of any compli∣ance with those terms of salvation which he should hold forth; do not stand to their own opinion, if they referre not the salvation of Infants, to the meer ap∣pointment of God, without respect to any thing that the Church may do in it. But, they that will not part with their Christianity, for so gross a presumption as that is, will take heed how they become murtherers of the Childrens souls first, denying them that help to Gods Kingdom which is in their power to give, and that of their own, by breaking the unity of the Church, rather then do that which the Church alwaies did do. Indeed, if there were any thing in the precept of Baptism to signifie, that it is not to be given them who do not actually make profession of Christianity, reason would that it should be obeyed; referring our selves to God, for the is∣sue of those inconveniences which his commands breed, though never so visible. But what saith the Apostles commission? Go make Disciples all Nations, bap∣tizing them in the Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost; teaching them to ob∣serve whatsoever I have commanded you. For I do except against the translati∣on of it; Go teach all Nations; Beeing in the Greek, , and in the Syriack, TALMED, which can signifie nothing but make Disciples. Now, those that were first called Christians at Antioch, Acts XI. 26. were called Disciples afore, and afterwards also, almost throughout the Scripture, which useth the name of Christians but seldome. And is there not reason to take them for Dis∣ciples, who, being ingaged to Christianity, by being baptized Infants, stand ob∣liged to inform themselves in it, when they come to age? Indeed, all that hath been said of the Covenant of Grace, and the terms of it witnesseth, that they are first to be proposed to them that understand, then choice is to be made, bap∣tism following, to solemnize the profession of that choice: But this text is so farre from signifying, that Infants should not be baptized till all this is done, that it rather serves to intimate an exception to the generality of the propoi∣tion, in behalf of them; seeing those who shall be taught the obligation they have to be Christians, whither they will or not, are very regularly and legally called Disciples, and therefore comprehended in the precept of making Di∣sciples. This intimation appears clearer in the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. VII. 14. where he perswadeth Christians, that were married to Infidels, not to forsake them, in these words; For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the wife: And the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the Husband; else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy. For the meaning whereof, I will have recourse to the Book of Wisdome, III. 11-19. where, describing the miseries of the Idolatrous hea∣then, under the title of those that neglect wisdome, among other things, he saith; Their waies are foolish, their hearts wicked, and their generation accursed. For, saith he; Blessed is the barren that is clea, and hath not known the bed of sin: And again, The fruits of good labours, (that is, of those that labour in the Law) are glorious, and the rot of wisdome never fadeth. But the sonnes of Adulterers shall decay: And the generation that is born of evill bed, shall be destroyed. For, the exesses of the Gentiles that knew not God, in the usts of carnal unclean∣nsse, were so great, that it alwaies was to be presumed, that children so bred, could have no means of insruction to preserve them from the same. And the difference between the people of God, and Idolatrous Nations, was visible evn in this point, from the first separation of them, upon that account; as ap∣peareth by the zeal of Simeon and Levi for their Sister so dishonoured; Should they deal with our sster as an harlot? say they, Gen. XXXIV. 31. Which zeal Judith IX. 3. understandeth to have proceeded upon this reason; That they, being abandoned to the service of strange Gods, had done that unclenesse which God had forbidden, and which his servants abhored, as the pollution of their blood. For there is no man that knows what belonged to Heathenism, that can doubt, that all uncleannesse of this nature, was alwaies reckoned among them for a thing indifferent, and no account had of it but in civill regards, as it dishonoured the house, o tainted the issue. But the people of God, being bred to the knowledge of the true God, and the abomination in which he hath it, stood upon it chiesty in that regard, because, should they do as Idolaters, they could not be taken for Gods people. Wherefore, when S. Paul adviseth them that were maried to Infidels, not to part from them, in case they were content to continue with them, ; this content is to be under∣stood to be such, as might stand with Christianity; that is, that the Christian party should have interest to teach the issue Christianity, and to guide them ac∣cording to the Law. For, by this interest, they are, in S. Pauls esteem, legal∣ly holy, as to the Church, because of a legal presumption of their Christianity, by the meanes of their education under that Parent that was Christian; and, by the consent of that party which was not Christian, had all freedom, to propose un∣to their Posterity the obligation of▪ Christianity. If this be the case of those that are born of one side Christian; what shall we say of them that are born of Chri∣stian Parents? For, being sure (as humane things can be sure) that they shall come to the knowledge of Christ, and then be under the obligation of Chri∣stianity; they are already, as to God, and to all Christians, (not to them that do not believe Christianity) under the obligation of living and of behaving themselves as Christians. But we are not therefore to imagine, that the guilt of originall sinne ceaseth in them, any more then in those that are not Chri∣stians, or that this guilt can be taken away otherwise then by Christianity. And hath an Infant any thing but Baptism to intitle it to Christianity? And shall they not cry out to God upon those Parents, that suffer them to go out of this world not Christians? Surely, if we look upon the provision of the Law with a single eye, (that is, alwaies observing the difference formerly setled between the Law and the Go∣spell) we shall have great cause to conclude; The Law, that is, the Covenant made with Abraham, having intitled his posterity to the Land of promise, pro∣videth, that every male childe of his, that shall not be circumcised the eighth day, shall be cut off from his people, Gen. XVII. 14. that is to say; The life thereof shall be forfeit in Gods hands, not to give him any share in the right of that people, who, by being circumcised became Gods people. So, you have here the condition of Circumcision, requisite to intitle even those that are born of Abraham, to the promise made to him and his seed. The consequence hereof is that which the correspondence, between the Law and the Gospel, be∣tween the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of▪ Grace, inferres. If, by
entring into the Covenant made with Abraham and with his seed, they become heirs of the land of promise, then, by entring into the covenant made with Christ and Abrahams, that is Christs spiritual seed, we become heirs of the world to come. If by circumcision they entred into the Covenant made with Abraham, and with his seed; then, by Baptism we enter into the Covenant made with Christ, and with Abrahams spiritual seed. If, by the neglect of Circucision, the temporall life of Abrahams seed were forfeit, by the terms of this Covenant, in Gods hands, then, by the neglect of Baptism, is the spiritual life of those that are born of Christs spirtuall seed, forfeit in Gods hands. For, if the Land of promise, and the inheritance thereof, estated upon Abraham and his seed, according to the flesh, required neverthelesse the execution of that condition, by which they were admitted into the Covenant; How much more, shall the inheritance of the world to come, promised to the children of Christians, as the parties agree, require the execution of that condition, by which the Covenant of Grace is in∣acted? Indeed, if the Covenant of Grace were inacted between God and man, by the publishing of the Gospel, as most men seem to imagine, there were some colour for such a consequence. But, if the Covenant of Abraham was to be inacted upon the flesh of them that were Circumcized, even after that the whole people of Israel had entred into Covenant for themselves and their po∣sterity; and that, till this were done, no child was intitled to the benefit of it: How can it be imagined, that the Covenant of Grace, which is (as all Cove∣nants necessarily are) the act of two parties, should be inacted by the act of God alone, in publishing the Gospel? Indeed▪ by that Declaration, God, of his infinite goodnesse, hath obliged himselfe before, to stand to all the pro∣mises of the Gospel, with any man, that shall professe and stand to his Christi∣anity. But, till his profssion be made, as Gods Law hath appointed; that is, by Baptism, the Covenant is not inacted. And therefore, I allow, that which S. Paul saith, Rom. IV. 2. That Abraham received the sign of Cirumcision, for a seal of righteousnesse of that faith which he had being uncircumcized: But I do not allow, that his circumcision was a bare sign of that right, which he and his posterity had to the promise, without it and before it, speaking of the time, af∣ter it was once inacted for a Law of that Covenant; For, afore indeed, that it was so requied, his faith intitled him to the same promise without it. For, if the Law require, that writings be drawn, and sealed; though these writings, of themselves, are meer evidences, and signs to record the consent of the parties, by which every contract subsists; yet in as much as the Law requires▪ them, the consent of parties avails not to bring the contract Io effect without them. Even so, if the Law of God appoint the first Covenant to be signed by Circumcision, the second by Baptism; though it may be said to be in force, conditionally, to∣wards them that have not yet signed it upon themselves; yet are they not abso∣lutely within it till that be done. If the Roman Emperours Law require, that their Souldiers, when they were listed and imprested, should also be marked wih the mark of a hot Iron, recording upon their flesh, that from thenceforth they were Souldiers; it is reasonable to think, that thenceforth, and not a∣fore, they were intitled to the priviledges of Souldiers, and liable to the pe∣nalties of leaving their colours. This is that character of Baptism which S. Au∣stin hath so much of; and S. Chrysostome compares Circumcision to the same, which therefore, not onely signifies, but brings with it the burthens and privi∣ledges of Abrahams seed, or Christs of-spring. If therefore circumcision, bringing with it the obligation of living according to the faith which Abraham had be∣ing uncircumcised; and, when the Law was afterwards given, of living accord∣ing to the Law; do also bring with it a title to the promise made to Abraham and his seed; Is it strange, that Baptism, visibly and necessarily bringing with it the obligation of Christianity, upon them who are dedicated to God by the Church, in giving that Sacrament, should be intitled thereby to the regenerati∣on of Gods spirit, the earnest of our future inheritance? In the children of the Israelites, as there was nothing to intitle them to the promise made to Abra∣hams seed, setting aside Circumcision, and the Covenant that required it; so
was there nothing to hinder them, or render them incapable of a temporall proise. In the children of Christians, either we believe originall sinne to be no bar to Gods Kingdom, and fall into the Heresie of Pelagius; Or, that the New Covenant, which is an act of two parties, is inacted by the appointment of one, in regard of the Elect, who never knew of it; but signifies nothing in regard of those that are not elect, though never so much convict of it, and yet have force to damn them, whom onely Gods appointment could make it con∣cern. But, if these extreams be equally destructive to Christianity, it behoveth us to ibrce that which the correspondence between the old and new Cove∣nant necessrily inferreth, upon that proportion, which must be the same be∣tween Circumcision and Bptism, and the promises to which they intitle us. Neither is this Argument to be avoided, but by avoiding the ground of all my∣sticall sense in the Scripture, which is, indeed, the avoiding of all Christianity, by acknowledging, that there is no ground for i in the Scriptures of the old Testament, which all acknowledge. For, if the children of Christians are no lesse niled to the promises of the New Testament, then the Children of A∣braam under the Law, were to the Lnd of promise; granting originll sinne to be a barre to the effect of them, neither is it removed, but by bringing them under the Covenant of Grace; nor are they brought under it, but by the act of the Church baptizing them, and so obliging them to it. And here comes in the saying of S. Paul. exhorting them that were pricked in heart with the remore of our Lords death, Acts II. 38. 39. Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, unto remission of sinnes, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: For to you is the promise made, and to your children, and to all that are farre of, whom the Lord our God shall call to you. Indeed, it seemeth that, when the Apostle saith, the promise is made to their children, he meant to prevent a mistake, that the promise which he speaks of, concens not onely the present generation, but all succeeding ages of Gods people. For, when he addeth, all those whom God shall call to you; it seemeth that he intends not, for the present, to deterine, whether those that wre to be called to the same promises, were to be ingrfed into the Com∣mon-wealth of Israel by circumcision, or not. But, all this being admitted, see∣ing no age can succeed, wherof Infants are not one part; and, seeing that the Aposle declres, the promises of the Gospel by Christ to belong to them, no otherwise then they understood the promises of the Law to do; of necessity it must follow, that, upon correspondent ters, they obtain interest in corres∣pondent promises: Which correspondence, wherein it consists, hath been oft enough said. And this Argument is much inforced by the act of our Saviour, commanding litle children, of the state of Infants, to be brought to him, re∣proving them that would not have him troubled with them, lying hands on them, and blessing them, Mat. XIX. 15. Mark X. 15. 16. Luke XVIII 16. 17. for, by this means, it is effectually declared past all contradiction, that the bs∣sing which Christ came to give belonged to Infants; For, though this were all done upon another occasion; to wit, That our Lord had made them the pattern of that humility, which he preacheth to Christians; yet, the very doing of it is evidence enough, that he meant not to leave that estate uprovided of his blessing. What his blessing is the Apostle expresseth, Act. III. 26. To you first, God, having raised up his Son Jesus, hath sent him to blesse you, by turning every man from his sinnes. If therefore, that which barreth Infants of this blessing, be nothing but Originall sinne; and that, neither Gods appointment alone, nor the publishing of his Gospel, nor the faith of their Predecessors, can make any ap∣pearance of freeing them from it; what madness will it be, not to expect it from, not to impute it to that condition, which succeedeth the condition, by which the children of Gods ancient people stood intitled to the Land of promise?
CHAP. VIII. What is alleadged to impeach Tradition for baptizing Infants; Proves not, that any could be saved regularly, who dyed unbaptized; but, that, baptizing at yeares was a strong means to make good Christians. Why the Church now Baptize, In∣fants. What becomes of Infants dying unbaptized, unanswerable. What those In∣fants gt who dye baptized. ANd thus, from the Scriptures alone, I have proved, that Infants are capable of Baptism, and that the Church is bound to provide them of it; unlesse we will say, that the Church is not bound to provide them of that means of sal∣vation which the Church alone dispenseth. And, upon these terms, I conceive, I may safely acknowledge, that there is no Precept for baptizing of the In∣fants of Christians written in the Scripture; presuming that it is written in the Scripture, that Infants are to be provided of the necessary means of salvation by the Church. For, though it be not necessary, that all Infants be baptized, be∣cause they are Infants, yet will it be necessary that they be baptized before they go out of the world; And therefore, while they are Infants, rather then they should go out of the world unbaptized. But, the practice of the whole Church and that from the beginning, challenges the effect of S. Augustines rule; that, what is received of the whole Church, and not by any expresse act of the Church, from which the beginning of it may be demonstrable, must of neces∣sity be imputed to the Tradition of the Apostles. For, the judgements of men being so diverse as they are, how can it be imagined, that so great a body, and so farre dispersed, as the Church, should agree to impose such a brthen upon themselves, had they not understood the obligation of it, by the means of them from whom they received their Christianity? The testimonies of Tertullian de Bapt. cap. XVIII. of S. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. XL. in sanctum baptisma, and of Walafridus Strabus de Reb. Eccles. cap. XXVI. that dehot fro bap∣tizing Infants, or declare that the Church, in the first ages, did not baptize du∣ring infancy, are so farre from making any exception to this evidence, that they contain sufficient evidence for the same truth; if we be so considerate as to un∣derstand, this Tradition not to require, that all be baptized during infancy; but that no Infant go out of the world unbaptized. For, he that will imploy a litle common sense may see, that there may be reasons, to make men think it better, that Baptism be ministred to those that can understand what it imports, & what they undertake, provided that they go not out of the world unbaptized; but, that there be an effectual course taken, for the baptizing of them in danger of death. For, that it is not my sense, but the sense of the Churh, that makes the Baptis of Infants necessary, not because Infants, but, least they dye unbap∣tizd; I appeal to S. Austine, Enchirid. cap. XLIII. A parvulo enim recens nato us{que} ad decrepitum fenem, sicut nullus prohibendus est à baptism, ita nullus est qui non peccato oriatur in baptism: Sed paruli tantum Orginali—For, from the li∣tle one new born, to the decrept old man, as none is to be hindred of Baptism, so is there none that does not dye to sin in Baptism: But little ones onely to Original—He aith not, that, from young to old, all are to be Baptized, but none is to be re∣fused Baptism, supposing the necessity of his case, and the rule of the Church, to require it. The same is to be said of the Canon of Neo-caesarea, that allows the baptism of a woman with childe, because it exnds not to the baptizing of the Infant in her wombe, before confession of faith; And, of the custo of the Greeks to this day, testified by Balfanum and Renaras upon that Canon. For, what need more words? I acknowledge, that Vives upon S. Austin, de Civit. dei l. 27. gives very great reasons, why it were better, that the Baptism of In∣fants were differred till they come to the discretion of understnding to what they ingage themselves. But, shall I therefore believe, that Vives was an Ana∣baptist? that he did not believe Original sinne? that he acknowledged any cure for it without Baptism? that he thought it not necessary to salvation, that all
should be Baptized before death? A ridiculous thing once to imagine. Thus much for certain, so sure and evident as it is, that, when he writ this, the custome of the Church was to baptize Infants; so certain it is, that, when all that I have alledged was written and done, that men should not be baptized in infancy, there was a constant custome and practice in force in the Church, whereby care was taken, that no Infant should dye unbaptized. And though they expresse reasons, for which they had rather Christians should be baptized at years; yet never any Christian expressed any opinion, or any reason, why Infants should not be baptized, rather then dye unbaptized. Never was there any opinion heard of, and allowed in the Church, that Gods Predestination adore, with∣out Baptism, or any thing else beside it, can be taken for a cure of Original sin. Irenaeus is one of the next to the Apostles that we have: He, when he saith, II. 39. Christus venit per seipsum omnes salvare, omnes, inquam, qui per eum re∣nscuntur in deum, infantes & parvulos, & parvos, & juvenes, & seniores. Christ came to save, by himself, all who by him are born anew unto God; Infants and li∣tle ones, and children, and young men, and old ones. If any man think fit to questi∣on, whether, in his language, renati in deum, can be understood without Bap∣tism, when he speaks of Infants, must suppose, that one that is not an Infant, may bee regenerate without it. Such a one must know, that though he dare understand that which S. Paul never said, when he calls Baptism, the laver of regeneration, Titus III. 5. yet Irenaeus, with the whole Church of God, never un∣derstood any regeneration without it. Thus much for certain, as to these words of Irenaeus, if he understand the regeneration of men to be by Baptism, he cannot understand the regeneration of Infants to come otherwise. S. Cyprian, whatso∣ever his reasons be, when he contendeth for the baptizing of all Infants, as he evidences the practice of the Church, so he maintaines the same grounds, upon which I have shewed, that it did proceed. Tertullian de Animâ cap. XXXIX. S. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. XLII. abundantly prove mine intent. The words of Tertullian: Huic enim & Apostolus, ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis praerogativâ, quàm ex institutionis discipli∣nâ. Caeterùm, inquit, immundi nascerentur; quasi designatos tamen sanctitati, ac per hoc etiam saluti, intelligi volens fidelium filios: Ut hujus spei pignore matrimo∣niis, quae retinenda censuerat, patrocinaretur. Alioquin memin erat dominicae definitionis; Nisi quis nascetur ex aquâ & spiritu, non ibit in regum dei; id est, o erit sanctus. Ita omnis anima eo us{que} in Adam censetur, donec in Christo recen∣seaur. For hereupon, the Apostle also saith, that men are born holy of either sex sanctified, as by prerogative of seed, so by breeding and discipline. Otherwise, saith he, they should be born unclean; giving to understand, that the children of Christians are, as it were, designed to holinesse, and thereby to salvation, that he might patro∣nize those mariages, which he thought fit to be maintained, by the pledge of this hope. Otherwise, he remembred the determination of our Lord; Unlesse a man be born of water and the spirit, he shall not go into Gods Kingdom; That is, he shall not be holy. So, every soul is so long listed in Adam, till it be listed again in Christ. Which, you see, is not done but by Baptism, according to Tertullian. There∣fore, in the end of the next Chapter; Proinde, cùm ad fidem pervenit, reformata per secundam nativitatem ex aquà & supernâ virtute, detracto corruptionis pristinae aulaeo, totam lucem suam conspicit. Therefore, when it comes to the faith, being re∣formed by a second birth of water and the power above, and the curtain of former corruptions drawn, she sees her whole light. And de Bapt. cap. XVII. shewing in what case a Lay-man might baptize; Sufficiat scilicet, in necessitatibus uta∣ris, sicubi, aut loci, aut temporis, aut personae conditio compellit. Tunc enim constan∣tia succurrentis excipitur, cùm urget circumstantia periclitantis. Let it suffice thee to use it (the right of baptizing) in cases of necessity, if at any time the con∣dition of place, or time, or person constrain. For, then is the resolution of him that helpeth accepted, when the case of him that runneth bazard presseth. There is no such thing as any case of such necessity, in the opinion of our Anabaptists: therefore it is not Tertullians. He shows, that the Church alloweth a Lay-man to baptize, because it believed, that the children of Christians could not enter
into the Kingdom of God otherwise. The words of Gregory Nazianzene; . Be all this, saith he (that delays Baptism) in those that demand Baptism. But what would you say of Infants, that are neither sensible of the losse, nor of the Grace? Shall we baptize also these? By all means, if any danger should pres. For it is better they should be sanctified insensible, then depart unsealed and not persued. And of this, cir∣cumcision, that is applied on the eighth day, to those who cannot reason, is a reason to us. The daubing of the door-posts also, preserving the first born by things un∣sensible. For the rest, I give mine opinion, staying three years, or something over or under that, (at which age they may hear and answer something of Religion, though not perfitly, but grosly understanding it) then to sanctifie their souls and bo∣dies with the great Sacrament that perfecteth us. By and by, . And it is in all reason, of more advantage, to be fortified by the Laver, for the suddain accidents of danger that incounter us, not be∣ing capable of helpe. He proceeds disputing against those that would not be bap∣tized aore thirty, because of our Lords example. All this is so plain, that I will adde nothing to point out the effect and consequence of his words. Nor doth the VI Canon of Neo-caesarea signifie any more then this; providing, that women be baptized while they are with childe: And that it be not thought that the baptism of the Mother concerns the child; ; Because every ones proper purpose, upon profession is declared. Nor, Walafridus Strabus de Rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. XXVI. saying plainly, that, in the primititive times, the Grace of Baptism was wont to be gran∣ted onely to them that were found in body and mind, to understand what they expected, and what they undertook, by being baptized. For, though the so∣lemn profession of Baptism be a powerfull means to make it effectuall; yet, what is that to the necessity of baptizing before death? And, that the custome here testified was not generall; the Infant that received the Eucharist in S. Cy∣prian de Lapsis, besides the opinion of Nazianzene which you had even now will witnesse. Neither do the examples of S. Chrysostome, who, being bred un∣der Meletius, Bishop of Antiochia, was not Baptized till one and twenty; or of the same Nazianzene; who, having a Bishop to his Father, was not baptized till he came to mans age; prove any more, than the then custome of the Church allows; that it was, by particular men, thought fit to be deferred, sup∣posing that in case of necessity it were secured. But a great many witnesses speak not so much, as the Law, the rule, the custome of giving Baptism by any man that was a Christian, in that case of necessity. For, out of that case of ne∣cessity, the office of baptizing belonged to the very highest in the Church, to wit, to as might stand with the more weighty imployments of their office. For otherwise, a little common sense would serve to inform them, that those of∣fices, which required more of their personal knowledge, skill, wisdome and goodnesse, were to be preferred before the office of Baptizing, which, though it concerns salvation, yet requires no such qualities. Can any man then imagine any reason, why all Christians are licensed, or rather commanded to baptize, in that case, but the necessity of the office; and, that no Infant should go out of the world unbaptized? And this chokes all the exception that is made, from the custome of giving Infants the Eucharist in the ancient Church. For, as I have shewed before, that it was not held necessary to salvation, as Baptism was; so here I must alledge, that it cannot be said, that the Eucharist was celebrated; and, that all Christians might celebrate the Eucharist, in this case of necessity, to the intent that Infants might not go out of the world, either unbaptized or without the Eucharist.
As for Origen upon the Romans, and S. Austin de Gen. X. 43, who affirmed the Baptism of Infants to come from the Tradition of the Apostles; suppose we for the present, that it is not Origen that speaks them, but Ruffinus that tran∣slated him, and that this is said, IVC years after the birth of Christ, CCC. and more, after the death of the Apostles; was it not visible to them what came from the Apostles, what from the determination or practice of the Church? For, that it should come from abuse, he that would tell me, must first per∣swade me that Antichrist was in being, and ruled the whole Church, and might as easily make his corruptions generall, as Christ Christianity. But, if it were meerly their saying, to make it a Tradition of the Apostles; what shall we say of Pelagius? For, they must pardon me, who think, that the hatred of his Heresie brought the baptism of Infants into force. More generall it might de∣servedly make it. For, by the condemning of his Heresie, the danger of In∣fants going out of the world was coneed. But it was the Baptism of Infants, being in force afore, that made his opinion an Heresie, as making the necessity of Baptism visible, as supposed by all Christians, and therefore the truth of Original sin. Pelagius was not so very a fool as they imagine; If all the know∣ledge that a man of his time could get, by seeing all parts of the Church, would have served for an exception, to the authority of the baptism of Infants, he might have wrangled with his adverse party, about the exposition of those Scriptures which are alleadged in the point, till this day, and his opinion have found footing in the Church. But, because he could not sop mens eyes, so as not to see what they saw; we may, for wantonnesse, betray the cause of God, by letting the interpretation of the Scriptures loose to every mans fancy, which God had appointed to be confined within the Tradition of his Apostles, but they could not chuse but condemn that position, which the visible practice of the Church proclaimed to be Heresie. Thus farre then, I proceed upon the Tradition of the Apostles, to make the Baptism of Infants necessary, in case of necessity, that is of danger of death. But I, that condemn not the ancients, for disputing, that it ought not to be gene∣rall, nor the Greek Church, for reserving it till years of discretion, supposing the means of it reasonably secured in that case; am not like to attribute the ne∣cessity of baptizing all Infants, which the present Laws of the Church do intro∣duce, to the tradition of the Apostles; but to the original power of the Church, founded upon the constitution thereof, in determining the circumstances of those offices, which being incumbent upon the Church, are not determined by any law of either of his Apostles. For, though I take not upon me to say, that, there can no reason be given, why this particular should not now be so deter∣mined as we see it is; who do acknowledge great reasons to have been alleadg∣ed by the ancients to the contrary, for their time; yet, I see so many ways for the misunderstanding, and the neglect of Christianity to creep upon the Church, that I cannot see sufficient reason, why the Church should trust the conscience of particular Christians, whom it concerned to see to the baptism of all Infants that might come into that case, now that the world was come into the Church; and that therefore, the Church could not have the like presumption, of the con∣science of all that professed Christianity, in the discharge of an office of that concernment, to that which it might reasonably have, while it was under per∣secution, and men could not be thought to imbrace Christianity, but for con∣science sake. And therefore, as I do maintain it alwaies to have been within the lawfull power of the Church, to make a generall Law, as now it is; so I must averre, that there was just reason, and ground, for the exercise of that power, in determining this point, whither as in the East, with some toleration of those whom they had confidence in, for seeing to the baptizing of their Infants in danger of death; or generally, as in the West, to see the occasion of mischiefe and scandall prevented, by doing it presently after birth. And therefore those that forsake the unity of the Church, ather then be subject to a Law, which it may lawfully make, as I have showed, if that which hath been resolved of the difference between Heresie and Schism be true, cannot avoid being schisma∣ticks.
As for the ground of that opinion, which moves them to break up the seal of God, marked upon those that are baptized unto the hope of salvation, upon the obligation of Christianity, by baptizing them anew, to the hope of salvation, without the obligation of Christianity; whether they are to be coun∣ted Hereticks therefore or not, let who will dispute. This I may justly inferre; they take as sure a course to murther the souls of those whom they baptize a∣gain, as of those whom they let go out of the world unbaptized. There remains two questions, which seem to make this resolution hard to believe. If there be no salvation without Baptism, no not for the Infants of Christians; it is demanded, what becomes of their souls, and whither they go. I must needs allow, that those ancient and later Divines, alledged by Cassander, and our Hooker after him, had reason to entertain a charitable hope of the hap∣pinesse of those, who, being prevented (by the inevitable casualties of mans life) of attaining the Sacrament of Baptism, are accompanied out of the world by the prayers of Christian Parents, commending them to God, with the same affections, wherewith they alwaies vowed them to God, by bringing them to Christianity, so soon as they should become capable to be instructed in it. But, if I will stand to the bounds of Gods revealed will, I must also say, that this hope is presumed without book; that is, without any Law of God, to warrant the effect of it. For, if God promise the Kingdom of heaven to In∣fants that depart after Baptism, (as the reasons premised, and the practice of the Church make evidence) nothing hindreth the mercy of God to extend to those that depart without it, where nothing hindreth the power of his grace to regenerate, without the Sacrament, those, whom he hath not expressed that he will not regenerate. But, this shall not proceed from any obligation of his Co∣venant of Grace, nor tend to make good the evidence thereof, which the pra∣ctice of the Church createth: And therefore shall make onely a presumption of what may be, and not of what is. I find that Arminius had further a doubt∣ful conceit, that all Infants, departing without Baptism, are to be saved, by the virtue of Gods second Covenant, and the death of Christ upon which it is grounded; God having extended both as farre as sinne by the first Adam ex∣tendeth. But, the publication of the second Covenant, and the intent of Christs death upon which it is grounded, being conditional, as hath been show∣ed; I suppose, it is not enough to intitle Infants to the benefit thereof, that they never did any thing to refuse it. Otherwise, what cause is there, why all the Gentiles, that go out of the world without hearing of Christianity, should not be saved by virtue of it, notwithstanding all that they sinne against the Law of nature? Because the New Covenant is to take effect, where it is not refu∣ted; and, sinnes against the Law of nature cannot be constrained, as a refusall of the Covenant of Grace. And, supposing that, excluding themselves from Gods mercy, by sinning against the law of nature, as I said in the second Book, they are thereby necessarily excluded from all benefit of the second Cove∣nant; It is not because they were born under the benefit of it, (intitled there∣unto by the same birth which makes them need it) but because, as by their birth they need it, so by their birth (supposing the coming of our Lord Christ) they are onely capable of it. Therefore it remains firme, that, though God, by Christs death, stand obliged to receive those that turn to Christianity; yet the Covenant is not inacted, till the party become obliged to it. And so it remains, that I answer negatively; that, whosoever hope charity, may be allowed, there is no legall assurance or presumption of salvation, for Infants that depart afore Baptism. If this will not serve, unlesse I affirm where they are, and in what e∣state, I will affirm that I know not; but I will affirm further, that it is an ef∣fect of the tree of knowledge, to demand a further answer, being well resolved that God hath given none. They that will not believe the Mystery of the Tri∣nity, till I demonstrate to them, how three persons can subsist in one nature, one in two natures, must be Arians or Socinians, for any thing that I have here said. They that will not believe the Covenant of Grace, till they have a reason, why God hath taken such a course, as will not save those whom he might have
taken a course to save, must for me be Pelagians, or Stoicall Predestinations. They that will not submit to the Baptism of Infants, till I can tell them, where thoe are, and in what estate, that depart unbaptized; must, for me, be Anabap∣tists. But, when that is done, how will they be Christians, unlesse Christianity preend to resolv these quesions, before a man is obliged to be a Christian, which no Christian can imagine? I can easily say, that they are not to be in the estate of them, that are condemned to punishment answerable to their works; seeing originall sinne, howsoever foul, is not the worke of him that hath it. And he that undertakes to press me by the Scriptures, will as soon be dumbe▪ as he finds the torments of hell no where assigned by the Scriptures, but to the works of those tht actually trangress Gods Lws. As for that condemna∣tion of all mankind by the first Adam, our of which it is recovered by the se∣cond Adam, according to S. Paul, Rom. V. I suppose all the world will allow, that I acknowledge it, whn I allow not those Infants the Kingdom of God, that depar unbptizd. If it be id, tht Fulgentius, in his Book de fide ad Pe∣trum, reckons it for a part of the Catholick faith, that Infants, departing with∣out Baptism, are in hell torments; it will be as easie for me to say, that Gen∣adius in his Book de dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis, acknowedges it not. For, though Gennadius was on of tho, whose opinion concerning Grace was pro∣hibited by the Council of Orange; and that there is appearance enough, that Fulgentius writ expresly to contradict him, in the list of positions received by the Church; yet, seeing this point is not defined by the Councill (much lsse by any act of the Church against Pelagius, still much lesse by any Tradition of the whole Church before and after Pelagius) though it may pass for dogma Ecclesiasticum, such a position as the Church alloweth to be held and professed, yet it cannot be prssed for any part of the rule of faith, which cannot but be acknowledged by all the Church. I will add the words of Gregory Nazianzen in the same Oration a litle afore; . Some delay for neg∣ligence, others for covetousesse; others are in no capacity to receive it, for infancy perhaps, or some accident utterly involuntary; whereby, though they would, they could not attain the Grace. As therefore we found much difference among those, so these. They that wholly scorn it in deed, are worse then the more co∣vetous or negligent. But these are worse then those who fail of the Gift for igno∣rance or constraint. For constraint is no other thing then to fail against a mans will. And I truly think that those shall be punished, as for their other wickednesse, so for neglecting Baptism. Those also, though lsse, because guilty of failing, ra∣ther for folly then malice. But that the last shall neither be punished nor glorified by the iust Judge, as without malice, though unsealed, and suffering rather then doing harm. For, he who is not worthy of punishment, is not therefore of honour, as he that is not worthy of honour, is not therefore of punishment. And I consider also thi: If thou condemnest him for murther, that would have murdered, onely be∣cause he would, without murdering; let him that desired baptism, without being baptized▪ be counted baptized. In this last cse, supposing a mans resolution to be a Christian so compleat, that only opportunity of being baptized, is wanting, I con∣clude with the Church snce Gregories time, that there is no doubt in the salvation of such a one. And that, by virtue of his own words, that Baptism is the Covenant
of a new life, which, if a mans heart fully resolve upon between God and him∣selfe, to doubt of his salvation because his baptism is prevented, is, contrary to S. Peter, to ascribe his salvation to the cleansing of the flesh, not to the profes∣sion of a good conscience. In the mean time, he who acknowledges that such a one is not punished for not being baptized, though not glorified, can neither allow the Kingdom of heaven to an Infant that dyes unbaptized, nor condemn him for Original sinne, which is, for not being baptized. As for the opinion of Plagius, who, because our Lord said, Except ye be born of water and of the spi∣rit, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; granteth Infants that dye un∣baptized, no to coe to Gods Kingdom, but would have thm come to ever∣lasting life neverthelsse; the Anabaptists may learn modety of him, in hand∣ling the Scriptures with reverence, and not allowing regeneration by water, and the Holy Ghost, where the Church never allowed the Kingdom of God. But on the other side, when he maketh life everlasting, which himselfe cannot istinguish from the Kingdom of God, due to nature and birth, he voideth the grace of Christ, and the intent of his coming; seeing nothing but their own choice, can hinder men to attain that without Christ, which is due to infants by their birth. And if any man think to blast this with the reputation of Popery, (as the conscience of this time is, to make that Popery which they understand no, nd may july give reasonble and conscionable men a good opinion of Popery, the imputation whereof is so brutishly abused; what will he think o himselfe▪ when he finds himselfe in the company of so many Doctors of the Church of Rome, as at this day, and alwaies have maintained that, which, you see, I dare not affirm, but he dares; namely, that all Infants, who dye unbap∣tized, go into everlasting fire? It is demanded in the second place, what is that regeneration by the Holy Ghost, and wherein it consists, whereof, Infants that are baptized can be thought capable. For, the wild conceits of those, that imagine them to have faith in Christ, (which, without actuall motion of the mind, is not) require miracles to be wrought of course, by baptizing, that the effect thereof may come to passe. And, if the state of Grace, (which, the habituall grace of Gods spirit either supposeth or inferreth) is not to be attained, but by the resoluti∣on of imbracing the covenant of Grace, (as, by all the premises, it is not o∣therwise attended) it will be every whit as hard to say, what is that habituall Grace, that is said to be poured into the souls of Infants that are baptized, be∣ing nothing else, but a facility in doing what the covenant of Grace requireth. But, if we conceive, the regeneration of Infants that are baptized, to consist in the habituall assistance of Gods spirit, the effects whereof are to appear, in making them able to perform that which their Christianity requires at their hands, so soon as they shall understand themselves to be obliged by it; we give reason enough of the effect of their Baptism, whither they dye or live, and yet become not liable to any inconvenience. For, supposing the assistance of Gods spirit, assigned them by the promise of Baptism, to take effect, when their bodily instruments inable the soul to act as Christianity requireth; if the soul, by death, come to be discharged of them, can any thing be said, why originall concupiscence, which is the Law of the members, should remain any more, to impeach the subjection of all faculties to the law of Gods spirit? Or will it be any thing strange, that, when they come to be taught Christianity, the same spirit of God should be thought to way them, to imbrace it of their own choice, and not onely in compliance with the will of their Parents? yet is this no more, then the regeneration of Infants by water, and the Holy Ghost importeth; that the spirit of God should be habitually present, to make those reasons, which God hath given to convince the world, that they ought to be Christians, both discernable to the understanding, and waying down the choice; whereas, those that are converted from being enemies to God, (that is to say, at those yers, when no man can be converted to God, that is not his enemy be∣fore) though the spirit of God knock at their hearts without, striving to cast out the strong man that is within doors, and to make a dwelling for it selfe in
the heart, are possessed by a contrary principle, till they yield Gods spirit that entertainment which God requireth. If this habituall assistance of Gods spirit, (by the moral effect of Gods promise, not by any natural change in the dis∣position of that minde, which never used reaon to make choice of it) can be called habitual grace, (as, for certain, it is a grace of God, in consideration of our Lord Christ, and no lesse habitual, then any quality which the soul of man, or the faculties thereof can be indowed with) I shall not need to quarel the de∣cree of the Council of Vienna, which hath determined the git of habitual grace to be the effect of Baptism in Infants. Onely I exprsse more distinctly, and, to the preventing of the inconveniences mentioned, wherein it conisteth. But I shall inferre, as a consequence of this resolution, that we are not to look upon Christians that are baptized in their Infancy, as thoe, who are all of them ne∣cessarily enimies to God, before they e converted again to become true Christians. For, though that very age, when they come first to years of discre∣tion, obliging them to act as Christians, be liable to o many and so great temptations, that few cn pass through it without falling away from the pro∣fession of Christians; yet, because it is not incredible, that there are many ca∣ses, in which the Ministry of education, blessed by Gods providence, as acted by his grace, brings it to pass, it is by no means to be supposed, that all those, who are baptized Infants, are necessarily to passe through the state of Gods enemies: And therefore, that, as many as come into that state, do fall from the state of Gods grace into which they are baptized. Which is none of the least demon∣strations, of that which hath been maintained in due place, that the state of Gods grace, is as well lost and forfeited, as it is to be recovered again by Chri∣stians. And upon this ground, and to this purose it was, that the ancient Church (at such time as the solemnity of Baptizing became tied to Easter and Whitsuntide, and the young were baptized with the old, not absolutely In∣fants, but according to the opinion of Gregory Nazianzene related afore, at three or four years of age) used to give them alo the Eucharist, as soon as they were baptized. For, the Eucharist being nothing but the confirming and second∣ing of the covenant of Baptism, the reason why they were baptized inferred the giving of them the Eucharist. Which reason, being rendred by the supposed Dionysius in the end of his Book de Ecclesiasticâ Hierarchia, (where he tells us, that litle ones received the Eucharist as soon as they were baptized) as I do here, that they might be alwaies, (from thence forwards) in the state of Grace; The Eucharist, being the Body and Blood of Christ, because the means to convey his Spirit, may well be judged the means, to secure, and confirm that promise thereof which Baptism importeth. Yet doth not this inferre, that, since it is become necessary for the Church, to baptize all in the state of meere Infants, it is not for the best to deferre the communion of the Eucharist, till litle ones may know what they do; (though in my opinion, it is deferred farre longer then it ought to be; nothing but a disposition positively opposite to Christianity, defeating the effect of it, which may prevent the said disposition in innocents) much lesse, that this can be any just ground for division in the Church; so that the division, which shall be raised upon this ground, necessarily renders those who are the cause of it Schismaticks. In fine, seeing it is excellently said by S. Gregory Nazianzene, in sanctum Bapt. Orat. XLII.  That we are to think the force of Baptizing to consist in the Covenant of a second life, and purer conversation, with God; And, that the Eucharist is nothing else but the seconding of this Covenant; where Baptism, in that regard, is neces∣sary to salvation, there the Eucharist, though not necessary, (as the ancient Church never held it) cannot be unlawful. Whether expedient or not, he that contents himselfe with the practice of the Church, for Unities sake, will prove the best Christian. I do not therefore condemn this custome, for a prophanati∣on of the Sacrament, when it was in use. Infants cannot examine themselves, neither can they presume, in eating that bread, and drinking of that cup. But, neither can they be taught to do all things which Christ commandeth, so soon
as they are made his Disciples, by being baptized. If the Church duely pre∣sume, that, with remission of sinnes, they attain the gift of Gods spirit, by be∣ing baptized,; did it unduly presume, that, remission of sinnes remaining unin∣terrupted, the gift of the Holy Ghost may be strengthned by receiving the Eu∣charist? Let us rather watch over our own customes, then condemn the cu∣stomes of the Church. The grace of the Holy Ghost may be fortified by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, against those occasions of re-entry, which the evil Spirit espieth in those that begin to perceive the difference between good and bad, though unable to reflect upon themselves, and to judge, whither in the state of Grace or not▪ If the Eucharist be prophned where they take it too young; what pretense of Christianity, or of a Church, remains, where neither young nor old take it? CHAP. IX. What controversie the Reformation hath with the Church of Rome about Penance. Inward repentance that is sincere, obtaineth pardon alone. Remission of sinnes by the Gospel onely: The condition of it by the Ministrey of the Church. What the power of binding and loosing contains more then Preaching, or taking away of∣fenses. Sinne may be pardoned without the use of it. Wherein the necessity of using it lyeth. I Have showed, from the beginning, that the Power of the Keyes, which is the foundation of the Church, is seen much more towards them that are already of the Church, then them that are not of it. For, in those, there is but one thing for the Church to judge, whether their perswasion and resolution be such as qualifies them to be baptized Disciples of Christ, that is Christians: But in these, so many particulars as the profession of a Christian is imployed a∣bout, so many are there for this power to judge, whether the profession of a Christian be discharged in them or not. And this ground must needs be much strengthned, by that which hath been resolved, concerning the Covenant of Grace, and the terms of it. For, if the profession of Christianity be that which qualifies a Christian for remission of sinnes and life everlasting; then, he that fails of this profession, by any such sinne, as cannot stand with it; as he attained the communion of the Church, upon presumption that he stood qualified for the promises of the Gospel; so he failes of it upon evidence, that he is not so qualified. Therefore, though the Powr of the Keyes is seen in free admitting to the Communion of the Church; yet is it more visible, in ex∣cluding from the same, as well as in readmitting to it. And this is the next act, or the next object, which the the power of the Church is imployed about, that comes here to be considered. The difficulty whereof seems to stand in that, which the Church of Romes by the Law of confessing once a year all sinnes that come to remembrance, seems to teach; That no sinne, or at least, none of those which a man is bound to confesse, (which, in what sense they may and are to be allowed mortal sinnes, I have showed in due place) can be remitted him that falls into them after Baptism, unlesse the Keyes of the Church passe up∣on them. The opposite whereof, in the other extream, seems to be the opinion of those that petend for a point of Reformation, and of that freedom to which the Gospel calls Christians; That, though it be necessary to give satisfaction to the the Church, which shal have been scandalized by the evil example of a notorious offence; yet, that no office of the Church, and of the Keys which it is rusted with by our Lord, concurs to the loosing of that sinne, which the Church hath first tied a man with, by excluding him from the communion of the Church; But that it is wholly to be imputed to the preaching of the Gospel ministred by the Church, when it is received by faith. Though, for the present, I inquire not what they would have this faith to be, having distinguished the consequences of the seve∣ral concets which may be had about it afore. For, this difficulty being here proposed in the beginning, I do not foresee any thing of moment in question,
concerning this power of the Church, the effect nd intent of it, that will not come to be determined by virue of the reolution therof, and in consequence to it. Which resolution shall brifly be this. That inwrd repentance, (with confession to God alone, that is ncere and effectual to the reforming of that which a man repents of, for the future, is a diposition qualifying a man for pardon of sne, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, without any act of the Church passing upon it. But, that God hath charged his Church, (and there∣fore given it power and right) to call all those that notoriously transgresse that Christianity which once they have professed, to those demonstrations of in∣ward repentance, and amendment of mind, by visible actions, that may satis∣fie the Church, that Gods wrath in regard of that sinne is appeased through Christ, and, upon these demonstrations, to readmit them to communion with the Church. And further, that God, having provided this means of procuring and assuring the pardon of sinne by the Church, hath also obliged all Christians to make use of the same, by bringing their secret sinnes to the knowledge of the Church, so farre, and in as much as they ought to stand convict, that the mi∣nistry of the Church is requisite, to procure in them that disposition, which, by the Gospel, intiles them to forgiveness. This resolution hath several parts, which I have thought fit to be thus wound up in one, not onely for brevities sake, (which I seek so farre as it will let me be understood) but, for the dependance they have one upon another, in point of reason and truth. And first, to clear the foundation in the first place, I sup∣pose what our Saviour preached himselfe, in publishing his Gospel, according as it stands declared and setled by the premises; to wit, that mankind, being lost in sinne, and neither the law of Nature, nor that of Moses, being able to re∣duce it to righteousnesse, and so to happinesse; God, by our Lord Christ, re∣quires all them that find themselves surprized in this estate, to believe him to be sent for remission of sinnes and life everlasting, to all, that, turning from that conversation in which they are overtaken, do make the glory of God the end, and his will the rule of their actions for the future, by undertaking to live like Christians, in hope of being inabled, by Gods spirit, to perform the same, for Christ his merits, and of being accepted for his suffering. This being the summe of Christ his Gospel, according to the premises, and, the reason, why this profession is limited by the Gospel, to be solemnized by the Sacrament of Baptism, being so clearly rendred, that it is impossible to rendr any other rea∣son, how the spiritual and everlasting promises of the Gospel should depend up∣on a material and bodily act, of washing away the filth of the flesh; I suppose the way is plain to inferre, that, suppong God allowes pardon to all that fall after Baptism, so often as they return by true repentance, it cannot be refu∣sed those that return by true repentance, whether it be obtained by the mini∣stry of the Church, or without it. It is not necessary for me here to repete all those sayings of the new Testament, wherein the motion from, the state of damnation, in which the Gospl finds us, to the state of salvation by the Go∣spel, expressed under the er of Repentance. John Baptists, and our Lords first Sermon is upon this Text; Repnt, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. III. 2. IV. 17. in Mark▪ Repent, and believe the Gospel, I. 15. and both a thing. For, he that is moved to repent, either by the preaching of John Baptist, or of our Lord Christ, must needs take the rule and measure of that which he turns to by repentance, from him whose Doctrine he followeth, whether John, or our Lord Christ whom John declreth. The same is the theme that the Apo∣stles preach upon Mar. VI. 12. And the same is the case, whether the Apostle say, Repent and be baptized, Acts II. 38. or Repent and turn, as Acts III. 19. seeing he must needs be understood to meane, that they turn to Christianity by repentance. And still the same, when S. Paul, publishing the Gospel, de∣clares, that God by it calls all men to repentance, Acts, XVII. 30. that it consists in preaching repentance and faith in our Lord Christ Jesus, Acts XX. 21. or in calling men to repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of re∣entance, Acts XXVI. 20. therefore all our Lords Sermons of repentance in
the Gospels, Mat. XI. 20. 21. XII. 41. Luke X. 13. XI. 32. XIII 2-9. XV. do imply and presuppose the same limitations, to determine the repentance which his Gospel requires. Which he that receives not, is called the impeni∣tent heart, Rom. II. 5. And St. Paul directs Timothy to instruct the adversaries with meekness, if perhaps God may give them repeutance to the ac∣knowledgement of the truth, 2 Tim. II. 25. And S. Peter, when he commends God as long suffering towards us, Because he would have none perish, but all come to repentance, 2 Pet. III. 5. speaks of those that mock at Christianity, saying, Where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things re∣main as they were from the beginning? Since then, converon to Christianity is that which qualifies for remission of sinnes, those whom it overtaketh in sinne; can any reason be given, why it should not be effectual to the loosing of any sinne, whereby a Christian, transgressing his Christianity, forseiteth the privi∣ledges of it? For, the profession which he sealed by being baptized, as to the Church, fails not by a inne that the Church sees not, and, as to God, re∣vives by that new resolution which repentance introduceth. There is not, in∣deed, much mention of privte repentance, in those which are already Christi∣ans, in the writings of the Apostles: But there is frequent mention of sinnes, without mention of any cure by the Church, without any appearance or signi∣fication of any cure applyed to them by the Church. As, the eating of things offered to Idols, when it might be the occasion to make another Christian com∣mit Idolatry, 1 Cor. VIII, 12. which, if publick, and yet cannot be thought to come under the Keyes of the Church; how much more those that are are not publick? I have proved in another place, that S. Paul instructs Timo∣thy, not to ordain sinfull persons, least he communicate in their sinnes: Because, saith he, Some mens sinnes are manifest aforehand, going before them to judge∣ment, 1 Tim. V, 22. 24. But, those that stood for Ordination, could not pre∣tend to be cured of their sinnes by the Church, because, coming into that rank, they could no aspire to be preferred in the Church. But the words of S. John are unavoidable, for he writ to Christians, 1 Ioh. I. 7. 8, 9, 10, If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have communion with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sinne. If we say that we have no sinne, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: If we confesse our sinnes, he is faithfull and just, to forgive us our sinnes, and cleanse us from all un∣righteousnesse. If we say we have no sinne, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. And immediately; My little children, I write these things to you that ye sinne not. And if any man sinne, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes: But not for ours alone, but for the sinnes of the whole world. The precept of God to John, and by John to the seven Churches to repent, Apoc. II, 5. 16. 21. III. 3. 9. is to Christins, and to Churches. For, though it be directed to the Angels of those Churches, yet in behalfe of the Churches themselves. Now, can the Church be cured by the Church? If not, then are some sinnes of Christians cured without the Keyes of the Church. If so, why not the sinne of a man by that man, as well as the sinne of a Church by that Church. The cure of the sinne of a Church being nothing else, but the repentance of that Church, o, perhaps the greatest part of that Church. For otherwise no mans sinne of that Church could be cured, till every man of that Church should return by repentance. What say you to S. Pauls invections ▪against wronging Christians, and against uncleannesse, 1 Cor. VI. 6-10. 15-20. Shall we think, that they who sued Christians be∣fore Infidels came to confession fo this sinne? that these, whose sinn S. Paul aggravates above this; (for, it is worse to wrong a Christian, then to seek right of a Christian by an Infidels means) acknowledged any way the Church had to constrain them to do right? Nay, that those, whom he reduceth there from fornication, did acknowledge the cure of it by the Church? What then needed S. Paul to perswade them, that they could not be saved, without turn∣ing to God from it? For, had they been perswaded, that it could not be cured▪
without confession to the Church, they must have supposed, that it could not be cured without confession to God. And, what say you to S. Pauls instruction; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, 1 Cor. XI. 28. For, though this may be subject to some limitation, (as by that which follows, it will or may appear, that it is to be limited) yet must not this limitation be such, as shall abate any thing of the promise of the Gospel, which the Sacraments bring with them, to those, who, by a competent resolu∣tion for their Christianity, are qualified for it. Turn we to the Law and the Prophets, and observe, according to the premi∣ses, that there was no expiation prescribed by the Law, for the inward guilt of sinne; but for outward uncleannesses, or incapacities of conversing among the people of God, (and, by consequence, of injoying the benefit of the Land of promise) together with some sinnes, which the Law specifies, but condemns not to any bodily or pecuniary punishment. Wherefore, seeing we read in the Law and the Prophets, so many exhortations to repentance, which, if we suppose to come from God, we cannot suppose to be void of a promise im∣plyed, tendring pardon and favour at Gods hands upon repentance, it is neces∣sary to acknowledg, that inward repentance, under the Law, qualified for remis∣sion of sinnes▪. Read the seaven Penitentiall Pslms, and tell me how men came then to be cleansed of their sinnes, (David affirming Psal. LI. 18. Thou desirest no sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou delightest not in burnt-offer∣ings) but, by that faith, which moved them to seek reconcilement with God by repentance, and, by that conversion to righteousnesse, which their faith supposed acceptable to God. So the Prophets Ezek. XVIII. 32. XXXIII. 9-20. Esay I. 18. 1 King. VIII. 33. 2 Chron. VI. 24. besides infinite more. For, if we say, that men were then bound to confesse their sinnes, that they might be cleansed by the Synagogue; he that confessed a capitall crime, must incurre a capitall punishment; and without death, there was no way to cleanse him of it. If we say, he might be cleansed by sacrifice, by the Synagogue, without con∣fessing the sin; why not under the Gospel by means answerable, that is, by the Eucharist, and the oblations out of which it is celebrated, without confessing in particular to the Church? I do not therefore here dispute, what sins might be, and what might not be purged by sacrifices; not doubting, by many passages of the Prophets and Ecclesiasticus, that the righteous and spiritual men of that people, under the Law, did offer sacrifices for the expiation of those sinnes, which, there was no particular promise in the Law, that God would pardon upon those sacrifices: But first, I suppose, that, though God allowed their con∣formity to his present Law, in offering sacrifices, that were not expresly requi∣red by it, but customed by Gods people upon it; yet he accepted them not for those sacrifices, but, for that repentance and conversion of heart from whence they came: Thereupon then I argue, in the second place, that, if with∣out declaring the kind of sinne under the Law, under the Gospel much more. For, seeing that there is no expiation for capital crimes, without death, by the Law, he that should offer sacrifice for such a sinne, declaring it, must become liable to death. And the same is the case, in the second rank of offenses against the Law, which it punisheth with scourging: Those also belonging to that rank, which the Law threatens with death by the hand of God, which renders their life forfeit into Gods hands; Because of the Rule which they have, that if they come to be know to the Synagogue, they are to be punished with scourging. For who can imagine, that these can be purged by the Law, without undergo∣ing the penalty of the Law? And therefore, if sacrifices were offered for them, they were not confessed, seeing that all estates in the Synagogue, which was bound to punish them, were also bound to bring them to punishment. As for the Church, it hath been already declared, that the constitution there∣of presupposeth, in order of nature and reason, the covenant of Grace, that is to say, the condition upon which the Gospel tendreth remission of sinnes: So that, as we have all the reason in the world to think, that God hath founded
the corporation of his Church, to be the means of affecting or procuring that dispoition, which qualifieth for the promises of the Gospel; So, if the same dipoion cn be procured, without the ministery of the Church, which sup∣poth the knowledge of particulr sinnes, there can be no cause, why God should injoyn that, the effect whereof is to be had without it. Now, I suppose from the premies, that, those who live within the Church, have sufficient helps of Gods Grace, to able them to return from their sinnes by repentance. As for thoe helps which hy may have by the ministery of the Church, making known their nnes to it; Though they may be of such virue, as to make that more  which is posible without them; Yet, when all is done that man cn do, it exedth not the same kind of helys, whih man outwardly may ren∣dro Gos inwr rce; Which, as it is more probble that Gods good pro∣vidence should ke ffectuall, then where the same outwrd mean are not imployed, or where they are imployed in a lesse measure; So is it possible, that, bing one ffint, they may become effectual by Gods grace, though in a  measure. But, I confesse, there is nothing prevailes more with me to con∣clude this, then that which the Scripture affords us, to evidence, that God hh instituted and appointed the Ministery of his Church, for the reconciling o thoe nnes, which must, or which may come to the knowledge of his Church. For, when God giveth first to S. Peter, the Keyes of his Church, Mat. XVIII. 19. and afterwards, to all his Disciples, the power of binding and loosing sinnes, Joh. XX. 19. it is evident, that, by this power, they are able to do nothing to unbelievers, but perwade them, by preching the Gospel, to imbrace that cour by which it tendreth rmission of sinne; untill, having perswaded them to it, they oblige them to enter into the Church by Baptism, as that, to which God hath liited that profession of Christianity which he requires to remission of sinne. Thus is the power of the Keyes, or of binding and loosing sinne, first seen and exercised in baptizing, understanding thereby, not onely the ministring of the Sacrament, but the bringing of a man to that disposition, to which Bap∣tism is due. The same is still exercised towards those that are come into the Church, by laying forth to them the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, of our Lord and his Apostles, obliging them to return from sinne by Repentance: So that, it cannot justly be said, that Preaching, as we call it, (that is, further instructing in the doctrine of Christianity, those that by the preaching of the Gospell, have been moved to imbrace it) is a thing impertinent to the power of the Keyes, not concerning the office of it: Unlesse we think, ministring the helps of sufficient grace imperinent to effectuall grace, which alwayes suppo∣seth them; Having already shewed, that before conversion to Christianity, the power of the Keyes is seen in ministring the same. But he that thinketh, that, within the Church, the power of the Keys goes no further then Preaching, and clearing the scandall of notorious offences, can give no reason, why those that ar converted to believe Christianity by Preaching the Gospel, should be bound by their own profession to oblige themselves to it, and, by that means to en∣r the ociety of the Church. For, they are as well certified before baptism as after, that, without repentance and conversion from sinne, there is no remission of sinne, or hope of everlasting life; which, if a mn be left to his own choice, whether he will imbrace or not, after that he is come into the Church, why not afore? Why came he into the Church? Or, why was there provision made, that the Church should be a cor∣poration, the communion whereof, all Christians should be be bound to hold nd imbrace? Therefore our Lord, when he declares the depositing of the same Keyes (or, power of loosing and binding) with his Church, which he he gave elsewhere to S. Peter, and the rest of his Disciples, Ma. XVIII. 15-20. com∣manding, that, he who will not hear the Church, be to the Church, as Publi∣cns und Sinners were then to the Jews; inferreth, that, Whatsoever they should bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever they should loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And again, that, where two of you, (that is, of the Church) shall agree upon any thing to ask it, it shall be done for you by my Eather in heaven.
Where, reducing him that heareth not the Church into the State of a Publi∣can or a sinner to the Jews, being the binding of sinne, as to the Church, up∣on supposition that he is bound by it already, as to God, (in order to the loo∣sing of the same as to the Church, upon supposition that it is first loosed as to God) is something else besides preaching, or clearing the scandal of notorious sinne. And if our Lord, by inferring immediately a generall promise of hearing the prayer▪ of Christians, intend to intimate, that he would accept of the pray∣er of the Church, for the reconciling of those whose sinnes were bound, as I observed afore; then of necessity, something more then showing the guilt of sinne, by Preaching, is referred to the Church, in procuring the loosing of him that is bound from the debt of sinne, not from the scandall of it. And what is this, but that which we see done by S. Paul, and by the Church of Corinth, in obedience to S. Pauls commands, concerning him that had ma∣ried his Father widow, 1 Cor. V. 2.-2 Cor. II. 5-11. VII. 8-11. For, when S. Paul blames them, that they did not all mourn, that he who had done the act, might be removed fom among them; Certainly he means, that he who had done the act, was to mourn so much more, that he might be restored unto them again. For so it came to passe, and upon such terms he is restored; If any man hath grieved, it is not me that he hath grieved, but in part, that I may not charge you all. Enough to such a one is this rebuke of many. So that, contrariwise, ye ought rather to pardon and comfort such a one, least he be swallowed up with abun∣dance of sorrow. The reason followes; For I see, that that leter of mine grievd you, though but for a time. Now I am glad, not that I grieved you, but that you were grieved to repentance. For ye were grieved according to God, that ye might in nothing be punished, as from us. For, the sorrow that is according to God, work∣eth repentance to salvation not to be repentth of: But the sorrow of the world work∣eth death. I demand, whether the repentance which S. Pauls censure brought forth, were the repentance of that Church, or the repentance of, both the per∣son guilty and of the Church. For▪ without question, if this were the crime, and that he was born out in it by a faction in the Church, (the act whereof prevailing, redounds to the account of the whole) then S. Paul justly blames the Church, because they had not cleared their hands of it, by putting fro them the guilty person, with demonstration of hat sorrow, which might evi∣dence their adherence to the Christianity which they had once professed. And accordingly, if the Church were grieved to repentance, such as procureth salva∣tion, being according to God; and that having so done, they are injoyned to restore the guilty person; Therefore, that the guilty person had been reduced to so much more sorrow, as the crime concerned him more; and that this sorrow, also, was repentance to salvation, according to God, wrought by the censure in∣flicted upon him by S. Pauls Bpistle. Whether then S. Paul require them to re∣admit him, least Satan should get advantage upon the Church, by this breach, (whose conceits we are not ignorant of, saith S. Paul) and least the party should be swallowed up with excessive sorrow; Or least, the party, by dis∣pair of reconcilement with the Church, should be reduced to renounce Christi∣anity, or a division be made in the Church from under the authority of S. Paul; This he plainly declares, that he pardons the man whom they pardon, in the person of Christ, that no such thing come to passe; That is, acting by Aposto∣lical commission, according to which, that which any mans Apostle or Commis∣sary did, was as if himself did it; So that, either we suppose the repentance wrought by the censure to be sufficiently evidenced, or that S. Pauls commis∣sion is not trustily discharged. This is more then, then preaching the Gospel, or removing offence from before the Church: It is removing the sinne, by procuring repentance, and thereupon, assuring of pardon, which seems not well assured, when there is not competent means used, much lesse the effect of the means visible, in procuring repentance. But if a Physitian, onely prescri∣bing and applying the means of curing a disease, is said to cure it, much more▪ the Church, not onely prescribing and applying the means of curing sinne, (by the exercise of repentance, in prayer, with fastin and alms-deeds) but also,
constraining the sick person, effectually to use the cure prescribed, by excluding him the communion of the Church, so long as he refuses to use it. Now, when S. Paul commandeth, to deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirt may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. V. 5. proving the powing of Excommunication necessary to the constitution and being of the Church, and that, who so is excommunicate falls under the power of Satan, as excluded Gods Church; I alledged, that those miraculous operations which God gave the Church undr the Apotles, to witnesse the truth of Christianity, by the evidene of his presence in the same, were seen upon those which were cast out of it; And that, in that regard, this man is commanded to be delivered to Satan. The destruction of the flesh then, for which he is so delivered, may sig∣nifie the incursions of Satan upon such persons, then visible, and so I understood it afore. But I must not, therefore, omit that sense of these words, which the ancient Church frequeneth, understanding this destruction to be the mortifica∣tion of the flesh by works of Penance. For this is that sense which Tertullian, then a Motanist labours to confute, but Origen in Levit. Hom. XXIV. Pacia∣nus, Paraenesi ad Paeniteniam. S. Basil ad Aphilochium. C. VII. S. Ambrose de Paenitentià. I. 12. S. Austine, de fide & operibus cap. XXVI. suppose and use. Neither is it any way inconsequent, that the excommunicate, believing them∣selves to come thereby, under the power of Satan, should betake themselves to those demonstrations of humiliation and mortification, whereby the Church might be moved to admit them to the means of their reconcilement. And in this there is more then preaching the Gospel, or taking away offence: There is authority obliging to use the cure, and granting reconciliation upon the same. Again, when S. Paul saith to them again, 2 Cor. XII. 20. 21. I am afraid, least, when I come, I find you not such as I would, and be found of you, such as you would not; least there be strifes, envies, animosities, conenions, back-bitings, whis∣porings, inflasions, commotions. Least, when I come to you again, God humble me in regard of you, and I mourn for many that have sinned afore, and have not re∣pented of the uncleanesse, and whoredome, and wantonnesse which they have done; How should S. Paul be humbled in regard of, or mourn for many of them, but, in regard of the necessity which he feareth to find, of putting them out of the Church, or to penance, in case they adhere to the Church? And, if, by ap∣pearance and demonstration of their repentance, S. Paul was to be moved not to do this; is it not evident, that this is the means which he imployes to pro∣cure repentance, and assure pardon, by discharging them of it? I do here re∣pet that which I said afore, to show, that it is the Apostles intent, Heb. VI. 4. 5, 6. X. 26▪ 27. XII. 15. 16, 17. to deterre them from falling away from Christianity to Judaism, for fear of persecution from the Jews, by puting them out of hope of being readmitted to the communion of the Church. Not as pro∣nouncing sentence of damntion against them; but, as demonstrating it so dif∣ficult to be presumed upon▪ in behalfe of him that had once violated the profes∣sion of Christianity, that the Church was not to become the warrant for it. If this be the case of those, whose interest in the promises of the Gospel the Church warrants not, then, the warrant of the Church, (either in pronouncing sentence of absolution formally, or in admitting really unto the communion of the Eucharist) proceeds, o ought to proceed upon supposition of that dispo∣sition which qualifies for pardon, wrought in the penitent by the censure of the Church. And, that this is the case, I have further inferred from the words of the Apostle, 1 Joh. V. 16. 17. If a man see his Brother sinne a sin t to death, he shall pray, and life shall be given to them that sinne not to death: There is a sinne to death, I say not that ye pray for it. All unrighteousnesse is sinne; But there is a sinne not to death. For, seeing it is manifest, that the Church is to pray for all sinners, be they never so great enemies to the Church; it cannot be understood, that, absolutely, the Church is not to pray for the sinne to death; but, that, as he forbiddeth not, so he obligeth not the Church to pray for the sinne unto death, those prayers, which tend to reconcile the sin∣ner to the Church, upon supposition, and for a warrant, of the reconcilement
thereof with God. If this seem not to agree with the words, because S. John seems to speak to particular persons, and not to the body of the Church, when he sayes, If any man see, lt him ask; Let him consider the words of anoher Apostle, James V. 14. 15, 16, For, when he promiseth forgivenesse of sinnes to him that shall call for the Priests of the Church, and they pray over him; Ad∣ding immediately, Confess your sinnes to one another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed; It is necessary that we make good a reason, why this admo∣nition follows upon that which went before: Why the Apostle, having taken order for the cure of their sinnes, who are here ordered to send for the Priests of the Churh, proceeds to say, Confesse your sinnes to one another; Namely, because the way of curing sinne is the ame, when a man confesses his sinne to a Brother (that is, a private Christian) and when h submits it to the authority of the Church. For, as here the Apotle maketh the means of obtaining par∣don▪ to consist in the prayers of the Priests, in whom the authority of the Church resteth; o there, in the prayers of one Christian for another, that confesses his sinne to him. And hreupon, it is necessarily to be presumed, both that the Apostle means, that the Priests of the Church impose upon him that course of cre, which his sinne requireth in case he survive; And also, that a private Christian, by his advice, reduce his Brother to use the same means: Otherwise, to what purpose should the one or the other declare his sinne, seeing he might be prayed for at large, without declaring the same? It is therefore no marvail, that the words of S. John, manifestly concerning particular Christians, should extend to the Keyes of the Church, and the publick office thereof. For though, in the beginning when he saith; If a man see his Brother sinne a sin not to death; he addresseth onely to particular Christians; yet the nd there is a sinne unto death, I say not that ye pray for it; manifestly addresseth to the Body of the Church; implying, that it is to be acquainted therewith, by him that sees this, if the case require it. Whereupon S. Paul thus exhorteth, Gal. VI. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in any transgression, ye that are spiritual restore such a one with the spirit of meeknesse, considering your selves, least ye also be tempted. Here the title of spiritual, may extend to particular Christians; But there is a pre∣sumption concerning publick persons in the Church, that they are such, be∣cause, it is the opinion that they are such which qualifies them to be made pub∣lick persons in the Church. Now, when he speaks to the brethren in generall, to do this, he showes, that it may concern the Body of the Church, as well as particular Christans. But when he speaks of the spirit of meeknesse, it is mani∣fest, that the intent of his speech concerns those Penances which were imposed upon sinners, for trial of their convesions, in which he requires that meeknesse, which the consideration of a mans own meeknesse recommends. And there∣fore, the same thing is taught by S. Iames, by and by after the words afore quo∣ted, James V. 19. 20. Brethren, if any man of you go astray from the truth, and some body bring him back; let him know, that he who brings back a sinner from the errr of his way, shall save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sinnes For, it is plain by S. Paul, that this extendeth to the recovery of a sinner by the Keyes of the Church, as they were managed during the Apostles time. Certain∣ly, if we understand S. Pauls words, 1 Tim. V. 22. 24. of imposition of hands in Penance (as I have showed, in my Book of the Right of the Church, p. 23. that they may and ought to be understood) it is necessarily to be inferred; see∣ing they who admit those sinners, to be reconciled unto God by the Prayers which the Church makes for them, with imposition of hands, (signifying there∣by, that it alloweth them to be sncerely penitent) are partakers of their sinnes which shall follow upon the readmitting of them to the Church, being not worthy qualified for it; Therefore, the Church is to see, that a man be qualifi∣ed for reconciliation with the Church, upon supposition of his reconciliation with God, before he be reconciled to the Church. And in, first procuring him, and then judging him, to be so qualified, consists the right use of those Keyes which God hath given the Church, towards them that transgresse the profession of Christianity after they have made it.
The reason of all this is derived from those things which have been setled by the premises. The condition which the Gospel proposeth for the remission of sinnes, to them who stnd convict by it, that they are under sinne, is, that they return from sinne, nd, believing that our Lord Chit was sen by God to cure it, undertake to professe that which he taught, and to live according to the same. Those which professe so to do, the Church accepteth of wihout ex∣ception; because, this being the first account she hath of them, she cannot ex∣pect more at their hands, then, that they submit the rest of their lives to that Christianity which she obligeth them to. If, by trngressing this obligation, which they have undertaken, they forfeit the right which they obtaind there∣by, is it in the power of the Church to restore them at pleasur? In vain then, is all that hath been said to show, that the Gospel and Christianity, in order of nature and reason, is more ancient then the constitution of the Church, and the corporation of it; And, that all the power of the Chuch presupposeth the condition, upon which, those blessings which it tendreth are due. And certain∣ly, our Lord, when he saith to his Diciples, Joh. XX. 23. Whosesoever sinne ye remit, they are remitted—intended not to contradict the sense of the Srbes, when they say, Who can forgive sinnes but God alone? Mark. II. 7. Luk. V. 21. Much lesse to reverse the word of his Prophets, ascribing this power of him a∣lone, Esay XLIII. 25. Mich. VII. 18. Psal. XXXII. 5 What is then the ef∣fect of this promise to them, that have forfeited the right of their Baptism; sup∣posing, that, when men first become Christians, the Disciples of Christ and his Church, remit sinnes by making them Christians, according to that which hath been declared? Surely the same, observing the difference▪ of the case. For he, who, being convict of his disease, and of the cure of it, by the preaching of Christianity, is effectually moved, by the helpe of Gods Spirit, to imbrace that cure, which, none but the Church which tenders it can furnish, attains it not but by using it; That is, by being baptized. But, he, who, being baptized, hath fail∣ed of his trust, and forfeited his interest in Christ, cannot so easily be restored. I have showed you, what works of mortification, of devotion, and mercy, the re∣covering of Gods grace and favour requirs. Let no man therefore thinke, that the power of remitting sinnes in the Church, can abate any thing of that, which the Gospel▪ upon which the Church is grounded, requiteth to the remission of finne done after Baptism. The authority of the Church is provided by God, to oblige those who are overtaken in sinne, to undergo that, which may satis∣fie the Church of the sincere intent of their returne; And the Church, being so satisfied, warranteth their restitution to the right which they had forfeited, upon as good ground, as it warranteth their first estate in it. But, this presup∣poseth the wrath of God appeased, his favour regained, and the inordinte love of the creature which caused the forfeit, blotted out, and changed, (through that course of mortification which hath been performed) into the true love of goodnesse for Gods sake. The Church therefore, hath received of God no power to forgive sinnes im∣mediately; as if it were in the Church to pardon snne, without that dipoiti∣on, which, by the Gospel, qualifieth a man for it: Or, as if the act of the Church, pardoning, did produce it: But, in as much as the knowledge thereof directeth, and the authority thereof constraineth to use the means which the Gospell prescribeth, in so much is the remission of sinnes, thereby obtained, truly ascribed to the Church. Lazarus was first dead, before he was bound up in his Grave clothes: And, when he was restored to life, he remained bound, till he was loosed by the Apostles. The Church bindeth no man, but him that is first dead in sinne. If the voice of Christ call him, out of that death, he is not revived, till the love of sin be mortified, and the love of God made alive in him, by a due course of Penance performed. If the motion of Gods spirit, upon the preaching of the Gospel, convincing a man that there is no means but Chri∣stianity to escape out of sinne, and prevailing with him to imbrace it, be effectu∣all to obtain the promises of the Gospel; Much more shall the actuall operati∣on of the same, moving him that is dead in sinne, to put sinne to death in him∣self,
that he may live a Christian for the future; be effectuall to regain the grace of God for him, who hath not yet the life of grace in him, but is in the way of recovering it by the helpe of Gods grace. But, he who is thus recove∣red to life by the ministery of the Church, is not yet loosed of the bands of his sinne, till he be loosed by the Church, because he was first bound by it; as our Lord, having raised Lazarus to live, commands him to be loosed by his Apo∣stles. For if, he who accepteth of the Gospel and the terms of it, remain bound to be baptized by the Church, for the remission of his sinne; Is it strange, that he who hath forfeited his pardon, obtained by the Church, even in the judge∣ment and knowledge of the Church, should not obtain the restoring of it but by the act of the Church? And therefore the Church remitteth sinne after Bap∣tism, not onely as a Physician, prescribing the cure; but as a judge, admitting it to be effected. And, the satisfaction of the Church, presupposeth that God is satisfied, that is to say, his wrath appeased, and his favour regained, by the means which the Church prescribeth; But requireth also, that he submit, not onely to use the cure which the Church prescribeth, but to the judgement there∣of, in admitting the effect of it. And upon these terms, and upon no other, the virtue of Baptism, mortified by sinne, reviveth again, according to the doctrine of the School. For, if nothing else, but the sincere resolution of living and dying as a Christian, can intitle any man to the promises of the Gospel, what is it that must intitle him to them, that hath once forfeited his title? Surely nothing but the renewing of that trust, which is forfeited by failing of it. And surely that trust is not so easily re-established, as it is first contracted. I have shewed you in the second Book, what reason we have to believe, that the severity of the an∣cient Church, in readmitting those that failed of their profession at their Bap∣tism, necessarily argues the difficulty of being re-estated in the favour of God. There goes more, indeed, to the satisfying of the Church, that he who had failed of his Christianity, hath sincerely renewed his resolution for it, then, to the renewing of it. But, that this resolution will as well be effectuall and du∣rable, as it is sincere; it is as difficult to assure a mans selfe, as to satisfie the Church. The power of the Church, then, in binding and loosing, that is, in re∣mitting or retaining sinne, consists not onely in declaring a sinner, either bound or loose; Whether in generall, by preaching the Gospel; or in particular, by refusing or restoring him to the communion of the Church, For, whom the Church bindeth, for sinne known to the Church, his pardon is not to be had without the act of the Church: But, in constraining him that will be a Christi∣an, to mortifie the love of sinne in himselfe (as his sin declares it to be alive in him) is the power of the Church in remitting sinne, exercised; And, in pro∣nouncing sentence of absolution, in what form soever, the power of assuring the same. Let us now look over these same Scriptures again, for by them, having no other, we must judge, whether this power extends to all sins, so that no sinne after Bap∣tism can be pardoned, without the ministery of the Church, and the use of it; Whether it extend onely to notorious sinners, as an abatement of the sentence of excommunication, (which being liable to, upon demonstration of repen∣tance, they are admitted to be reconciled by it) or lastly, whether there be some other reason to determine the extent of it. Surely he that argues, because God hath given his Disciples this Power, and the Church after them, therefore he hath commanded all sinners to use it, denying all hope of pardon to them that do not use it, by declaring their sinnes to them, whom the Church trusts for it, makes a lame consequence. For, will any reason allow him to say, that, otherwise, this power signifies nothing, when it is granted to extend to the cu∣ring of all notorious sinnes? That which we learn of it from S. Paul to the Corinthians, without all controversie, concerns no sinnes but but such. The sinne of him that had maried his Fathers wife, was so well known, that it had raised a party in the Church, of such as pretended it to be consistent with Christianity. And, when S. Paul is afraid, that, coming to them, he shall be fain to put ma∣ny of them to Penance, for the sinnes, which having committed, they would
have made no demonstration of conversion from them, before his coming; it is evident enough, that he speaks of no secret sinnes; because, the punishment which he pretends to inflict, is for standing out against his leters in their sinnes. As for that sinne, which, the Epistle to the Hebrews, seems to exclude from reconcilement with God by the Church; Apostasy from Christianity; it is ne∣cessarily and essentially a manifest sinne, because it consists in the visible renoun∣cing of that profession, which had been visibly made. But, coming to S. James, we find that he commands the Priests of the Church to be sent for, promising forgivenesse of sinnes upon their Prayers. And therefore, when he proceedeth to say: Confesse your sinnes to one another, and pray for one another; we gather, that he promiseth the pardon of those sinnes, which the sick person shall have confessed to the Priests of the Church. For, if it be requisite, for obtaining the prayers of a Brother, for the pardon of our sinnes, that we confesse them to him; he that prescribes it must needs understand, those sinnes, which he pro∣mises forgivenesse, upon their prayers, to be declared to them afore. It is there∣fore manifest, that the Apostle here delivereth a precept of confessing sinne both to one another, and to the Priests of the Church; supposing the cure of sinne be known to all Christians, by the Tradition of our common Christiani∣ty, and the visible custome and practice of all Churches; by works of humilia∣tion and mortification, of devotion and mercy, whereby satisfaction is made not onely to the Church, which receiveth offense by visible sinne, but also to God, who is offended by all sinne, in that sense, and to that effect, which hath been justified in the second Book: Namely, to the appeasing of his wrath, to the regaining of his grace and favour, to the restoring of the Covenant of Grace contracted at our Baptism, which sinne had made void; And therefore in virtue of that satisfaction for all sinne, which was once made by our Lord Christ upon the Cross, without which, that which we are able to do towards this effect, would all have been to no purpose. Whereupon, that the Church is not satisfied, in such a case; but, supposing that God is satisfied first, and, that the prayers which the Church maketh for the pardon of sinne, are granted and made, or ought to be granted and made, upon presumption, that the sinner is in a way of obtaining pardon of God by those Prayers, upon his submission to the use of those means, which, either the Priests of the Church, by the authori∣ty thereof shall injoyn, or a Brother by his skill and discretion shall advise. This being unavoidably the meaning of the Apostles; first it is manifest, that, all Christians being directed by the Apostle to have recourse to the Keyes of the Church, for the cure of sinne in the danger of death, they may be more obli∣ged to the same course in time of health; because it may then be used: where∣as, in danger of death, though it must be prescribed, yet it cannot be used but by him that surviveth; Secondly, it is further implyed, that the sinne which a man confesseth to his Brother, if he be not able to advise a meete cure for it, is, not onely by the party, but, by him also, to be brought to the Church. And so, in both cases, you have an injunction of the Apostle, for the submitting of secret sinne to the Keyes of the Church. But, you have also a possibility for the cure of sinne, without the authority of the Church, in as much as it had been too im∣pertinent for the Apostle to have given a Precept of confessing sinne to one ano∣ther, if no sinne could be pardoned without having recourse to the Church. The same is the effect of S. Johns words; If a man see his Brother sinne a sinne not unto death,—For, it is manifest, that, that sinne which one man sees, is not notorious to the Church. And yet, the distinction which S. John maketh be∣tween the sinne which he commandeth a private Christian to pray for, and the sinnes which he commandeth not the Church to pray for, with the difficulties which the primitive Church had about it, show, that those sinnes, which private advice cannot cure, he would have brought to the Church. And S. Johns mean∣ing is, that a man should pray for such sinnes of his Brother, as he is sure are not to death: Supposing first, his Brother disposed by himself, or by his advise, to take the course that may qualifie him for forgivenesse. But, if it prove doubt∣ful, whether to death or not, the Apostle, by saying, that there are some sinnes,
which he referreth to the Church, whither to pray for pardon of them, (to wit, in order to restoring them to the communion of the Church) or not, sup∣poseth, that they are reported to the Church by him that saw them, when the Church saw them not. But first supposing, that they might possibly have been cured without bringing them to the Church. And if these things be true, then is the bringing of a sinner back from the error of his way (according to that Pre∣cept of S. James, which followeth) an obligation that is to be discharged, not onely by the office of a private Christian, in convicting a private Christian of his sinne, and of the means that he is to use for his recovery, but also by bringing him to the Church, if the case require it; Which obligation will necesatily lie upon the sinner himself, in the first place. But so, that his own skill and fidelity to his own salvation, may possibly furnish him his cure at home. The tenor of our Saviours words throughly inforceth the same, according to that which I observed in the first Book. p. 140. that all Christians may be said to bind sinne, by showing a Christian his sinne, in case he refuse that cure, which, he that convicts him of his sinne, convicts him that is to use; And to loose sin, in case he imbrace it: But this, in the inner Court of the Consci∣ence, between God and the soul. For, though the words of our Lord; If thy Brother offend thee, tell him of it, between him and thee—extend to private inju∣ries, obliging a Christian, first to seek reparation by the good will of his party, upon remonstrance of the wrong: Then, not to seek it out of the Church, but by the Church; yet, they necessarily comprehend all sinnes which another man knows, which, to him are offences. And therefore, when our Saviour saith; If he hear thee, thou hast gained thy Brother; it is manifest, that the effect of his promise which followeth; Whosoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; is obtained by the act of a private Christian, without recourse to the publick authority of the Church. And who will believe, that the skill and fidelity of some private Christian may not furnish him as good a cure, as he can expect to learn from any private Christian, to whom he can have recourse? And yet, the process of our Lords discourse showes, that the intent of it concerns in chiefe the exercise of the Keyes of Gods Church, even upon those sinnes which are not notorious. Which who so considers, cannot refuse to grant, that S. Pauls injunction, for the restoring of him that is surprised in sinne, concerns both the office of private Christias, and also of a whole Church, and the Body of it. And truly, considering what hath been said concerning Scripture and Tra∣dition, it cannot seem strange, that the Apostles, leaving such authority with the Churches of their founding, with generall instructions to those whom they trusted them with; writing to the Bodies of those Churches, things respectively concerning all Christians, should give directions concerning all in generall terms, which, the visible practice of the said Churches might determine to the respective office of each quality and estate in those Churches. No more, then that our Lord, finding the power of the Keyes, not yet visible before Christia∣nity, should propose his instructions in that generality, which onely his Apo∣stles orders, and the practice of their Churches, upon their instructions, deter∣mineth. For, the power of the Keyes in the Church inables it further untill the worlds end, to limit further, whatsoever shall appear to require further deter∣mination, to the end of binding and loosing of sinne which it importeth, ac∣cording as the present state of the Church in every age shall require. Let us now consider, that, though I have made evidence, by consequence from the writings of the Apostles, that remission of sinnes committed after Baptism, may be obtained without the Keyes of the Church; yet, it is hard to find any expresse promise to that effect, in their writings, unlesse it be that of S. Johns first Epistle; In which, notwithstanding, a limitation, of that confession which the Apostle requires, to the Church, and to those that are trusted by the Church, may reasonably be understood, supposing, the way of curing sinne, by the ministery of the Church to have been customary, and therefore known at that time. And, on the contrary, though I do believe these consequences to be unreproveable; yet it is to be considered, that S. Pauls indulgence seems to be
granted upon a particular occasion, incident to distemper the ordinary course of the Church; Namely, the prevailing of some sinne, to a faction of some great, or the greatest part of the Church. Which, as it necessarily intercepted the use of the power of the Keyes, though provided and ordained by God for the curing of the said sinnes; so can it by no means argue, that God hath not appointed it for the ordinary means of curing them. As for the consequence which was made, from the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets, and of the Gospels, before the establishment of the Cove∣nant of Baptism, to show, that they take effect also in sinnes after Baptism; It may easily be considered, that they take place no further, then that dispositi∣on which is requisite to the forgivenesse of those sinnes, whereby the grace of Baptism is violated, may be supposed to be produced without helpe of the Church. Which as, I conceive, I have proved to be possible; so, I conceive, no man living can prove to be so easie, that all those who stand in need of the reme∣dy can presume (upon so good ground as the safety of the soul requires) to ob∣tain it, or to have obtained it of themselves, without that helpe, which the mi∣nistery appointed by God in his Church furnishes. Which if it be true, it will inevitably follow, that the most part of Christians, are, for the most part, bound in conscience, to have recourse to the power of the Church, and the Keyes thereof, for the cure of those sinnes which are not of themselves notorious; And that other Christians may be tied in conscience, to bring them to the Church for it, by making known those sinnes, which otherwise are not notori∣ous; To wit, when they cannot reasonably presume, that of themselves, they will apply themselves to the means which the cure requires. And if this be true, it will also follow, that it is in the power of the Church, to make Rules, (of force to bind the consciences of those who are of the Church) limiting the terms, upon which they shall stand bound to have recourse to the Church, for that purpose. Indeed, had the Apostles delivered any such faith; That a man is justified, by believing, that he is appointed by God to salvation, immediately upon consideration of Christ, without any disposition qualifying him for it; (onely limiting his right in this appointment, to the time that this appoint∣ment is revealed to him, which revelation is that faith which alone justifieth) I would then confesse, that this interpretation of Scripture would no way be receivable; because, indeed, no such Scriptures could have proceeded from those that delivered such a faith. It would then be sufficient, that he to whom this pre∣destination is revealed by justifying faith, should say, Lord have mercy upon me, at breathing out his last; Or rather, it would be needlesse, nay damnable for him, to desire that mercy, which if he were not sure of before he said it, he must be damned for want of that faith which onely saveth. But if all Christians be justified, by sincerely undertaking the profession of Christianity, and, that this sincerity is inconsistent with doing contrary to that which this profession con∣taineth; then, let all men of discretion and conscience judge (not, whether the Church hath reason to believe, that every such a one will voluntarily charge himself with that humiliation which may seem to mortifie the passions that made him sin afore, and make his profession sincere for the future) but, whe∣ther himselfe hath reason to believe, that either he knows how to value it, or will effectually perform it, not being instructed and obliged to it by the Church. Seeing then, on the side, that God hath provided the Ministery of the Church for the purpose; (the effect of it in reconciling notorious sinnes being undenia∣ble) On the other, no reason can presume, that all Christians either know, or will supply to themselves, the work and effect of that Ministery, being left to themselves; It followeth, that, though voluntary Penance is not necessary, for obtaining remission of every sinne; yet, it is necessary for the body of the Church, because there is no ground of presumption, that the sinnes thereof are or can be cleansed without it.
CHAP. X. The Sects of the Montanists, Novations, Donatists, and Meletians, evidence the cure of sinne by Penance, to be a Tradition of the Apostles. So doth the agree∣ment of primitive practice with their writings. Indulgence of regular Penance from the Apostles. Confession of secret sinnes in the Primitive Church. That no sinne can be cured without the Keyes of the Church, there is no Tradition from the Apostles. The necessity of confessing secret sinnes, whereupon it stands. ANd this is that whch the Tradition of the Church, that is, the originall and universall practice of Penance, (evidencing that it could have no other beginning then the authority of the Apostles, which onely could oblige the whole Church) throughly justifieth. I told you at the beginning, how near Montanus his Heresie was to the death of S. John, when the age of the Apostles ended. And, it will not be amiss to tell you here, that, I shall show you in a∣nother place, that, in all probability, it is still elder by above twenty years, then Eusebius his account, which there I allowed, doth make it. The pretense there∣of, (among other austerities, which they pretended to impose for Rules upon the whole Church, upon the authority of Prophesies, Inspirations, and Revela∣tions which they had, or pretended to have) was to exclude some great crimes, from reconcilement with God, by the means of the Church; that is to say, in the language of those times, from being admitted to Penance. I demand now, of any man that will imploy a little of his common sense upon the businesse, whether there had been any subject for Montanus, to pretend the introducing of greater austerity then was practised in the Church, in this point, if there had been no practice of Penance then in the Church, capable of greater strictnesse then was commonly practised. And if his common sense gives no sentence, let him advise, either with that which remains of Tertullian for Montanus, or, a∣gainst him, in the records of the Church; and tell me, whether they do con∣demn the reconciling of sinne by Penance prescribed in the Church, or that strictnsse which Montanus pretended to introduce over and above the com∣mon practice; evidencing therfore the force of that Penance which as generally practied, by condemning him for indeavouring to inhanse it. Thus much for certain, had not Montanus pretended to impose the austerity which he affected, for a Rule, upon the rest of the Church, the occasion for which he was exclu∣ded out of the Church had not been. He had reduced the Churches of Phry∣gia to his sense, rather by the credit of those Revelations, then by any authority which he stood professed of in them, so farre as I learn; And from thence it came to passe, that his Doctrine continued so long in force there, that the sect is call , that which the Phrygians follow, and the Sectaries, Cata∣phryges in Latine. But when (according to the strict correspondence that then was exercised between all Churches) it came to be communicated to the Chur∣ches of Asia; we find by Eusebius, how his pretense of Revelations was re∣jected as counterfeit, or as unsufficient, and by consequence, the Law, which, up∣on the authority of them, he pretended to impose upon the Church. That, be∣ing rejected by the neighbour Churches, he travailed to Rome, or sent to Rome to approve them there (that, being so received, he might, upon new grounds, tender them to his neighbours) we learn by Tertullian. That, being rejected there also, Tertullian, out of the passion he had for them, being drawn away from the Church, maintained their profession in a Church erected by Schism, upon that account at Carthage, till the times of S. Augustine, (by whom they were reduced to the communion of the Catholick Church) we learn by Sirmondus his Praedestinatus, and the same S. Augustine; But o∣therwise the Phrygians, were counted Sectaries by the rest of the Church, that is necessarily Schismaticks, and perhaps Hereticks, if indeed, by being separated from the body of the Church, they became guilty of those excesses, which they are charged with by Epiphanius, S. Jerome, and others. Of these particulars,
you may see in S. Augustine de Haeresibus, and Sirmondus his Praedestinatus both of them Haeresi. XXVI. and LXXXVI. But all the while, the subject of this se∣paration is the discipline of Penance, received by the whole Church, as from the Apostles; the limitation of the practice thereof being the ground, upon which the difference is stated. And, for the ground of this ground; Whether it could then be pretended, that the Keyes of the Church could do no more then cure the scandall of notorious sinne on the one side; Or, whether it could then be pretended on the other side, that the Keyes of the Church import any Power to pardon, sinne immediately, not supposing that disposition which qua∣lifieth for pardon visible to the Church, and procured by those actions, which the authority of the Church injoyneth; All this, I am content to referre to that common sense which is capable to understand these particulars. I shall not need to say much of the Novatians at Rome, and elsewhere, the Donatists in Africk, of the Meletians in Aegypt, having said this of the Montanists; all of them, (if we regard the subject of the separations, which they made in seve∣rall parts of the Church) being nothing else but branches of the same sect, and, forsaking the unity of the Church, for their part of that cause which ingaged Montanus. The Novatians, because they would not indure, that those who fell away from the Faith, in the persecution of Decius, should be readmitted to the communion of the Church, upon demonstration of repentance. The Mele∣tians, for the same cause, in Aegypt, under the persecution of Diocletiane. The Donatists upon some appertennce of the same cause. Onely they serve to evi∣dence the discipline of Penance to have been as universall as the Church of Christ; when no part of it is found free from debates, about the terms liiting the exercise of it. They serve also to evidence the ground and the pretene of the Power of the Keyes, in the discipline of Penance, by the same reason which I alledged afore. After these times, when the customes of the Church, (which, from the begin∣ning, was governed by un-written Law, delivered by word of mouth of the Apostles, but limited more and more by the Governours of several Churches) began to be, both reduced into writing, and also, more expresly determined, by the Canons of severall Councils, greater and lesse it were too vain to prove that by dicourse, which of it selfe is as evident, as it is evident that there are such Rules extant, which, in their time, had the force of Law to those parts of the Church, for which they were respectively made. Onely I do observe the agree∣ment that is found between the originall practice of the Church in this point, and that order which I have showed you out of the Apostles writings, eviden∣cing that interpretation which I have given of them, by that rule which com∣mon sense inforces, that the meaning and intent of every Law, is to be mea∣sured by the primitive practice of it. For, we see so much doubt made, whe∣ther those three great crimes of Idolatry, Murther, and Adultery, were to be reconciled by Penance (that is, by the visible and outward demonstration of inward repentance) to the Church, not onely by Montanus, but partly by No∣vatianns, that that great Church of Antiochia remained doubtfull a great while, whether Cornelius or Novatians should be acknowledged the true Bishop of Rome, We see the Eliberitane Canons (which were unquestionably made di∣vers years before the Council at Nicaea, and therefore may be counted as an∣cient as any that the Church hath) exclude some branches of those sinnes from reconciliation with the Church. We see this vigor abated by the succeeding discipline of the Church. It is indeed said, in the Church of Rome at this time, that the ground of the Heresie (as without ground they call it) of the Montanists and Novatians was this; that, acknowledging the Church to have power to forgive lesse sinnes, they, (the Novatians) denied it the Power to forgive Apostasy or Idolatry: To which the Mon∣tanists added Murther and Adultery. But I have showed, in my Book of the Right of the Church, p. 17-27. that, within the Church also, as well as among the Montanists and Novatians, some of these sinnes were not admitted to communion, no not at the point of death. And, that there ne∣ver
was any opinion in the ancient Church, that the Church hath any Power to forgive sinne immediately, but onely by the medicine of Penance which it in∣joyneth; I referre my selfe to that which here followeth. Now it is plain, that neither those parts of the Church, nor the Novatians, did hold those sinnes desperate, but exhorted them to Penance as their cure in Gods sight; agreeing in not readmitting them, whither for the maintenance of Discipline, or for fear the Church, warranting their pardon, who might prove not qualified for it, should become guilty of their sinnes, according to S. Paul, 1 Tim. V. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, nor partake in other mens sinnes. For, S. John, and the Apostle to the Hebrews, had authorized the Church to make difficulty of it, though S. Paul had readmitted a branch of one of them, (the incestuous per∣son at Corinth) whether for the unity of that Church, then in danger to be di∣vided upon that occasion, or, as reasonably satisfied of the truth of his repen∣tance. But, when the zeal of Christianity decreased as the number of Christi∣ans increased within, and persecution without withdrew so many, that there was no means left to preserve the Body without abating this severity; (the num∣ber of Apostates in some persecutions, being considerable to the number of Christians) we need seek no other reason why the Montanists and Novatians should be Schismaticks, (not properly Hereticks) then their separating from the Church, rather then condescend to that which the Body of the Church found requisite to be granted. Let us see what crimes they are which the Eli∣beritane Canons, that is, the Canons of the Council of Elvira in Spain) ex∣clude from the communion, even in case of death. As, if a man at age, after Bap∣tism, commit adultery in the Temple of an Idol. cap. I. If an Idol Priest, having been baptized, shall sacrifice again. II. If such a one, after Penance, shall have committed adultery. III. If a Christian kill a man by Witchcraft, wherein there is Idolatry. VI. If a Christian commit adultery after Penance, VII. If a Wo∣man, leaving her Husband without cause, mary another, VIII. If a Father or Mother sell a child into the Stews, or a child it selfe, XII. If a professed Vir∣gine shall live in uncleannesse, XIII. If a man marry his daughter to an Idol Priest, XVII. If a Clergy-man commit adultery, XVIII. If he who is admit∣ted to communion, (upon adultery) in danger of death, shall commit adultery again, XLVII. If a Woman kill the childe which she hath conceived of adultery, LXIII. If a Clergy-man, knowing that his wife hath committed adul∣tery, dismiss her not, LXV. Sodomites, LXXI. If a woman forsaking an adul∣terer whom she had married afore, marry another, LXXII. If a Christian be slain or confiscate upon the information of a Christian, LXXIII. If a man accuse a Clergy-man (to wit, criminally, as a subject a subject, before secular Powers) of a crime which he cannot prove, LXXV. We see by these very particulars, an abatement of that which Tertullian stood upon, that no adultery should ever be restored to communion again; For here, Penance is allowed adultery the first time, by the VII. And, she that leaves her Husband and maryes another, is allowed the communion in danger of death; As also after her first Husband is dead, by the IX. And so are Virgines that turn Whores, if afterwards they re∣pent and abstain before death, by the XIII. So for murther, a Christian Wo∣man that kills her maid, is admitted to Penance, by the V. And a Catechumena, (that is a woman professing Christianity before Baptism) that kills the childe conceived of adultery, by the LXVIII. So in Idolatry; Those who one∣ly wear such a Crown as those that sacrificed did wear, but sacrifice not, nor are at the charge of sacrificing, by the LV. And truly, that VII Canon which allowes Penance upon adultery onely the first time, but refuses the communion of the second time, even in danger of death, is manifestly more severe then that Rule which divers of the Fathers, (Origen in Levit. XXV. Hom. XV. S. Am∣brose de Paenit. II. 10. 11. S. Augustine, Epist. LIII. LIV. Hanil. L.) do men∣tion, as in force and use at their time, to wit, that Penance cannot be done the second time. For, though a man be not readmitted to communion by Penance, upon falling into the same, or a more grievous crime, the second time, yet may
be allowed the communion in danger of death. Just as S. Ambrose ad Virgi∣n Lapsam cap. VIII. censures her to do Penance till death. Innocent I. Pope, Epist. II. expresly affirms that this was done in conside∣ration of the times; because, if men were lightly admitted, after having fallen in persecution, who would hazard life for the profession of his faith? But, that afterwards, either the Church must be Novatians, or grant Penance in danger of death. And truly, the breach which the Novatians made, must needs oblige the Church to readmit unto communion in danger of death. But, if the Church were obliged to be strict, when there was fear of persecution, least all should fall away, then was it obliged to abate, when many were fallen away, that the Body thereof might be recovered and restored. And the words of Innocent that follow, are sufficient to show, how much the Church then presumed upon that Penance, that Absolution, that communion which a man was admitted to upon confession of sinne, in danger of death: For he saith, Tribuetur ergo cum Poenitentiâ extrema Communio; The last Communion therefore shall be al∣lowed, with Penace. Now it is evident, by the Canons which Gratiane hath compiled, XXVI. Quaest. VI. VII. VIII. & Quaest. VII. cap, I. that, when a man was admitted to Penance upon confession in danger of death, the commu∣nion was given him provisionally, as well to obtain the grace of God to streng∣then him in that exigent, as for the quiet of his conscience; but neverthelesse, he stood bound over to perform the Penance which was, or should be injoyned, in case he recovered. And therefore, when Pope Caelestine I Epist. I. invayes against those, who refused Absolution, and the communion in danger of death; and Leo I. Pope, Epist. LIX. orders, that they be reconciled, by giving them the Communion; It is to be supposed, that they understand this Penance to be injoyned in that case, because the custome of the Church required it. And this serves to void the doubt that may be made, what the Keyes of the Church can have to do in the remitting of sinnes as soon as they are confessed, which serve to loose sinne, no further, then they serve to procure and to create that disposi∣tion which qualifies for forgivenesse. You saw afore in the second Book, what difficulty the ancient Church made in warranting the salvation of those that re∣pented upon their Death bed, though they proceeded to submit themselves and their sinnes to the Keyes of the Church, for their absolution, and the commu∣nion of the Eucharist at their departure. And though, Gennadius de dogmatibus Eccles. cap. LXXX. say freely, that he is a Novation and not a Christian, that presumes not faithfully of Gods mercifull purpose to save that which was lost, even in him that departs upon confessing his sinne; yet still this is but a pre∣sumption of what may be, not a warrant of what is, which the power of the Keyes, regularly used, promises. Otherwise, what would Gennadius say to the great Councill of Arles under Constantine, which denies absolution in that case, Can. I. as you see the Eliberitane Canons do? True it is which S. Cyprian saith, Nunquam sera est poenitentia, si sit vera: Repentance is never late, if it be true. But who will maintain that to be true, which the terrour of death, and re∣morse of conscience may rack out of him, in whom the love of God and good∣nesse hath not formed that resolution, of maintaining his professed Christianity, which makes God the end of all his actions? when as all that is done in such a case, by common experience, may be imputed to a true grounded desire of a∣voiding punishment for his own sake, with a superficiall desire of doing well for Gods sake. Though, on the other side, it may be presumed, that such a one is not first moved with dislike of his sinne, when first he submits it to the Keyes of the Church; but hath first done many such acts of sincere contrition, as his own judgement directed him to, for the gaining of Gods grace: And at length, to give himselfe further satisfaction, resolves to humble himselfe, not onely to the declaring of his own shame, but to the undergoing of that Penance, upon performance whereof, the Rules of the Church▪ also warrant his forgive∣nesse. Between these contrary presumptions, the primitive severity of the Church, it appears, refused absolution, and the communion, even in danger of death, to
some of the most grievous sins: Which afterwards was thought fit to be abated. Not proclaiming dispair to any sinner, but to oblige him, not lightly, to pre∣sume upon pardon of that sinne, which, the Church could never presume, that a man can repent him of enough. For, on the other side, it appears, what inconvenience the granting of reconcilement to all, at the point of death, may produce, if the intent of the Church, in binding over to Penance him that escapes, be not understood: Namely, to give men cause to presume of pardon by the Church, when the Keyes thereof cannot have their operation, in pro∣ducing the disposition that is requisite. And thus, the primitive practice of the Church, seems to demonstrate not only the Tradition of the Apostles concern∣ing Penance, and Excommunication which it abateth, and the Keyes of the Church, which it manageth; but also the Power which it exerciseth, not to consist in pardoning sinne at large, and immediately, but, in procuring that disposition to which the Gospel hath proclaimed forgiveness, and (upon know∣ledge thereof) in assuring the pardon which it pronounceth. For, whoso considereth the premises, can never be so madd as to imagine, that men were refused reconcilement even at the point of death, or reconciled with a reser∣vation of Penance to be performed if they survived, meerly for the satisfaction of the Church, and the example of others; But, because the Church remained not satisfied, that God was satisfied with their present disposition, as qualifying them for pardon according to his promise. Some men have mistaken them∣selves so farr, as to imagine, that when a man was admitted to absolution by imposition of hands, and the Communion, in danger of death, by the ancient Church, he could stand bound no further to any Penance. But it is very evident in the practice of the ancient Church, that, in regard some sinnes were not admitted to reconcilement by Penance, therefore it concerned the Penitent, in the first place, to make suit to be admitted; Which being granted, and, he ha∣ving undertaken the Penance imposed upon him, in the next place, he was ad∣mitted to the Prayers of the Church, (at all the solemn Assemblies of the Church, during the time of his Penance) with imposition of hands, as the means to obtain pardon at Gods hands. So, Imposition of hands, signified not Abso∣lution, but the way to it, and, capacity of it, supposing the performance of Penance imposed. And this is petere poenitentiam, & accipere poenitentiam propter manûs impositionem; in the ancient canons, by name Concil. Tolet. XI. can. XII. to demand Penance, and to accept of Penance by imposition of hands; As ap∣pears by that form of the publick service of the Church, which you have in the Constituions, II. 8. 9. where you have the form of prayer to be offered for Peni∣tents, when they were dismissed, before the celebration of the Eucharist, he that prayeth holding his hands over them kneeling. Neither was there any o∣ther absolution then this in use, according to the ancient custome of the Church; He who, having declared himself offended at himself, for that which he had done, had obtained of the Church, to be admitted to Penance, for the time that his Penance continued, was prayed for by the Church, that his sinne might be pardoned, in order to communion with the Church. The time of his Penance being compleated, his absolution was the restoring of him to commu∣nion with the Church, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. This is that absolu∣tion upon which the Church warranteth his pardon, not by pronouncing him pardoned, but supposing him qualified for it, by that disposition which his Pe∣nance had produced. And though, afterwards, the form of absolution changed, and was pronounced by way of sentence, not by way of Prayer desired; yet was there still the more doubt to be made of the validity thereof, the more con∣fidence it signified; because the more trust was reposed in the power of the Church, the lesse provision was made for that disposition which the Gospel, be∣fore the being of the Church, requireth. One thing more I desire may be con∣sidered in the practice of the ancient Church, to evidence the same, which is this; The Church, being necessitated to abate of the primitive strictnesse, and to admit all maner of sinnes to reconcilement by Penance, that they might the better answer their trust to God, in not warranting the pardon of sinne
without reasonable trial of repentance, took a course of lengthning the time of Penance, during which, the conversation of the Penitent might yield as∣surance of it. For the Canons, whereby so many years Penance is prescribed upon such and such sinnes, were couched in writing long after the times of Montanus or Novatians; And therefore the customes, whereby they came in force before they came in writing, had their beginning from that obligation which the Church desired to discharge, of not warranting forgiveness of sinne, but upon due grounds. In this case then, and generally, whosoever was injoyn∣ed Penance, to qualifie him for communion with the Church, if he did any e∣minent act which might evidence the sincerity and zeal of his conversion, or his forwardness and eagerness in taking revenge upon himself, was not onely of custome and course, so much the easier readmitted by the Church, but was ordered by the Canons to be so much the easier and sooner readmitted. For evidence whereof, as also of divers other particulars here alleadged, I will remit the Reader that would be informed to Morinus his great work de administrati∣one Poenitentiae. It shall serve my turn here to point out to you, the ground which these effects evidence to be this; That the Catholick Church proceeded not in binding and loosing, as if it had any power to give pardon at large; But as sup∣posing, that those that are bound by the Church, cannot be loosed but by the Church; nor loosed by the Church, but supposing the disposition that qualifi∣eth for pardon produced in them by that Penance, which the authority thereof constraineth to undergo. And therefore, that, in the power of injoyning Pe∣nance fitting, as well as of declaring pardon, the power of forgiving sinnes in the Church, is by the tradition of the Church declared to consist, I will conclude with the words of Firmilianus, Bishop of Casarea Cappadocia, in his Leter to S. Cyprian, among S. Cyprians LXXV. He saith, that they used in their parts to hold Synods every year, Ut si qua graviora sunt, communi consilio dirigantur; Lapsis quo{que} fatribus, & post lavacrum salutare à Diabolo vulneratis, per poeniten∣tiam medela quaeratur; Non quasi à nobis remissionem peccatorum consequantur, sed ut per nos ad intelligentiam delictorum suorum convertantur, & domino pleniùs satisfacere cogantur. This businesse of greater waight may be ordered by common advice; And remedy found by Penance, for brethren that have fallen away, being wounded by the Devill, after the laver of salvation; Not as if they got pardon of sinnes from us; but that, being, by our means converted to understand their own sinnes, they may be constrained to make the fuller satisfaction to God. These are the very terms upon which my opinion standeth. Let us now compare the Originall and general practice of the Church, with that which we have in the Apostles writings, and say, by the agreement, whi∣ther their authority were the beginning of it or not. Shall we think that all who ever questioned the reconciling of some sinnes, were utterly void of com∣mon sense, in imagining, that the Apostle to the Hebrews, and S. John, writing of the sin unto death, intended not to speak of that pardon which the Church may or ought to give or not give, when we find no other motive for that severity, but never see any of the Church except, that they concern not that purpose, but, well and good, that they serve not to prove it? In like maner you have seen S. Paul witnesse the order then in the Church, to mourn for those that were excluded the communion of the Church: You have seen S. John and S. James, after our Saviour, signifie, that the means of procuring remission of sin by the Church, is to be expected from the prayers of the Church. You may see on the other side, the primitive Church make great demonstration of sorrow, at the discovery of those sinnes, for which some body is shut out of the Church, or reduced to Penance; As you may see by the authorities alledged in Grotius, upon 1 Cor. V. 2. and by Epiphanius his Exposition of 2. Cor. XII. 21. Haer. LIX. especially by that eminent example of Natalis in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. V. 28. And, in the solemn service of the Church, before the celebration of the Eucharist, from the beginning, you have seen a Prayer appointed to be made for those that were under Penance, (as well as for those that were not baptized, and those that were vexed with evill Spirits) that so
they might be dimissed before the Eucharist, to which they were not to be ad∣mitted: I say, therefore, they who see this, if they will see what they do see, have evidence, what the Apostles instituted in the Church; as also upon what ground, and to what purpose, by what the Church immediately after them did practice. A third thing there is, which visibly derives, not onely these Ordinances, but the true intent and meaning of them, from the institution of the Apostles; and that is the indulgence which S. Paul useth, in abating the Penance of that incestuous person whom I spoke of at Corinth. Indulgence in Ammianus, sig∣nifies the discharging of taxes imposed upon the Provinces of the Romane Em∣pire, by an act of Grace of the Emperours, upon remonstrance of reasons, wherefore this or that Province might deserve to be eased. What can be more like this, then the abatement of that hardship, whereby, those that were pre∣scribed Penance, were to demonstrate their inward repentance to the Church? S. Paul, we see, upon representation of the submission of the Church, and the guilty person both, to the censure which he had ordered, and of the real demon∣stration of sorrow made on his part, and the intercession of the Church for his reconcilement, thus condescends; To whom you grant any thing, I also grant it. For if I have granted any thing, it is for your sakes that I have granted it to him whom I have granted it, in the person of Christ, that Satan may have no advan∣tage over us. For we are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. II. 10. 11. I showed you before, two reasons, which S. Paul may be thought to point at by these words. For, he acknowledgeth by the premises▪  ery considerable demon∣stration of conversion in the penitent, sufficient to argue, that S. Paul thought him really qualified for remission of sinne. But, in regard he declares here, that it is for the Churches sake, that he condesceeth, to prevent the advantage that Satan might have against them, he intima a jealousie of some mutiny in the Church, against his authority, in case he condescended not. For, though he grant absolution in this regard; yet, he may well say, he granteth it in the per∣son of Christ, though we suppose the party not really qualified for it, supposing that he doth it to preserve the Unity of the Church, chiefly concerning the com∣mon good of Christs flock. For, what S. Paul does by virtue of the office com∣mitted to him by Christ, that, he may well say he doth in the person of Christ, as tending to the upright discharge of his office. By the former of these reasons, we evidently see the intent and effect of the Keyes of the Church, in purging of sinne, by the discipline of Penance. For, if indulgence be granted in con∣sideration of evidence that appears, to ground a presumption, that the party is qualified for remission of sins, in the judgement of the Church; then is all the discipline of Penance to no other purpose, but, to oblige sinners to take that course, whereby they may appear to the Church qualified for remission of sinne. But that which S. Paul here doth, is the very same, that the primitive Church alwaies did from the beginning. For, whoso showed such zeal in taking revenge upon himself for his transgressions, that the Church might be satisfied, that God remained satisfied of his repentance; to him, the severity of this discipline was so fully released, that those strict Canons, that injoyned so many years Pe∣nance for divers great sinnes, may seem to have been but threatnings, inviting to show that zeal in conversion from sinne, that the Church might have cause to be satisfied of their inward repentance. And, as often as there was fear of schism in any Church, the practice of the primitive Church witnesseth, how ready they were to receive those that would return, abating the hardship of Penance. The reason being this, that, what the Church condescended to for the avoiding of a greater mischief to the body thereof, which is Schism, in that, she could not be understood to warrant forgivenesse of sins, to those whom she received, further then that disposition of mind, which the parties themselves know that they returned with, might warrant it. For, in as much as it was evident, that the Church waved the rule, by which they used to proceed, for unities sake; it remained also evident, that the charge of making good that disposition which qualifieth before God for the communion of the Church, devolves upon the
conscience of them, that impose the necessity of waving such wholesome rules upon the Church, whatsoever the form were, in which they were recon∣ciled. Let us now see, whether the primitive practice of the Church will justifie the voluntary confession of secret sinnes to the Church, as the means to obtain the pardon of them at Gods hands. Tertullian in his Book de Poenitentiâ, is very earnest in perswading, not those that were fallen into notorious sinnes, (for what need he perswade them to undergo Penance, who, if they would conti∣nue Christians; that is, if they would injoy the communion of the Church; could not avoid it?) but as it appears by his words, those that could not be constrained to have recourse to that Penance, which the Church required for the purging of their sinnes, or, for assurance that they were purged. For, when he pronounceth, that, sins of the will, which no man but the party is guilty to, are to be purged by this Penance, (as he doth in the third and fourth Chapters of that Book) shall we imagine, that he undertakes of his own head, to bring in a thing that was not wont to be done in the Church? Then might he have been rejected as well as his Master Montanus, when he went about to impose new Laws upon the Church. But those new Laws, I show you, were excepted against from the beginning of pretending them. Let any man show me, that voluntary confession of secret sins was ever exceped against in Tertullian, who writ that Book when he was of the Catholick Church, earnestly perswading to it. Likewise, though he writ his Book de Pdicitia, when he was become a Montanist; yet it is easie to discern what he speaks in it as a Montanist, by discerning, what the Catholick Church contests, and what it allows, of his do∣ctrine. In the seventh Chapter of that Book, it is manifest, that he calls those sinnes to Penance, which, he were a mad man that should take, either for scan∣dalous, or for notorious. The Novatians, being a branch of the Montanists, and refusing to reconcile the greatest sins, are to be thought to have followed their order, in reconciling lesse sins, as it is manifest by S. Ambrose, de Poenit. V. 2. that they did. Therefore they, and therefore the Catholick Church did practice the discipline of Penance, upon sins neither notorious nor scandalous. In S. Cyprian you have severall places, where he mentions Penance for those sinnes, which were to be confessed, according to the custome of the Church, after a certain time of humiliation; when▪ they were to be admitted to impositi∣on of hands, that is, to the prayers of the Church, for the pardon of him, whom the Bishops blessing (which the mposition of hands signifies) acknowledged hope∣full for remission of sinnes. Epist. X. & LV. The same S. Cypriane de lapsis, ma∣nifestly instances in those that had committed Idolatry secretly, or had resolved towards it, what befel them, because they revealed it not to the Church; so that sometimes, they did reveal it. Here cometh in the fact of Nectarius, related by So∣crates V. 19. because, the custome being, to confesse to a Priest deputed to that purpose, sinnes not otherwise known (who was to direct what she should pub∣lickly declare, when she came before the congregation) a certain noble Woman, whose case is there related, proceeded to declare that, which caused such scan∣dall, that thereupon Nectarius, then Bishop of Constantinople, thought fit to put down the office which that Priest then held and executed, of receiving the confession of those sinnes, which were afterwards in part to be made known to the Church, as the Priest intrusted should direct. For Socrates, relating the dis∣course which he had with the Priest, which advised Nectarius to abolish the of∣fice aforesaid; saith that he told him, it was to be feared, that he had given oc∣casion to bring S. Pauls precept to no effect, which saith, Communicate not in the fruitlesse workes of darknesse, but rather reprove them; Which must sup∣pose the publishing of those sinnes, which a man may pretend, by brotherly correction, to restore. And it is manifest, that secret confession of sinnes hath remained in the Eastern Church, and in that of Constantinople particularly, even to this time▪ So that no man can imagine, that it was abrogated by Nectarius. Origen in Psal XXXVII. Hom. II. advises, indeed, to look about you for a skilful Physitian, to whom you may open the disease of your soul; good reason.
For, there being a number of Presbyters by whom every Church was govern∣ed; and, it being in a mans choice, whom he would have recourse to, were he not to blame, that should not make diligent choice? But, when he adviseth further, that, if he think the sinne fit to be declared to the assembly of the Church, as, where it is to be cured; doth he not require necessary Penance, upon voluntary confessions? S. Ambrose de Pnit. II. 7. I. 6. II. 8. 9. laboureth to abate the shame of confessing sinnes. If he speak of publick sinnes, there can be no reason why: For, what hath he to do to abate that shame that cannot be avoided? That which may be avoided, is that, which cometh by confessing such sins, as it is in a mans power to conceal. The same is evident in S. Augustin, Hom. ult. ex L. And is further cleared by this, that it is evident, that, he who was discovered, not to have discovered to the Church that sinne, which he was privy to, but the world was not, is, by many acts of the Church, constrained to undergo Penance for that default. And, in the Eliberitan Canons, it is provided, that he who confesseth of his own accord, shall come off with a lighter Penance; he who is revealed by another, shall be liable to a harder censure. Can. LXXVI. But no evidence can be so effectuall, as the introducing of the Law of auricular confession; that is, of confessing once a year, as well as re∣ceiving the Eucharist once a year. For, be it granted, as it is most true, that this Law comes into force and effect, by the secular power of those soveraignties of Christendom, which, complying with the interest of the Church of Rome, have agreed, and do agree to inact the decrees of those Councils, which have been held by the authority of it, (or the provisions thereof, during the time that no Councils are held) by temporall penalties upon their iubjects; Is it therefore imaginable, that the Councill could have pretended to introduce this limitation, and demand the secular power to inact it, had it not been a custome in force before that act was done, that people should submit themselves to Penance for those sines, which the Church, without themselves, could not charge them with? Could any man offer so much violence to his own reason, as to affirm that which himself cannot believe, he would easily be convinced, by producing the fashion of Ashwednesday, and the order, for the greatest part of Christians, to declare themselves Penitents, at the beginning of Lent, with a pretence of obtaining absolution, to the intent of receiving the com∣munion of the Eucharist at Easter. Which, being more ancient then that law, sufficiently demonstrateth, that the effect of it was not to introduce the con∣fession of secret sinnes, which alwayes had been in use and force in the Church▪ but, expresly to limit and determine that which had been alwayes done former∣ly, for the future to be done by all, and at the least once a year. It remains now, to show, the originall and generall practice of the Church, that there is no Tradition to evidence, that no sinne after Baptism can obtain remission but by the Church; (speaking of such sinnes as make the grace of Baptism void) which is sufficiently done already, if we remenber, that, not on∣ly the Montnists, or the Novatians, but the Church also did sometimes exclude some sinnes from all hope of reconciliation by the Church, not excluding them, neverthelesse, from hope of pardon with God; but, not ingaging the Church to warrant it. For I demand, in what consideration that pardon is obtained, which the Church supposes possible for them to obtain. Is it not upon the same, score as all Christians obtain padon of sin? To wit, by being qualified for it, with that disposition of mind, which the Gospel requires; which therefore may be obtained, without the Ministery of the Church. For, if it be said, that these persons would willingly undergo Penance, upon condition of being restored to the Communion of the Church (upon supposition, that, by the Ministery thereof they are restored to Gods grace) and that, therefore, the desire of re∣conciliation by the Church supplies it, as the desire of Baptism is accepted, when it cannot be had; If this be said, I will allow, that he who refuses the Ministery of the Church, (tendring him a reasonable presumption of attaining recon∣cilement with God, by the means of it, according to the just Laws of Christi∣anity) can have no cause to promise himselfe pardon without it. In the mean
time, it is not the desire of reconcilement by the Church, that qualifies him for remission of sinne, but onely takes away the barre, that hinders Gods grace, to work that disposition in him, which qualifies for it. For, if it be a part of Christianity, to be a member of the Catholick Church, then are not they ca∣pable of the promises made to Christians, that will not seek them by the Mi∣nistery of the Church, when, and how farre, and according as their Christiani∣ty shall▪ oblige them to seek them. To the same purpose, I alledge also the se∣cond reason of S. Pauls indulgence, and the effects of it, in the practice of the primitive Church; To wit, the admitting of those that had committed Idola∣try in time of persecution, (or, who were otherwise born out in their sinnes by faction in the Church) to communicate with the Church, when, in such cases, there could be no presumption of sufficient disposition in the parties for for∣givenesse from God, but onely to avoid a breach in the Church, of all things most prejudiciall to the generall good of the Body. For, can there be any appearance, that the Church, in such cases, could be satisfied of the true and suf∣ficient conversion of those that are admitted upon such terms, when, it is mani∣fest, that they are not admitted of choice, but to avoid a further inconvenience? Wherefore, seeing the Church could not justifie the doing of it, if there were not possibility of their being qualified for the Communon of the Church; it follows, that this possiblity consists, in that the means of grace, being suffici∣ent for all within the Church, may be effectual without the ministery thereof, provided it be within the unity of it. Here I must alledge the custome, even of the primitive Church, imposing no Penance upon Clergy-men  that weae degraded for those crimes, for which Laymen were reduced to Penance. I remember the first Book de Synedris, al∣ledges this for an objection against the necessity of excommunication, seeing it was not necessary for the Clergy. Not considering that excommunication is a∣bated by Penarice, as Penance is abated by degradation, in the Clergy. But, casting a foul aspersion upon the whole Church, for imposing Penance upon the people, when as nothing required it, if the Clergy needed it not: And this upon a mistake, whether in point of fact, or, in point of right. For, it is not true, that the Clergy were not subject to Penance, especially in the first times of Christianity, either when the crime▪ was of a deeper nature, then such as ordinary Laymen did Pehance for; Or, when a Clergy-man, having been cen∣sured to communicate among the People (which was degradation at that time) relapsed. Though afterwards, they were remitted to do their Penance in pri∣vate, not bringing them before the Congregation, for the prayers thereof with imposition of hands. Neither is the reason which the ancient Canons give to be neglected, in point of right. For, the losse of their rank in the Church, be∣ing to them a rebuke, whereof Lay Christians are not capable; it is necessary that a difference should be made between them and the people. Especially, the interest of the Church requiring it, in regard of another rule, that, no man that had done Penance, should ever be admitted to the Clergy, because of the common Christianity imbased in them who have done Penance, which, in those who are promoted to the Clergy, is required, of the best. For those, who, for their qualities might best serve the Church, if they had done Penance, were ever after unserviceable; i not, might be restored. Whereby it appeateth, that the Church presumed of them who knew their duty better then ordinary Christi∣ans, that the loss of their rank would be sufficient to reduce them to true re∣pentance, without further constraint from the Church: As afterwards they were trusted to do their Penance in private. But this is full evidence, that the Church did not think all sin incurable without the Keys of the Church; For then, the Church could not have referred the applying of the means of pardon which they procure, to any presumption of any mans good conscience. The like ap∣pears in the reconciling of Hereticks and Schismaticks, to the unity of the Church, by sholes, that is, by whole Churches at once; upon whom, as it is im∣possible to imagine, that the discipline of Penance should passe, so is it known, upon evidence of Historicall truth, that those who were not to be baptized a∣gain
(as some Heresies were by the Canons in force) were admitted onely with Imposition of hands, that is, with the blessing of the Church, acknowledg∣ing thenceforth to pray for them as Christians, not as those for whom she prayes that they may become Christians; Which, not supposing possibility of pardon for them, not undergoing the discipline of the Church, could not have been granted. I avow it to be truly said, in this case, that the Baptism received among Hereticks revives, and comes to effect, by this blessing of the Church. For, seeing that the onely necessary barre to the effect of it was, the denying of that point of Christianity, which distinguishes every Heresie from the Catho∣lick Church; (or, the destroying of the unity of the Church, speaking of Schis∣maticks) those that so return, professing thenceforth the whole faith, and main∣taining the communion of the Church, cannot be said to want any thing neces∣sary to qualifie them for the promises of Christianity. Seeing then this possibili∣ty is not grounded upon the Ministery of the Church, which passes not upon them, but upon the common profession of Christians, made by them when they were baptized, and the taking away of that barre which made it ineffectuall a∣fore, by returning to the unity of the Church, though without any ministration of Penance; neither can it be said, that the disposition qualifying for remis∣sion of sinne, is not to be attained in the Church, without the Ministery of the Church, by the discipline of Penance, nor, that it is attained by the desire of it; but onely, that the barre is removed by submitting to it. A visible instance hereof I will propose, in the reconciling of England to the Church of Rome in Q. Maries days, an act of the highest nature that the power of the Keys could do; And yet it is notorious, that pardon and absolution, and the blessing of the Church was given them, who could not be induced to restore the Church goods, seized by Hen. the eighth. A thing excluding all pretence, fo any presumption of true conversion in them whom it concerned, and yet ound necessary, for the restoring of the Body in unity. But so, that the said necessity made it to be evidently for the general good, even upon these terms. For, maintaining those, who could not be induced to do right in the point, in the unity of the Church, there was no reason why the Church should be thought to warrant that abso∣lution, as to God, which it granteth, as to the Church; Because it appears, that it is granted to avoid a greater mischief: Leaving them who finde them∣selves concerned, by the ministery of the Church, the communion whereof they regain, to be reduced to that course which may assure their absolution as to God. But, I use this instance onely ad hominem, that my reason may be un∣derstood, not intending to justifie the proceeding in point of right; as I do un∣dertake to justifie the Council of Nicaea, in admitting the Meletians, who were guilty of the crime of Schism, not onely without satisfaction of their repen∣tance, but all in their ranks, onely suspending the exercise of their offices, till those that were presently possessed should depart. Or, as I might undertake to justifie Pope Melchiades, in offering to do the like, for the Denatists, for which he is commended by S. Austine Epist. XLVII. which the Church, supposing Schism to be a mortall sinne, (that is, of that number which the now Church of Rome injoyns Penance) could not do upon other terms then I have said; and, if it had thought no sinne reconcileable without the Church, could by no means have done. The same is to be said of those that are excommunicated, and cast out of the Church without cause. For, as no man ever doubted that to be a case which comes to pass, so can no Christianity allow, that a man should be exclu∣ded the Kingdom of God for another mans fault. He therefore, that hath the knowledge in Christianity, and the resolution for it, to keep himself to the du∣ty of a Christian in such a case; (though, being destitute of all advantage by the communion of the Church, it is difficult to do) he, I say, shall obtain par∣don of sinne, without help of the Church, and not by desiring the Ministery thereof, otherwise then, as not desiring of communion with the Church, remains a barre to the work of Gods grace. In fine, consider the primititive order of the Church, and that of the Church of Rome at this day, by the law of secret confession once a year. For, he that
considers, how much businesse the reconciling of a Penitent made the Church in those days, will never imagine, that it could be presumed, that all sins, which now come under secret confession, should then be expiated by the Keys of the Church. I have given you the testimony of Origen, directing, to make choice of some of the Presbyters of the Church, to make acquainted with secret sinne, that, if he should require Penance to be done in the face of the Congregation, his prescription might be followed. This inforces us to understand the other part of the alternative; that, if he required no such thing, it should be enough, to take that course of humiliation and mortification which he should prescribe, in private. And truly, one of the Canons of the Council at Elvira XXXII. or∣ders Penance to be injoyned by a Priest, not by the Bishop. Which I under∣stand to be, in private, and not in publick. Allowing it very probable, that this is not▪ properly counted Penance, but onely suspension from the Eucharist, in∣joyned by some of those Canons in some case, XXI. L. LXXVII. and is oppo∣sed to Penance, Can. XIV. So that, probably, one of the Presbyters might in∣joyn it in▪ secret by these Canons. But otherwise, seeing that, all this while, there was no Penance, but by order of the Bishop, (or as in some of S. Cyprians Epistles, of the Bishop and Presbyters, sometimes, when the case was difficult, as in Firmilianus quoted afore, by order of a Synod) what appearance is there, in common reason, that all sinnes, that now come under secret confession, could then come under the Keyes of the Church? In the order which Necta∣rius abolished, any man may discern, there was nothing but a course of a∣bridging publick businesse of the Church, by referring Penitents to one Priest set aside to that purpose. When that course was abrogated, still they had recourse to the Bishop and Presbyters; but it is manifest, so many could not be dis∣patched as afore. And now it is manfest, that▪ to require of every man, to confesse all the sinnes that ever he did since he confessed last, would be an un∣sufferable torture to mens consciences: And therefore, it is onely required, that they confess those which they have in remembrance. I ask then, how those which they have not in remembrance come pardoned? If by inward repen∣tance, restoring the disposition of a Christian, it is that which I seek. If, by be∣ing willing to confesse them, if I had them in remembrance, he that is not qualified for remission of sinnes as Christianity requireth, is not qualified, be∣caue he would have been so qualified, had it not been his own fault. I adde fur∣ther, that it is at this day resolved by Casuists of very good note, that a Peni∣tent is bound in conscience to impose upon himself further Penance then that which his Confessor injoyneth, in case he be satisfied in conscience, that he hath not imposed that which is sufficient. For, in the case of clave errante, it is ma∣nifest, that there is no remission by the Keyes, and yet remission is to be had, by the Gospel, antecedent to the Church. If then, a mans own Christianity may supply that means of forgivenesse which the Keys of the Church fail of procuring, it is manifest, that the use of them is not absolutely necessary, for every particular Christian, though absolutely necessary for the whole Body of the Church. Add hereunto the restimonies of Ecclesiasticall Writers, by which it appears, that, as they maintained the discipline of Penance, (which I also would maintain so farre as truth will allow) so they supposed remission of sins attainble without it. The exhortations of Tertullian and S. Ambrose, to Ec∣clesiastcal Penance, will no way inferr, that it was then actually a Law in force, that all sins, that void the grace of Baptism, should be made known to the Church, for the obtaining of pardon by the Keyes of it: For how ill doth i become any Law to begge obedience, by alledging reasons which must inforce it, if they be good, were there no Law? But, on the other side, what express testimonies, what necessary consequences there are to inferr, that there was no such Law in the primitive Church, I remit the Reader to the Collections of the Ahbishop of Spalato 5. VII. 10-20. and to the answer to the Jesuits chal∣lenge in Ireland.
CHAP. IX. Penance is not required to redeem tho debt of temporall punishment when the sinne is pardoned. What assurance of forgivenesse, the law of auricular Confession, as it is used in the Church of Rome, procureth Of injoyning Penance, after absolution performed. Setting aside abuses, the Law is agreeable to Gods. Of the order taken by the Church of England. ANd now it is time to inferre from the premises, the judgement that we are to make, of the law of secret confession and Penance, in the Church of Rome, premising in the first place, (that which is evident; supposing the pre∣mises) that the works of Penance (which they call Satisfactions, because they will have them to make satisfaction for the debt of temporall punishment re∣maining, when the guilt and stain of sinne is abolished) were never required by the Church, but according to the word of God, to render the conversion of the Penitent so sincere and resolute, as may qualifie him for pardon and Gods grace. It is not necessary, for this purpose, that I undertake here to show, that God, pardoning sinne, cannot, or ever doth reserve a debt of temporall punishment, to be inflicted in consideration of it. It is manifest to any man that is neither acted by passion, nor by faction, that, the death which God in∣flicted on Davids child gotten in adultery, and the other judgements which the Prophet pronounces against him, 1 Sam. XII. 10-11. were punishments in∣flicted in consideration of those sinnes which the nature and kind of them an∣swers expresly, for murther; that the sword shall not depart from his house: for adultery; that his wives should be defiled before the Sun. Therefore, when the Prophet sayes to him; The Lord hath set aside thine iniquity, thou shalt not die; It will be requisite to take notice, that, though his sinne is pardoned, speaking absolutely, because his life his spared, which was forfeit by Gods Law, (though into no mans hands but Gods) yet, this pardon extended not to extinguish the sentence pronounced, nor yet that which he proceedeth further to pronounce, concerning the childs death. Whither you will say, that, in such a case, sinne is remitted; because, absolutely, the man is restored to Gods grace; or not remitted, because, as to the punishments allotted, he suffers by Gods vindicative justice; is a controversie about words, which I will not spend words to determine. This cannot be denied, that, neither Gods originall justice, nor any covenant of his with man, hinders him so to proceed. But what is this to the intent of Penance imposed by the Church; which, I have evidenced, both by the Scriptures, and the originall practice of the whole Church, to have pre∣tended the abolishing of the guilt and stain of sinne? Indeed, it is not to be denied, that there is something more in that Penance which the Church impo∣seth. For, he that exacts the same revenge upon himself, at his own discretion and conscience, which the Church, by the Canons thereof, should exact, pre∣tends onelp to satisfie his own discretion and conscience, that God is satisfied with his repentance; (And there lies the danger, of satisfying a mans self with a palliative cure, instead of a sound one) whereas, he that does it upon the sen∣tence of the Church, pretends to satisfie the Church, that God is satisfied with it, and to assure himself of his cure. But, when this satisfaction to the Church presupposes satisfaction ro God, (at least, a presumption thereof, whither one∣ly legall, or also reasonable) well may I, without this exception, make this the pretense of Ecclesiasticall Penance. Neither had there been any cause, to question the doctrine and practice of the Catholick Church, concerning the sa∣tisfaction of Penance, had not the Church of Rome suffered it to be taught, (for, I should do them wrong to say, that they have injoyned it to be taught) that it tendeth to recompense the debt of temporal punishment, remaining when the sinne is remitted. For though, under the Gospel also, God may de∣cree temporal punishment upon that sin, which afterwards comes to be remitted repentance; yet, he who is restored to the state of Gods grace, (to whom all
things cooperate to good, as S. Paul saith Rom. VIII. 28.) though he suffer tem∣porall punishment for his sin by Gods justice, yet by Gods grace, to which he is restored, it is converted into the means of salvation, and of bringing to pass Gods everlasting purpose of it. Before I go further, I must call you to mind that which I said of the change of attrition into contrition, how it may be allowed by the covenant of Grace, and how it intimateth an abusive opinion, that the change which qualifieth a man for the promises which the Gospel tendreth, taketh effect in consideration of the intrinsecall worth of it; and not onely of Gods promise, which you have seen to be false. This dispute was a long time canvased in the Schools, without any reference to the remission of sinne by the Keyes of the Church. But, the difficulty being started, that Confession not made in charity, (that is, out of the love of God above all things) may satisfie the positive precept, but cannot avail to the remission of sin; Some sought a salve for this sore in the form of Absolution: which then proceeded, partly as a Prayer, partly as a de∣finitive sentence: For, they thought the Prayer obtained that Grace, which might be a due ground for the sentence. But, when the opinion prevailed, that the form ought to be indicative, it remained to say, how Confession and Ab∣solution should render him contrite, that comes onely attrite. Thomas Aquinas, to say how the Keys of the Church may be understood to attain the producti∣on of Grace, imagined the immediate effect of them to be a certain ornament of the soul, fitting it for Grace; by virtue whereof, that Grace which a man gets not by Penance when he is not contrite, quickens in him when he becomes contrite; As he that is baptized without that resolution which obtaineth the promises, becomes estated in them when it is rectified. And this opinion had vogue among his followers till the last age afore this; when, finding it more proper to raise then to resolve questions, it was laid aside by Cardinall Caetane first, then by the rest of his followers. In the mean time, the dispute of the change of attrition into contrition remained, most maintaining contrition to be necessary before absolution, till the Council of Trent; upon the decree whereof Sess. XIV. cap. VI. Melchior Canus first maintained, sorrow concei∣ved upon meet fear of punishment, with the Keys, to qualifie for pardon of sinne. Whose opinion is now grown so ordinary, that those, who hardly satis∣fie themselves in giving warning of the harm their own doctrine may do, go down the stream, notwithstanding, in yielding to an opinion that hath so great vogue. I do not intend hereby to say, that that the Council of Trent hath de∣creed this opinion, and obliged all to maintain it. The terms which it pitched upon are these; That, sorrow for sinne in consideration of the deformity of it, and the fear of Hell, with hope of pardon, but without any intent to sinne a∣gain, though of it self it bring not pardon, yet disposeth to the attaining thereof, by the Keys of the Church. Which may be true, though, onely sor∣row for the offence, and for Gods sake, qualifie for pardon by the Keys of the Church; if we suppose, that sorrow for a mans own sake, which, of necessity must first arise in him who discovereth himself surprized in sinne, to be the way and the mean, which Gods spirit actually assisteth him with, that hath forfeited the gift of it, to work him to that sorrow for Gods sake, which qualifieth for pardon by the Keys of the Church. Now, what I am to say, will easily appear before I say it, to him that considers what I have said concerning the disposition that qualifieth for remission of sinne, without consideration of the Church, and the Keys of it: The Ministery whereof, suppose instituted to procure that disposition, as supposing the Covenant of Grace which requires it. That he who finds himself in the state of damnation by sinne, must, if God send him justifying faith, in the next instance, believe, that he is predestinate to life; (without that resolution for his future Christia∣nity, which necessarily includeth sorrow for the offence of sin, and for Gods sake; without ground to presume of his perseverance till death in it) I have showed to be an imagination utterly destructive to Christianity. That he who confesses out of slavish fear, being absolved, should get that love of God above
all which his pardon supposeth; though an imagination not more destructive to Christianity then that, may be destructive to the salvation of more Christi∣ans. That slavish fear of the punishment due for sinne, though in a person guil∣ty of sin, and not cured of the love of sinne, is the work of the Holy Ghost, helping him that hath forfeited the gift of it; the way of recovering the state of Grace lost demonstrateth. For, if the Holy Ghost work not upon him that is in n, how shall he recover out of it? But is it strange, that he, who finding himself in the state of damnation by sin, knows, the onely means to be saved is to live as a Christian for the future, should resolve so to do in obedience to God and for his service, which he cannot do without that sorrow, which the present losse of his favour implies? Surely, supposing the assistance of Gods spirit, it cannot be otherwise. If this be the case of a Christian as a Christian, what can the Keys of the Church (founded by God upon supposition of Chri∣stianity, to bring men to it, and to salvation by it) do, but be instrumental and ministerial to the work of grace in this case? Confession therefore cannot re∣quire contrition (that it, sorrow for Gods sake) nor absolution effect it; But confession must be the means to procure it, absolution the effect that must sup∣pose it. When that course of humiliation and mortification, which the Keyes of the Church require, shall have had the operation, in settling that resolution for Christianity, which they may presume upon for the future, the sentence of obsolution recovereth the effect of Baptism, and reneweth▪ the gift of the Holy Ghost, which, perfect love that casteth out fear (according to the Apostle) at∣tendeth. This, the primitive and Catholick practice of the Church, as well as the covenant of Grace, and the condition thereof, demonstrateth. It was not then the custome to receive confession of sin, and immediately to give absolu∣tion; binding the Penitent over to make satisfaction for a debt of temporall punishment, remaining when the sin is done away. The first thing was to be admitted to Penance; to undertake the state, and habit, and fashion of a mour∣ne during the time: and so, to gain the prayers of the Church for his pardon, to be joyned with a mans own indeavours. Is not the means of changing attriti∣on into contrition visible, according to this course? Can it be visible by a word of the Penitent, though professing, at the present, to love God, and hate sin above all things? That the sentence of absolution should create that dispo∣sition which it findeth not, agreeth no beter with the originall practice of the Church, then with the originall condition upon which we are baptized. And, whatsoever Ornament the soul may be imagined to get by it, that grace, which quickens in him that becomes contrite, can never be imputable to the Keys of the Church in Penance, which were imployed without effecting it. Nor can it be said to quicken by virtue of any such imaginary ornament, which, by virtue of the Covenant of Baptism, quickens of course, without imagining of it. The bringing in of a definitive sentence of absolution, instead of the Prayers of the Church, which a man was admitted to by undertaking Penance, (the communion of the Eucharist being his actuall and finall reconcilement) argues as much change in the inward Christianity, as in the outward form of the Church. But, If the Prayers of the Church, joyned with the Penance of the Pe∣nitent, be a competent means to regain the state of Grace, a Prayer, imme∣diately upon confession, immediately before absolution, is not. How much less since the Council of Trent, which makes the definitive sentence the substance, the Prayers that are used, but the accessories, of the means of regaining the state of Grace by Penance. I proceed not hereupon to say, that the Ministery of Penance becomes void and uneffectuall to the purging of sin, where it is exercised upon these terms. For, as he who relies upon the sentence of absolution, for the producing of that disposition which is necessarily requisite to the remission of sinne, must needs ail of that which he promiseth himselfe, from that power of the Church, which God never granted upon such terms; So, the imposing of Penance may be un∣derstood to pretend the ransoming of temporal punishment no otherwise, then, loosing the bond of sin, whereby it may be turned into a spirituall blessing.
For, though the granting of absolution, and the communion of the Eucharist before Penance, is, in reason, and according to the originall practice of the Church, a contradiction to that sense; yet, nothing hinders the reason and the faith of Christians to bear up, and not be caried away with those corruptions, to which, the imperfection of Laws naturally induceth the perverse inclinations which we are born with. In the mean time it is worth the while to consider, what consequences the conceit of infallibility in the Church (not distinguish∣ing whither the present or the Catholick) creates, as well in the opinons of Doctors, as in the practice of people. There is so much difference between the way of ministring of Penance in the primitive Churdh, and the practice of Auricular Confession in the present Church of Rome, as must needs signifie, the hope of pardon to suppose the performance of Penance in the one; in the other, to be grounded upon a sentence of absolution that supposes it not; And yet, it will not be acknowledged, that there is any decay of discipline, any fault, any defect in the Laws and Customes (for what is Law but Custome; what rule is there for mens actions, that custome inforceth not?) of the Church, that cause so much difference in the proceedings of it. Howsoever the custome of redeeming Penance came into the Church, and, how prejudiciall soever the voyage of the H. Land, or the like, may have been to the discipline of it; the application of temporall good to some spirituall end, was a poor cloke for such a corruption, in comparison of that zeal to Christianity, which, fighting for Christians against Infidels pretendeth. This is the most material occasion that I find alledged, for that change which the discipline of the Church hath suffered, in granting absolution before Penance, To wit, the indulgences granted them that undertook to fight for Christians against infidels. And this is enough to render the abuse, and the decay of discipline by the means thereof, visible. But when Indulgences are proposed for a small summe of Money, (pre-sup∣posing indeed such qualifications, as need not the Indulgences, if rightly un∣derstood, and had, but as, not being rightly understood and had, render the In∣dulgences dangerous delusions) whither poor people will not rather be induced by our common corruption, to imbrace that sense which makes the pardon of their sinnes void, as so had; then that which makes them to be deceived of their money to no effect by the Church, I leave to the conscience of discreet Christians to judge. And, whither this be not horribly to abuse the Keyes of the Church, I leave to God and man to judge. In the mean time, I onely re∣mind you of that difficulty which the ancient Church made, in believing and admitting that those were saved, who, being admitted to the communion of the Eucharist in danger of death, died before they could accomplish that Pe∣nance, upon undertaking whereof they were admitted to it. For, is not the case of him, that steddily purposeth, to perform that Penance which the Church imposeth according to Rule, if he survive, much more hopeful for salvation dying afore, then his, that thinks his sinne purged by the sentence of absoluti∣on, without undertaking or performing any Penance at all, in order to the par∣don of it? And here, I summon the Consciences of the Doctors of the Church of Rome. Suppose a man take revenge upon himselfe, according to a good conscience, that is, proportionably to the weight of his sinne, according to the Rules that were in force in more uncorrupt times of the Church; another, according to the doctrine that is current in the Church of Rome, professing himselfe truly sorry for his sinne, and receiving absolution, presumes of pardon for it, inten∣ding to satisfie for temporall punishment that remains, as he is directed; whe∣ther of these is upon the better ground? whether of them pretends to par∣don upon the better title, supposing the premises, concerning the Covenant of Grace? He, who, satisfying his conscience, upon the original word of the Gospel, and the primitive practice of the Church, that he hath appeased the wrath of God by taking revenge upon himselfe, and is thereby returned to his first resolution for Christianity; Or he, who, being touched with sorrow for his sinne, and submitting the same to the Keys of the Church, hath done what the
current practice thereof requires him to do, for redeeming the temporall pu∣nishment of i? For it is evident, in the doctrine of the Apostles, and the primi∣tive practice of the Church, that the satisfaction of Penance appeaseth the wrath of God upon this ground, because it evidenceth that resolution for Christianity to be restored, which a man otherwise ought not to presume of in himselfe, when he knows in himselfe, that it hath been interrupted; much lesse ought the Church to presume of it in him, when the interruption thereof hath been visi∣ble to the Church. He then, who, having conceived sorrow for his nne, sub∣mits himselfe to the Keyes of the Church, to be restored to Gods grace by the ministery thereof, and does as he is injoyned to do, if the Church, and the per∣son whom the Church trusts for him do their duty, (that is, supposing the Laws of the Church to be good and sufficient, and well and sufficiently exercised) hath a good and sufficient presumption that he is restored. But he who proceedeth upon the common faith of the Gospel, and the primitive practice of the Church, (whereby all that is doubtful in Christianity must be resolved) attain∣eth that assurance of his restoring to the state of salvation, which, I have showed, is attainable. But, not supposing the Laws of the Church to be either sufficient, or sufficiently executed, that presumption of pardon, which can be built upon it, is neither good nor sufficient, but rather peremtory to salvation, by palliating the crime which it ought to cure. Now, for the ground which the Church of Rome gives a reasonable man to presume hereof, it is not to be denied or dis∣sembled, that the Council of Trent, Sess. XIV. cap. VIII. declareth, that it is the duty of all Confessors, to injoyn wholsome and competent Penance upon all Penitents, (and, that, by virtue of S. Pauls charge, 1 Tim. V. 22. (upon which the Power of the Church in imposing Penance, is truly grounded; seeing the blessing of the Church, signifieth by imposition of hands, is as much granted in Penance, as in ordaining) least they become partakers of other mens sinnes) declaring withall, the intent which they ought to aim at in imposing them; But we know also and see thereby, that there is no effectuall course taken to see that this be done: (whither it be possible, to take a course that may be effectu∣all to be done or not) And we know besides, how great vogue that opinion hath) which maketh attrition with the Keyes of the Church, (that is, the shame of declaring a mans sinne to his Confessor) a sufficient disposition to forgive∣nesse: And therefore it is justly to be questioned, whither the Law of secret confession, with these abusive opinions, and scandalous practises, under which it is now exercised in the Church of Rome, is for the best or not; That is to say, whether the greatest part of them who submit to it, do not unduly per∣swade themselves that their sinnes are cured by it, when indeed they are not. For, considering the ground of all superstition, and counterfeit religion to be this, that man, sensible of the wrath of God due to his sinne on the other side, yet favourable to that concupiscence which sinne pleaseth on the otherside, de∣sireth a colour to perswade himself that he is reconciled to God, by such means, as indeed serves not the turn; I know not whether perswasion is the more catch∣ing, (supposing the present division between the Reformation and the Church of Rome) that a man is justified by believing that he is predestined to life, and by calling to mind the assurance which once he hath had of it; Or, that he hath no more to do but to talke with his Confessor and give him content, who, it is great odds, does not believe any Penance to be required to qualifie him for pardon, but to redeem the debt of temporall punishment remaining after it is had. Whereby we may conclude, what to think of the performing of Penance, after absolution is pronounced. I do remember what I have said of S. James; that, when he commanded the Presbyters of the Church to be sent for to the sick, and to pray for him, with assurance of pardon for his sinnes, he supposeth those sinnes to be declared by him to them, (whereupon it follows immediate∣ly; Confesse your sins one to another, and pray for one another) together with his present disposition in regard of them; and that, if the case were such as required the hardship of laborious Penance, to satisfie the Church of the sincerity of his
conversion, though they prayed for him, (that is, suffered him not to go out of the world without the communion of the Church) yet they bound him over to perform that Penance, if he recovered, which the Church required in the like cases. For, can any man certainly know, that the whole Church used so to do, from the most ancient times that we have record of, and doubt, that the Apostle, speaking of that very subject, should suppose the same? Neither do I doubt, knowing what varieties fall out in all kinds of moral maters, that the same proceeding may be either necessary, or reasonable, in other cases. But, that the regular proceeding of the Catholick Church should be laid aside, that no further satisfaction should be demanded, then, whether a man hath perform∣ed all that was injoyned him when he confessed last or not; this I say, leaves it free to every mans interpretation, whether it tend to abolish the sinne or not; and by consequence, whether a man can, or ought so to rest satisfied, or further, be bound to see himselfe qualified for pardon, according to the Covenant of Grace. To which purpose, the form of absolution, by way of pronouncing sen∣tence not of seeking pardon from God, is to be considered. Not that I doubt, that the Church hath power to restore to communion with the Church (which this sentence effecteth) and to loose the bond of that sinne which it hath tied. For, if it be necessary for every Christian to be of the Church, then is it necessary for him, to seek remission of those sinnes which are under the Ministery of the Church, by the means which the Church hath appointed. But becaus I know, that the primitive form of absolution must needs agree with those Scriptures, which show, the means of obtaining remission of sin by the Church, for a great part, to consist in the prayers of the Church; And that the effect thereof did con∣sist in nothing else, but in being admitted to the prayers thereof for Peniten, with imposition of hands signifying the same. And therefore, the present form is an evidence, that the discipline of the Church is decayed in the mater of Pe∣nance, since the zeal of Christianity came to decay, after that the Powers of the world, professing Christianity, could not but countenance it with those pri∣vililedges and penalties, which necessarily follow the Religion of the State; and, by consequence, temporall respects were great ingredients in perswading men to be Christians. What the effect hereof may have been, I will not under∣take. But, when the world is obliged to take the sentence for good, as from God, and not obliged to presuppose the means to produce that disposition, which onely quilifieth for pardon; is not the scandall probable, in, and to those, that have not more care of their souls then they see the Church have? Sentence of absolution is pronounced, Penance is reserved in regard of temporall penalties due; what doth this proceeding pretend, but, that he who saith he is sorry for his sinne, so he be content to sue out his pardon from the Church, is qualified for it by the Keys of the Church; that, is by the sentence of it, not by the Mini∣stery of it, in producing that disposition which qualifies for it. It is not then to be said, that the Church, in the discipline of Penance, hath not a certain Juris∣diction, as every Corporation must necessarily have, in imitation of that, which, by the Roman Laws, is first and originally called Jurisdiction, which the sword of the Empire inforceth. For, if no Corporation can stand, without power to provide Laws for themselves; if all such are mockeries, if they be not inforced by penalties obliging obedience; then is the corporation of the Church, if or∣dained by God, by God inabled to inforce and constrain obedience, upon sup∣position, that a man desires to be saved by his Christianity; and, that the com∣munion of the Church is a part of it. And, the exercise of this power is rightly called the Jurisdiction of the Church, which ariseth upon the orignall constitu∣tion of it. But if this Jurisdiction suppose the Covenant of Grace, and therefore, cannot discharge any man that is not qualified as it requireth; then is the sentence of absolution to presuppose, the disposition requisite for pardon to have been produced by the Keyes of the Church; that is, by using the means, which the Church, as a Physitian, prescribeth; but further, as a Judge, constrain∣eth him to ta▪ that findeth it requisite to be reconciled to the Church, because he is a Christian.
And now, it will not be difficult to judge of the Law of auricular Confession once a year, now in force, by the Council of Lateran, in the Church of Rome. For, having marked the abuses hitherto reproved, so, that I cannot be ta∣ken, by any man that hath any conscience left, to allow any of them; and, ha∣ving formerly inferred, by necessary consequence, that it is in the power of the Church, to limit and determine the circumstances of doing that which a good conscience alwaies will indure, and probably will require any man to do; I must conclude it to be a Law which the Church hath power to make. Not as if God had commanded the Ministery of the Church to be secret; For, as I have showed from the beginning, that the prayers of the Church are, by the ap∣pointiment of our Lord Christ, and the practice of his Apostles, the means to obtain pardon; so I have showed, that it was also practised by the primitive Church. And therefore I do maintain, that, from the beginning, there was not, nor could be any difference, between the inward and outward Court of the Church, as now there must needs be, wheresoever Excommunion is inflicted upon notorious sinnes, and, sinnes that are not notorious, are cured in secret by the the Keyes of the Church. For, whether it were the knowledge of o∣thers, or a mans own conscience, that brought his sinnes to be cured by the Ministery of the Church, they came before those that managed the power of the Keyes in behalfe of the Church; and, by their judgement, whether at large, or limited by Canons provided afore-hand for the Church, was the cure ap∣pointed. The Council of Trent granteth, that God hath not forbidden pub∣lick confession of secret sinne. My reasons inferre more; That confession of sinne in secret, is an abatement of that discipline, which our Lord and his Apo∣stles instituted, for the cure of sinne by the Church; and by consequence, an abatement to the efficacy of his Ordinance. Neither can any thing be alledged for it, but the decay of Christianity, by the coming of the world into the Church, and, the necessity which that bringeth upon the Church, to abate of that which the primitive institution requireth, that the Ordinances of our Lord may be preserved, to such effects as can be obtained with the unity of the Church. And therefore, I deny not, that this Law may be abused, to become a torture, and snare, and an occasion of infinite scandals, to well disposed Con∣sciences. For, who will provide Laws for so vast a Body as the whole Church of Christendome yet is, that shall give no occasion of offence? They that pre∣tend it are but Absoloms Disciples, that, to cure one, advance innumerable. No more do I deny, that the skill of all Confessors, (that is, all that must be trusted with that power which this Law constituteth) is not, nor can probably be able to value the sinnes that are brought to them, and to prescribe the cure which they requite; supposing their conscience such, as will not fail to require that, which their skill finds to be requisite. In questions of this nature, though it were to be wished that such Laws could be provided for the Church, as, be∣ing unblameable, might render the Church unblameable; Yet, they that are capable of giving sentence, what is best for so vast a body, will find it best, (as in all other Corporations or Common-wealths) to improve the Ordinances of God, to the best of that which can be obtained with the unity of the Church. And therefore, setting aside those gross abuses, which may follow upon the perswasion, that those penalties which are to be imposed by the power of the Keyes, to produce that disposition which qualifieth penitents for remis∣sion of sinnes, tend onely to satisfie for the temporall penalty, remaining due when the sinne is pardoned; And, setting aside those abuses in the practice of Penance which tend to introduce this perswasion; I must freely glorifie God, by freely professing, that, in my judgement, no Christian Kingdom or State, can maintain it selfe to be that which it pretendeth, more effectually, then by giving force and effect to the Law of private confession once a year, by such means, as may seem both requisite and effectuall to inforce it. Not that I do condemn that order, which the Church of England, at the Reformation, con∣tented it selfe with, (as rendring the Reformation thereof no Reformation,
and leaving men destitute of sufficient means for the remission of sinne after Baptism) to leave it to the discretion and conscience of those who found them∣selves burthened with sinne, to seek help by the means of their Pastors, as ap∣peareth both in the Communion service, and in the visitation of the sick. But, be∣cause I see the Church of England hath failed of that great peece of Reforma∣tion, which it aimed at in this point; To wit, the receiving of publick Penance. This aime, you shall find expressed, in the beginning of the Commination against sinners, in these words; Brethren, in the primitive Church there was a godly dis∣cipline, that, at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners were put to open Penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day of our Lord: And that others, admonished by their example, might be more afraid to offend. In the stead whereof, untill the said discipline may be resto∣red again (which is much to be wished) it is thought good—What is the reason, that o godly a desire of so evident a Reformation could not take place, when Reformation in the Church was so generally sought, (besides those common obstructions, with all good pretenses will necessarily find, in all communities of Christians) I shall not much labour to perswade him, that shall consider, the ares of Puritantism to have been sowed together with the grain of Reforma∣tion, in the Church of England. This I will say, that, where visible Penance is exercised, for sins of themselves visible, (and much more, which the consci∣ence of those who commit them makes visible) there is a reasonable ground of presumption, that those, who see this done upon others, will not advance to the communion of the Eucharist, without visiting their own consciences, and exacting competent revenge upon their sins, though they use not the help of their Pastos in taxing it. That vulgar Christians would have been moved voluntarily to seek the help of their Pastors, in taxing the cure of their sins, without seeing the practice of that medicine upon notorious sins which the discipline of the Church required, who can imagine? For, nothing but example teaches vulgar peo∣ple the benefit of good Laws: No did secret Penance ever get the force of a ge∣neral Law, but by example. But, where there is no pretense of casting notorious offenders out of the company of Christians, that, thereby, they may be moved to submit to the cure of their sinnes, by satisfying the Church of their Repen∣tance, because the secular Power inforces no sentence of excommunication; it is no Christian Kingdom or Common-wealth, though Christians may live in it, as Christians may be cast upon a coast that is not inhabited by Christians. For, he that believes, not onely that there is a Catholick Church in the world, but, that he must be saved by being a member of it, may and will find imperfecti∣on enough, in those Laws, by which the Keyes of the Church are imployed and exercised; but, if he find no reconciliation of sinne by the Keyes of the Church, because no excluding of sinners from the communion of it, will find no part of the Catholick Church there, because no part of the Catholick Church was ever without it. And therefore, I must not fail to declare my opinion in this place; that, in a Christian Common-wealth, if by any means, those that are convicted of capitall crimes by Law, come to escape death, either by favour of the Law, or, by Grace of the Soveraign (as many times it falls out) and likewise, all those that are convicted of crimes that are infamous, having satis∣fied the justice of the Law, ought to stand excommunicate till they satisfie the Church. And, for the same reason, those whom the Church convicteth of crimes, which civill justice punisheth not, but Christianity maketh inconsistent with the hope of Christians, being excommunicate upon such conviction, ought not to be restored to the communion of the Church, until, by just de∣monstrations of their converion, the Church be satisfied of them, as qualified for reconcilement with God. For, where there is means, for those that are de∣tected of notorious sinnes, to be restored to the Communion of the Church, without the hardship of Penance; there can be no reason to imagine, that those, whose sinnes are secret, will, of themselves, submit themselves to the Keyes of the Church, to procure pardon, or to assure themselves of it. I find great reason to believe, that at the first, those sinnes which were brought under pub∣lick
Penance by the primitive Church, were onely those three great crimes of Murder, Adultery, and Idolatry, which, the Montanists, and Novatians, ex∣cluded from reconcilement by Penance, and the branches that were reducible to the same. For Pacianus, Paraenesi ad Poenitentiam, speaking expresly of this mater, expresses no more. But when the Empire was Christian, and the Church became ingraffed into the State; then was the Rule inlarged to all crimes that the Laws of the State made capital, to which, in point of conscience, those that are infamous by Civil Law are not inferiour, though, being not so pernici∣ous to the world, they are not by Civil Law punished with death. The Reforma∣tion of Ecclesiastical Law intended here under Edward VI. hath taken notice of these terms. As for the Presbyterians, that would so fain be authorized by the State to swagger & domineer over the consciences of their poor Neighbors, that they have not been ashamed to submit the Original power of the Church to an appeal to the secular; (which is in English, to let Parliament men live as they list, so themselves might be inabled to do what they listed with litle ones) to give them the power of the Church, is to destroy the Church, the power where∣of they pretend not to exercise to the curing of sin, but onely to the abolish∣ing of scandall, which, the Church never pretended to abolish, but by curing the sinne. And yet, they must give me leave to ask further, either how that con∣science can be cured of sinne, that is not wounded with it: or how it can be wounded with it, that is bound to believe the pardon of sinne before repen∣tance. So necessary it is, that they be required to disclaim the remission of sinne, and the opinion of saving faith, without supposing repentance, and the same to be procured by the Keys of the Church, before we suppose them to be a Church. CHAP. XI. The Unction of the sick pretendeth onely bodily health, upon supposition of the cure of sinne by the Keyes of the Church. Objections answered. The Tradition of the Church evidenceth the same. BEfore I leave this point, I am here to consider, what Ecclesiasticall power it is, and how well grounded, which the Church of Rome pretendeth to exercise in extream Unction; so called, because it belongeth to the sick in ex∣tremity; and, being accounted by them in the number of the seven Sacraments, is applyed unto the sick, over and above the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Eucharist. The question of the Sacraments, wherein the nature of them consist∣eth, and, by consequence, how many of them there are, I wholly set aside, from the present discourse: Because, I conceive, it will be determined more briefly, & upon more setled grounds, all at once, when I shall have discovered, what powers they are, which the Church indeed exerciseth, by those actions, which are, or which may be pretended to be Sacraments. But, it is plain e∣nough, that the Church of Rome pretendeth also to exercise the power of the Keys in extream unction, because, according to the words of S. James afore quoted, they assign the effect of it to be the remission of sinne. On the con∣trary, they who, by the promise of bodily health, to be restored to the sick up∣on the unction which the Apostle prescribeth, do gather, that the whole office there commanded was temporary, (as only intended for those ages when the miraculous grace of healing was in force in the Church) by consequence, do not admit any office to be incharged, or any power estated upon the Church by it. That which hath been premised, to show, that the circumstances of the Apo∣stles words, together with the originall and generall practice of the Church ar∣gueth aloud, his intent to concern the exercise of the Keyes of the Church, and the power of them, towards those that are in danger of death, ingageth my resolution to be this; That the unction of the sick, together with the prayers of the Church, for the recovery of their bodily health, (which Christianity alloweth not, without praying principally for the health of the soul)
is no way commanded by S. James, but as an appertenance or an appendant to the exercise of the power of the Keyes, in reconciling the sick to the Church, whereupon the prayers thereof become due; and therefore, without further promise of remission of sinne, or grace, then that generall promise, which the injoyning of prayer for the sick presupposeth. The reason of this assertion is now to be deduced out of the Scriptures, supposing for grounds, those things which hitherto have been setled. When our Lord sent his Disciples to preach the Gospel, and to do those works, that might witnesse them to be the Disciples of him that was sent by God, it is said, Mark. VI. 13. That they cast out many Devils, and annointed ma∣ny sick with oyl, and healed them. Now it is evident, that the miracles of the Apostles, as did their Masters, tended to one generall purpose; by bodily cures, to intimate the cure of sinne, and the recovery of life and health to the soul, which our Lord pretended to bring and tender them; though, by his works convincing them, that he was the Messias, whom they expected to bring them deliverance from their bodily enemies, and the happinesse of injoying freely the Land promised by their Fathers. Whereby we may see, what consi∣deration those Writers of Controversies have of the Scriptures, that ground the unction of the sick, (which they will have to be a Sacrament of the New Testament) upon this action of the Apostles; when as the Gospel, though now in preaching, by the Apostles as well as our Lord, yet was not establish∣ed till his death past and acceped by God, and by his resurrection declared to be accepted, as the ratification of that ambassage of reconcilement and peace which he came to publish. Far more discreet is that which the Council of Trent hath said; that, being intimated by S. Mark, it is published by S. James; At least if we understand the ground, whereupon we maintain, that the cure of sin is intimated by that bodily health, which S. Mark relateth to have been resto∣red by the Apostles. For so indeed it is. The bodily cures which the Apostles then did, seemed to intimate, that the imbracing and undertaking of Christia∣nity, is, from Christs death forwards, in consideration thereof, the cure of the soul, and the restoring of it from death to life. Which if it be so, then hath the Church no further power, in the pardoning or abolishing of sinne, then the absolute necessity of this condition will allow: That is to say, that it be under∣stood to pardon sinne, in as much, and no otherwise, then, as the ministery thereof moveth to induce men to be Christians, whither in profession or in performance. Thus those, who, by that Christianity which the Church maintain∣eth, are induced to believe, that they are lost for ever, unlesse they undertake the profession of Christianity, being induced so to do, are cleansed from sinne, and made Heirs of everlasting life, by the Baptism which the Church giveth. Thus those, who have forfeited the right which they attained by being baptized, by forfeiting the profession upon which they attained it, being reduced by the Church, to a disposition of making it good for the future, are thereby re-esta∣ted in the same right again. And, all the prayers which the Church can tender o God, for remission of sinnes, can no way be presumed, or understood to be of force with God, but upon supposition, that those for whom they are made, are either in the state, or in the way of performing that which their Christian profession undertaketh. This reason, added to those circumstances of S. James his words, and the originall practice of the Church afore quoted, which show, that he intendeth to speak of the applying of the Keyes of the Church to the sick; throughly convinceth, that remission of sinne is not attributed to the a∣nointing of the sick, but as an appertenance of the power of the Keyes passing upon them, and, upon supposition, that, by submitting to it, the Church, be∣ing inabled to warrant their pardon, could with confidence pray for that bodily health, which they chiefly need in that estate. For if, supposing this condition, nothing can hinder remission of sinne, if, not supposing the same, nothing can warrant it; what reason can we imagine, why the power of the Church, and those persons which are intrusted on behalfe of it, should be imployed in this businesse, but to procure that disposition, which onely qualifieth for remission of
sinne? And therefore, I cannot allow the excuses which the School Doctors use, to maintain the effect of this unction, in the remission of sinne, considering it precisely, without that dependance, which, in the words of the Apostle, it hath, upon the Keyes of the Church. They say, the effect of it is to wipe away the remains of sinne, whether originall or actuall, consisting in that pronenesse to the injoying of the creature, that faintnesse and sluggishnesse in following true virtue, that weaknesse in tending to God, which remain even in him that is perfectly restored to Gods grace. For these, if they be sinne, then are they cured by the same means by which his sin is cured (which, how it is effect∣ed by the Church) hath been oft enough said; If not sinne, God forbid but the prayers of the Church should prevail to weaken them in the sick; But, as those Prayers have their force uon supposition of the condition, so must they be un∣derstood to have the effect of forgivenesse ascribed them here by the Apostle, in virtue of that disposition, which the Ministery of the Church shall have pro∣duced. And therefore, I am not moved with those arguments which are produced, to prove, that the bodily health here promised, hath no relation to the mira∣culous graces of the Apostles time. It is said, that those Graces are not given according to mens ranks in the Church, but according to Gods good pleasure, as S. Paul saith, 1 Cor. XII. 4-11. where he reckoneth up that variety of Gra∣ces, which the spirit of God then stirred up in the Church, without any intimati∣on, that they were given rather to publick, then to private persons in the Church; And therefore, that it had been impertinent for S. James to name the Presbyters of the Church, had he intended to speak of curing the sick, by any such grace. But it is easie to answer, that such graces, though common to private persons in the Church, yet in reason, were most frequently imparted to those that were most eminent in Christianity: And, that publick persons in the Church were made such, upon presumption of their eminence above others in Christianity; which presumption, though it possibly may fail, yet, of neces∣sity, must hold good for the most part. And that, upon this account, as the Apostles, the Heads of the whole Church, were most eminent in all Graces, so it is in reason to be presumed, that the Presbyters of the Church (whatsoever were the office of Presbyters of the Church for the present) were after indow∣ed with those Graces then private Christians. Whereupon it will follow, (for a thing, which, no reason can be showed why it should not come to passe, though the Scripture offered no further evidence, that it did come to passe) that private persons, injoying the Grace of healing by the Holy Ghost, might re∣store to bodily health, by anointing with oyl; Not extending their functi∣on to the procuring of forgiveness for sinne, which the publick ministery of the Church pretendeth to procure. For, on the other side, notwithstanding the pro∣mise of bodily health in S. James, it is no inconvenience to grant, that the Prayers of the Church might fail of it, though it be not granted, that they fail of forgivenesse of sinne, when the person is qualified. The reason is, be∣cause the promise of forgivenesse of sinne, by the Gospel, is absolute, the con∣dition being cleared; that is, supposing the person qualified for it: But for bo∣dily health, there is no further promise, by the Gospel, then it shall seem to God, that the condition of bearing Christs Cross, in this or that man, requireth. It is also said, that, according to S. Paul, 1 Cor. XIV. 22. Tongnes are a sign to unbelievers, not Christians; And therefore, it is not to be supposed, that the grace of healing was to be exercised to the benefit of believers, but to the conversion of Infidels. For, S. Paul, that cured Publius of a fever, Acts XXVIII. 8. left Trophimus at Miletum sick, 2 Tim. IV. 20. and had Epaphro∣ditus by him sick to death, Phil. II. 26. 27. and cured not Timothy of his fre∣quent infirmities, 1 Tim. V. 23. But I answer again with S. Paul, 1 Cor. XII. 7. that, the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit with. That is to say; Those raes which do manifest, that the Spirit of God is in the Church, and therefore, that Christianity comes from God, are given neverthelesse to Christians, to do good to Christians with, though not to all alwaies, but to
such as God, who hath given them the Grace, shall move them to do good so with it. But, though I maintain, that the promise of bodily health upon the Prayers of the Church belongs to those graces, by which, it then appeared, that God is in his Church; yet, in that he requires the Presbyters of the Church, in that he promises remission of sinne; it is not to be imagined, that bodily health, and the exercise of that Grace which procured it, is onely intended, and so, that the precept concerns the Church no more then that grace appears: But, that the effect of it reaches to all ages of the Church, abating that which depended upon the miraculous graces proper to the Apostles time. For, sup∣pose remission of sinne past warranted the sick, by the Keyes of the Church that have passed upon him; Yet all Christians are to assure themselves, that their spi∣rituall enemies are most busie about them in that extremity: Whither out of despair to prevail, if not then, or, out of hope then to prevail; Their malice be∣ing heightned to the utmost attempt of casting him down, by the extremity of that instance. God forbid then, that the Prayers of the Church should be coun∣ted unnecessary in such an instance; though the remission of sinne be provided for otherwise. For, all obstructions to Gods grace, (requisite, in so great weak∣nesse, to overcome) being the effect and consequence of sinne; Neither can it be said, that the Apostle attributeth the remission of sinne to the Unction, by the promise which he annexeth to the injunction, whereby he imployes the Keyes of the Church to that end; Nor can it be indured, in a Christian, to count the removing of them, unnecessary and superfluous; especially, the patient being so disposed, and in such a capacity for the effect of them, by submitting to the ministery of the Church, for the remission of his sinne. And therefore cer∣tainly, as it is necessary to presume, that the promise of bodily health is not ab∣solute and generall, but, where it pleaseth God to give evidence of his presence in and to his Church, by the effect of his temporall blessings; So, that health of mind, necessary to resist the tempter with, which, Christianity obliges us to suppose, that Christians prayed for with bodily health, the Prayers of the Church are not effectuall to obtain, but, upon supposition of that disposition which the Church requireth; and that, procured by the Keyes of the Church, supposing the party obliged to have recourse to the Church for it. How well this opinion agreeth with the sense of the Catholick Church, I have argument enough, both in the sayings of the Fathers, whereby they ex∣press the reason of anointing the sick, and in the practice of the Church. Ori∣gen Homil. II. in Levit. Est & adhuc dura & laboriosa per paenitentiam remis∣sio peccatorum, cum lavat peccator in lachrymis stratum suum, & fiunt ei lachry∣mae suae panes die ac nocte, & cum non erubescit sacerdoti domini judicare peccatum suum, & quaerere medicinam, secundum eum qui ait; Dixi pronunciabo adver∣sum me iniquitatem meam domino, & tu remisisti impietatem cordis mei. In quo impletur & illud quod Apostolus dicit; Si quis autem infirmatur, vocet Presbyteros Ecclesiae, & imponant ei manus, ungentes eum oleo in nomine domini, & oratio fidei salvabit infinum, & si in peccatis fuerit, remittentur ei. There is yet a hard and painfull remission of sinnes by Penance, when the sinner washeth his Couch with tears, and his tears become his bread day and night; and when he is not ashamed to declare his sinne; o the Priest of God, and seek his cure, according to him that saith; I said, I will declare my sinne to the Lord, against my selfe, and thou forga∣vest the impiety of my heart. Wherein is also fulfilled that which the Apostle saith; But if a man be sick, let him send for the Priests of the Church, and let them lay hands on him, anointing him with oyl in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick; and if he be in sinne it shall be forgiven him. Here, he gives Priests the power of forgiving sinne from S. James. S. Chrysostome de Sacerdotio  II. 8. . For, not onely when they regenerate us, (by Baptism) but afterwards also, have they power to remit sinnes. For, is any man sick among you? saith he; let him call the Pastors of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oyl in
the name of Lord. Shall we then ascribe the effects of this power to the bodily act of anointing with oyl? or to their Prayers, not supposing that disposition to be procured by their ministery, which the promise of remission supposeth? Neither of both will stand with the premises; seeing the Prayers of the Church cannot be effectuall to them, that submit hot to the Ministery of the Church, when it becomes uecessary for the procuring of that disposition which qualifies for remission of sinne; so that, the sense of the ancient Church, declared here by Origen, and S. Chrysostome, must be understood to proceed upon considera∣tion of the power of the Keys, exercised upon the sick person that receiveth the unction, with prayers for his ghostly and bodily health. S. Augustine, de Tempo∣re Serm. CCXV. Quoties aliqua infirmitas supervenerit, corpus & sanguinem Christi ille qui aegrotat accipiat. Et inde corpusculum suum ungat, ut illud quod scriptum est impleatur in eo; Infirmatur aliquis—Videte fratres, quia qui in in∣firmitate ad Ecclesiam accurrerit, & corporis sanitatem recipere, & peccato∣rum indulgentiam merebitur obtinere. As oft as any infirmity comes, let him that is sick receive the Body and Blood of Christ: And then let him anoint his Body, that that which is written may be fulfilled in him; If any man be sick—See brethren, that he who shall have recourse to the Church in sickness, shall be thought worthy to obtain both the recovery of bodily health, and indulgence for his sinnes. Now I ask, whether the Rule of the Church will allow the communion of the Eu∣charist to him that hath not recourse to the Church for the cure of his sinne, when he ought to have recourse to it. For, if we suppose the Eucharist to be given him upon confession of sinne, then the reason which I pretend appears. If without, it is because nothing obliges him to have recourse to the Keyes of the Church at that time: And so, the prayers of the Church, and the Eucharist, and the unction are therefore effectual, because the Church rightly supposeth him qualified for remission of sinnes, without recourse to other means; For, dai∣ly sinnes and hourly, are abolished by daily and hourly devotions, with detesta∣tion of the same, and yet more firmly abolished by partaking of these offices ministred by the Church. Here I must give notice, that I undertake not that this Sermon is S. Augustines own, which, I see, is censured among those pieces that have crept under his name by mistake, or by imposture: For, the stile also seemeth to make it some hundreds of years later then his time. But I think it more advantage to my opinion, that it held footing in the Church so long after S. Austin, then, that it appeareth to have been the sense of his time. For, the sense of the now Church of Rome, that remission of sin is to be attributed to the Unction, appears to be of so much the later date. And therefore I alledge al∣so the words that are quoted out of the Book de rectitudine Catholicae conver∣sationis, among S. Austines Works; Qui aegrotat, in solâ dei miserecordiâ confi∣dat, & Eucharistiam cum fide & devotione accipiat, oleum{que} benedictum fideli∣ter ab Ecclesiâ petat, unde corpus suum ungatur: Et, secundum Apostolum, ora∣tio fidei salvabit infirnuim, & alleviabit eum dominis; Nec solum corporis, sed & animae sanitatem accipiet. Let him that is sick trust onely in the mercy of God, and receive the Eucharist with faith and devotion, and faithfully send for the con∣secrated oyl from the Church, that his body may be anointed with it; And accor∣ding to the Apostle, the Prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall give him ease; And he receive health, not onely of Body, but soul also. This, in∣deed, is something like that which they say now in the Church of Rome, that, our originall inclination to evill, dulnesse, and faintnesse to good, and averse∣nesse of the mind from spirituall exercises, are those reliques of sinne, which this Unction cureth. In the mean time, remission of sinne is or ought to be presupposed by the Keyes of the Church, passed upon him that duly receives the Eucharist; Nor can that health of the mind, which cureth these infirmities, be attributed to the Unction which pretends bodily health, but to the prayers of the Church, prescribe to be made for the sick in that estate. And, since those that deduce the office of anoiniting the sick, and, by consequence, the ef∣fect of it, from the practice of the Apostles curing with oyl, as Bede, Theophy∣lact, and Euthynius upon Mark VI. how will they justifie the spirituall pro∣mise
of remission of sinne, to depend upon the bodily act of anointing the sick, but upon supposition of that disposition of the soul which qualifieth for it, which cannot be supposed, when recourse ought to be had to the Keyes of the Church for obtaining it, and is not? And therefor, there can be no greater argument thereof in the practice of the Church, then this; that the orinary use of this unction, both in the Eastern and Western Church, is after receiving the Euha∣ril, which supposeth in the Church, a legall presumption at least, of the pares being in the state of grace. The words of venerable Bede, upon Mark VI. 13. are by no means to be neglected, Dicit Apostolus acobus; Infirmatur quis in vobis? Inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, & orent super ipsum, ungentes eam leo in nomine dmini. Et, si in peccatis sit, dimittentur ei. Unde patet, ab ipsis Apostol hunc Sanctae cclesiae morem esse traditum, ut energumeni, vel alii quilibet aegroti ugantur oleo, pontificali benedictione consecrato. The Apostle James saith; Is ay man among you sick? let him bring the Priests of the Church, and et them pray over him, anointing him with oyl in the name of the Lord. And, if he be in sinnes, they shall be forgiven him. Whence it appeareth, that this custome was delivered to the Holy Church by the Apostles, that the vexed with evill Spirits, and other sick persons be anointed with oyl, consecrated by the blessing of the High Priest. I believe no lesse. By that which the Apostles did then it appeareth, that thereup∣on S. James ordered, and the Church used to anoint the sick in hope of bodily health; but with prayers for the soul also, and that, by the ministers of the Church, when the case required their presence, that is, when the ministers of the Keyes was requisite. But when he saith; That the vexed with unlen spi∣rits, as well as the sick, were to be anointed with it, he toucheth thar whih he declareth more at large uon James V. 14. 15. Hoc & Apostolos fecisse in Evangelio legimus, & nunc Ecclesiae consuetudo tenet, ut infirmi oleo cosecrato ungantur a Presbyteris, & oratione comitante sanentur. Nec solum Presbyteris, sed, ut Innocentuis Papa scribit, etiam omnibus Christianis uti licet eodem oleo, in sua aut suorum infirmitate, ungendo. Quod tamen oleum non nisi ab Episcopis licet con∣fici. Nam quod ait in nomine domini; significat oleum consecratum in nomine do∣mini. Vel certe, quia, cum ungunt infirnium, momen domini super eum invocare debent. This, was not onely read in the Gospel that the Apostle did, but also the custome of the Church now holdeth, that the sick be anointed with consecrated oyle by the Priests, and cured by Prayer accompanying the same. Nor may onely Priests, but also all Christians, as Pope Innocent writeth, use the same oyle, when they or theirs are sick, by anointing. Which oyl, notwithstanding, is not to be conse∣crated but by the Bishop. For, that which he sath, in the name of the Lord, signifi∣eth that the oyl must be consecrated in the name of the Lord. Or he saith it, for∣sooth, because, when they anoint the sick, they are to call upon the Name of the Lord over him. The words of Pope Innocent, Epist. I. Quod non est dubinum, de fidelibus aegro tantibus accipi vel intelligi debere, qui sancto oleo Chrismatis pe∣rungi possunt, quo ab Episcopo confecto, non solum sacerdotibus, sed omibus uti Christianis licet, in sua aut suorum necessitae, inungendo. Which (words of S. James) are without doubt to be taken and understood of believers that are sick, who may be anointed with the holy oyle of anointing. Which, being consecrated by the Bishop, not Priests onely, but all Christians may use, when they or theirs need it, by anointing. And by and by; Nam poenitentibus istud infundi non potest, quia genus est Sacramenti. Nam quibus reliqua Sacramenta negantur, quomodo unum genus putatur concedi? For it cannot be poured upon Penitents, because it is a kind of Sacrament. For, how should it be thought that one kind can be allowed them, whom the rest of the Sacraments are refused? Bede agin; Si ergo infirmi in peccatis sint, & haec Presbyteris Ecclesiae confessi fueri, ac perfecto corde ea relin∣quere at{que} emendare sategerint, dimittentur eis. Ne{que} enim sine cofessione emen∣dationis peccàta querunt dimitti. Unde recte subiungitur; Confitemini ergo alteur∣tium peccata vestra, & orate pro invicem, ut salvemini. In hac autem sententia illa debet esse discretio, ut quotidiana levia{que} peccata alterutrum coaequalibus confi∣teamur, eorum{que} quotidianà credamus oratione salvari. Porro, gracioris leprae im∣munditiaem juxta legem sacerdoti paudamus, a{que} ad ejus arbitium, qualiter &
quanto tempore jusserit, pacificari curemus. If the sick, then, be in sins, and shall have confessed them to the Priests of the Church, and indeavoured to leave and mend them with a perfect heart, they shall be forgiven them. For sinnes cannot be forgiven without profession of amendment. In which sentence this discretion is to be, that we confesse daily and light sinnes to one anothers equalls, believing that they are cured by their daily prayers. But open the uncleannesse of greater leprosie, to the Priest, according to the Law, and see them reconciled at his discretion, how, and how long he orders. This is the very sense that I give the Apostles, according to that strait communion Christians then held with Christians as members of the Church: Why not rely upon the advice and prayers of Christians as Chri∣stians, who are commanded to procure the salvation of Christians next their own, in matters whereof they may be thought capable? Therefore, those sins which S. James directs the Priests to pray for, are such, as, for the weight of them, must resort to the Keyes of the Church for their cure. But when Bede, when Pope Innocent allows all Christians to anoint themselves, or theirs, with consecrated ovl; when the Sermon de Tempore commands them to anoint their bodies; when the Book de rectitudine Catholicae conversationis, directs them to send for it from the Church; it is manifest that they speak of Unction alone, whereas S. James, speaks of Unction joyned with the Keyes of the Church, and that the Priests office is required in that case. It is also manifest, that Pope Innocent calls that unction a Sacrament which Christians give themselves, which, though he refuses Penitents, yet, those whom the Priest shall have given the Communion to, could not be refused it. Which referres remission of sinne to the Keyes of the Church, but the hope of bodily health to the unction, with prayer, such as the case requires. In the Penitentiall of Theodore of Canterbury, thus it was read, according to Buchardus his collection, XVIII. 14. Ab infir∣mis, in periculo mortis positis, per Presbyteros pura inquirenda est confessio pecca∣torum, non tamen illis imponenda quantitas poenitentiae, sed innotescenda, & cum amicorum orationibus & studiis elemosynarum, pondus poenitentiae sublevandum: Ut, si fortè migraverint, ne obligati excommunicatione, alieni vel ex consortio ve∣niae fiant. Aquo periculo si divinitus ereptus convaluerit, poenitentiae modum à suo confessore impositum diligenter observet. Et ideò, secundùm Canonicam authorita∣tem, ne illis anua pietatis clausa videntur, orationibus & consolationibus Eccle∣siasticis, sacrâ cum unctione olei animati, juxta statuta sanctorum Patrum com∣munione vietici reficiantur. Of the sick that are in danger of death, a clear con∣fession of sins is to be demanded by the Priests; yet is not the quantity of Penance to be imposed upon them, but to be notified, and the waight of it to be eased with the Prayers of their friends, and zeal in giving alms; That, if they chance to depart, they be not (as bound by excommunication) strangers, and without the participati∣on of paradox. From which danger if God save him, and he recover, let him dili∣gently observe that measure of Penance which his Confessor iposed. And there∣fore, according to the authority of the Canons, that the door of pity seem not shut upon them, being comforted with the prayers and consolations of the Church, with the holy ointing of oyl, let them, according to the constitutions of the Holy Fa∣thers, be refreshed with the communion of the Eucharist. The same Burchardus XVIII. 11. quotes that which follows out of the decrees of Pope Eusebius, cap. X. in whose decretals now extant, (which Isidorus Mercator is thought to have forged) I find it not; But, he who observes, how proper the order which he prescribes in the case is, to that which the former passage prescribed in that case, may perhaps have reason to thinke, that it is out of the same Penitentiall of Theodore, and that, the passage premised, is the very order to which he re∣ferres; Si quis poenitentiam petens, dum sacerdos venerit, fuerit officio lin∣guae prinatus, constitutum est, ut, si idonea testimonia habuerit, quod ipse paenitenti∣am petisset, & ipse per motus aliquos, suae voluntatis aliquod signum facere potest, sacerdos impleat omnia sicut supra circa aegrotum poenitentiam scriptum est, id est, orationis dicat, & ungat eum sancto oleo, & Eucharistiam ei det, &, post quam objerit, ut caeteris fidelibus ei subministret. If a man that demands Penance, while the Priest is in coming, be deprived of the office of his tongue, it is decreed, that,
if he have competent witnesse that he had demanded Penance; and he, by some mo∣tion, is ablo to make some sign of his will, the Priest fully do all that is written a∣fore about the sick under Penance; That is, say the Prayers, and anoint him with the consecrated oyl, and give him the Eucharist; and, when he is dead, do service for him as for other believers. By these remarkable passages you see, that, even when Penance and the Unction both were ministred, and prescribed to be mi∣nistred by the Priest, bodily health was expected from the Unction, remission of sinnes from the Keyes of the Church. How much more, having showed, by Pope Innocent, and venerable Bede, and others, that the anointing of themselves and theirs, was referred to particular Christians; is there reason to presume, that this was done, in case, when there was no question of binding and loosing sinne by the Keyes of the Church? We have, lately published at Paris, a Leter of Amulo, Bishop of Lions under Carolus Calvus, next successor to A∣gobardus, concerning some forged reliques, pretending that, fits of convulsions and Epilepsies were stirred at the presence of them, for evidence that they were cured by them, as true reliques. To which he saith; Si autem & languores ali∣qui ac debilitates accidunt, juxta Evangelicum & Apostolicum praeceptum, praesto habet unusquis{que} ut inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, & orent super cum, ungentes eum oleo in nomine domini, & oratio fidei salvabit infirmum. But if any sicknesse or infir∣mity happen, it is ready for every man, according to the precept of the Gospell and Apostle, to bring in the Priests of the Church, that they may pray over him, a∣nointing him with oyl in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick. Here, because the occasion is publick, and notorious to the Church, the Prayers of the Priest are directed, though without reference to the ministery of the Keyes. Certainly, Proculus the Christian, that cured Antoninus, Son of Severus the Emperour, by anointing with oyle, according to Tertullian, ad Scapulam IV. did it not as a Priest, which he did to an Infidel, but as a private Christian, having hope in God, by himself, to make his presence in the Church appear. Onely this difference we find, that, whereas Proculus did this as a sim∣ple Christian, indowed with one of those miraculous graces, whereby God ma∣nifested his presence in the Church, at the beginning of Christianity; After∣wards, it was provided, that the oyl should be consecrated by the Bishop, with the Prayers of the Church, in virtue whereof, whither applyed by the Priests, or by private Christians, there might be hope that it might operate. S. Chryso∣stome in Mat. Hom. XXXII. Eth. comparing the entertaining of the Apostles at home, there mentioned, with obeying their successors in the Church; . For both this Table is farre more precious and pleasant then that, and this light: which all know, who, anoint∣ing themselves with oyl seasonably, and with faith, have avoided diseases. S. Au∣stine, de Civ. XXII. 8. Hipponensem quandam virginem scio, cum se oleo per∣unxisset, cui pro illa orans Presbyter lacrymas suas instillaverat, mox à daemonio fuisse sanatam. I know, a certain maid of Hippo, hauing anointed her selfe with oyl, in which the Priest praying for her had dropt his tears, was straight cured of a Devil. Here is nothing but the cure of the body, by consecrated oyl, only, that the Priest who gave it the maid, prayed for her when he gave her it. Therefore, when Hilarion cured the Son in law and daughter of Constantia with oyl, we are to understand the consecrated oyl, with which, the hinds and shepheards of Aegypt cured themselves of the bitings of Serpents, by his direction. Hieron. in Hilarione. Nor did Malachias in S. Bernard, pretend any more thereby, then bodily cure. Therefore I do not marvail, that Innocent I. should speak of unction without Penance, who seems expresly to grant, that sick persons should anoint themselves with that oyl which the Church should send them for that purpose: To wit, upon supposition, that they need not the Keyes of the Church, for the cure of their sinnes. For, Frier Thomas of Walden de Sacram. Tomo. II. cap. penult. understandeth him, as indeed his words impart, if you of∣fer them no violence, and the practice of the practice of Egypt, who are said to have sent it to the sick, and of the Greek Church, in giving it to those that
are well, seems to imply; to wit, that, as when the oblations of those who cannot be present at Church, are received, they are partakers of the benefit of those prayers which the Eucharist is celebrated with, because they are thereby acknowledged to belong to the communion of the Church; So, the sending of that unction which they apply to themselves, importeth the blessing of the Church to go along with their Prayers, which it is used with. Thus much for cer∣tain; when the Greeks contend, that this unction belongs also to those that are well, as the complement of their Penance; arguing from the act of the Apo∣stles, who anointed those to whom they preached repentance, and allowing it to the sick, as that, which, for the present, may be applyed unto them, when as the exigent of their case will not allow them to perform Penance as you may see by Arcudius V. 4. they do clearly enough express the reason which I give. CHAP. XII. The ground of the Right of the Church in Matrimonial causes. Mariage of one with one insolubly is a Law of Christianity; The Law of Moses not injoyning it. The Law of the Empire not aiming at the ground of it. Evidence from the primitive practice of the Church. IN the next place we are to consider what Interess the Church hath in the Mariages of Christians: And that, without granting Mariage to be one of the Sacraments of the Church, or any thing implying what a Sacrament is, and by consequence, how many there are; But yet, supposing, for disputati∣ons sake, that it were a Sacrament; that is, not supposing the contrary, but, de∣manding nothing but that which must be granted, whither it be so or not, that our discourse may proceed. Two things I suppose, the one as proved in due place. That the Church is, by Gods Law, a society which all Christians are bound to have communion with; And, that God hath given a peculiar Law concerning the Mariage of one with one, and that indissoluble, to all Christians; For, upon supposition hereof, all the interest of the Church in Matrimoniall causes standeth. Which is, therefore, now to be proved; thence inforcing, that, whatsoever grows questionable among Christians, concerning Mariage, upon the account of that Law which is proper to Christianity, belongs to the Church to determine. For, it is not my purpose to say, that Christian States have nothing to do in Matrimoniall causes; But, that the Interess of the State and of the Church, (though not distinguishable by the persons, when the fame persons belong to both) are to be disinguished by the causes, and grounds, and considerations, upon which they arise and stand. So that, what comes from a reason concerning civill society, belong to the State; what from the Law which Christians onely acknowledge, to the Church, to limite and determine. If then, any difference arise among Christians concerning Mariage, that sup∣poseth not some provision brought in by the Gospel, I will not under∣take that the determination of it belongs to the Church by Gods Law. On the contrary therefore, that which becomes questionable upon that account, I chal∣lenge to belong to the Church to determine; that is, to those that have right to determine on behalfe of the Church. For, I appeal to the common sense and experience of the world to evidence this; That, when any Law is given to any society or body, founded upon reasons, which, afore the founding of it were not in force; there will of necessity fall out new Cases, in which it will be questi∣onable, whether the reason of the Law is to take place or not. And, let the Christian world be witnesse, whether it be not requisite to acknowledge, that, if Christianity come from God, then, God hath provided a course to secure Christians in conscience, that their Mariages are not against the will of God. Therefore, according to Aristoles reason, the law which God hath given Chri∣stians concerning Mariage being generall, and, the cases which mens particular occasions produce being infinite, and so, not determined by the Law; it fol∣loweth, that they are referred by God to the determination of that society (that
is, of those that act in behalfe of it, with right to conclude it) which God hath founded upon the acknowledgement of those Lawes, whereof this is one. In the first place then, I am not afraid to undertake, that the Law of the Mariages of Christians. (that they be of one with one, and indissoluble) is gi∣ven by our Lord to his Church, and maintained by it. For, I am confident to make evidence, out of that which is received by all Christians, together with the premises, that it could neither have come into the world, but by Christiani∣ty, nor have been maintained so inviolable, as it hath been by the Canons of the Church. I say then, that it is impossible for any reasonable man to imagine, that, so difficult a Law, as, for all men to be tied to one wife indissolubly, as mariage hath alwaies been indissoluble among Christians, could have taken ef∣fect among all Christians, had it not been received from the beginning for a part of that Christianity, which our Lord Christ and his Disciples delivered to the Church; nor preserved so inviolable as it hath been, but, by the society of the Church. He that will give a reason how this Law could have taken place o∣therwise, must either alledge the Law of Moses, or the Law of the Romane Empire; There being no other Law extant, when Christianity took place. For the law of Moses, it is evident, that, at such time as Christianity came into the world, it was counted lawfull, according to it, to have more wives then one, and, to put away away a mans wife by a Bill of divorce. I demand then, how this should come to be prohibited by virtue of that Law, which was hitherto thought to allow it. It will be said, by the true interpretaion of the Law; which, having been ob∣scured by the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, our Lord by his Gospel, Mat. V. 31. 32. XIX. 3-9. Mark. X. 11. 12. Luk. XVII. 18. clears, and injoyns upon Christians for the future. But, I showed before in the second Book, that, when our Lord saith, so oft, in his Sermon on the Mount, You have heard it was said to those of old; his meaning is, that Moses said so to their Fa∣thers, when he gave them the Law; not, that the Scribes and Pharisees said so to their Predecessors, when they corrupt it: Besides, there are two things evi∣dent in the Scripture beyond contradiction. The first, that divers Lawes of Moses either make it lawfull, or suppose it lawful to have more wives then one, Deut. XXI. 15-17. the Law supposes a man to have two wives, the one be∣loved, the other not, and provides accordingly, Ex. XXI. 6-11. the Law gives him leave that hath bought the daughter of a Jew, to mary her to his Sonne; (who, if he have another, is bound to pay her the mariage debt of a wife) so that, if he do not, she is to go free, Deut. XXI. 1-14. the Law inables him that hath taken a captive in the War whom he likes, to marry her: not condi∣tioning, if he have no other wife. Call these two later, wives, or call them Concubines, so long as the Law of God allows them, evident it is, that it al∣lows that which Christians by their Christianity think themselves bound to for∣bear. Adde hereunto, that the King is bound not to take too many wives, Deut. XVII. 16. 17. that David is not reproved as transgressing this Law, though Solomon is; But on the contrary, that God imputes it as a favour to him, that he gave him many wives, 2 Sa. XII. 8. which he could not do, had he not allowed it; I say, adde the practice, as the life of the Law, to the leter, as the carcase of it, and, I may justly conclude that Polygamy is not prohibited by the Law of Moses. Besides, the Law provides, that an Ebrue slave, who may go free at the seventh year▪ if his Master have given him a slave of his own to wife, and he have children by her, must part wedlock with his wife, and leave her and children to his Master for his goods, Exodus XXI. 3. 4. nullify∣ing the contract of Mariage, by the choice of him who proffers his freedom before his wife and children in bondage; a thing utterly inconsistent with the insolubility of Mariage by Moses Law. Secondly, our Lord in the Gospel saith not onely; It was said to them of ld; He that puts away his wife, let him give her a Bill of Divorce; But, I say unto you—as Mat. V. 31. 32. But further, when they ask him, Mat.
XIX. 7. Why did Moses then command to give a Bill of divorce, and sed her a∣way? He answereth; Moses for your hard-heartednesse, suffered you to put away your wives; But from the beginning it was not so. Now I say unto you, that he that puts away his wife for fornicatio, and maries another, commits adultery; and he that maries her that is put away, commits adultery. And all this, having laid his ground afore; He that made them from the beginning, made them male and female, and said; therefore shall a mn leave father and mother and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God hath joyned let no man part. Whereby it is evident, that he derives not the prohibition of putting away a wife to take another, from any interpretation of Moses Law; to the provision whereof he opposeth the pro∣vision which hereby he introduceth; But, from the commission which he pretendeth, by virtue whereof, he restoreth the primitive institution of Paradise, which, the Law of Moses had either dispensed with, or, did suppose it to have been formerly dispensed with. For, he saith not onely, You have heard that it was said to them of old, which may be thought to be understood of the Scribes and Pharisees; But also, Moses said, and I say, opposing his own saying to that of Moses, so farre, as prohibiting that which he had allowed imports, without licensing that which was prohibited by the Law. And upon this ground; that by mariage, man and wife become one flesh; he proceeds to prohibite the divor∣ces which Moses Law alloweth; so that, the reason why mariage is indissolu∣ble is, because man and wife are one flesh by the Gospel of Christ, according to the first institutions in Paradise. This indeed, is the difficulty which I here sup∣pose already declared; how this first institution lost, or, may appear to have lost the force of a Law, till revived by our Lord Christ: though I conceive, the e∣vidence of this truth cannot be obstructed, by not declaring the reason of it here, S. Paul having so fully laid down the effect and intent of his masters Law, 1 Cor. VII. 1-6. Now, of that you writ to me about, it is good for a man not to touch a woman. Neverthelesse, because of fornications sake, let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband; let the man render his wife the be∣nevolence that is due; likewise the wife to the Husband. The woman hath no power of her Body, but the man. Likewise, the man is not master of his own Body, but the wife. Defraud not one another, unlesse upon agreement, for a time, that ye may at∣tend to fasting and prayer, and come together again, least Satan tempt you for your incontinence. For here, it is manifest, that, because man and wife are one flesh, they have an interess in one anothers bodies, not to be disposed of upon any other, to the prejudice of it. And, upon this supposition, the mariage of the first Adam in this earthly Paradise, being the figure of the mariage between the second Adam and his Church, becomes the rule and measure of the Mari∣ages of Christians in the Church, as the same Apostle declares at large, Ephes. V. 22-33. And this will serve also to make evidence, that the Law of Christi∣ans mariage cannot be imagined to come from the Lawes of the Empire, grant∣ing, as the truth is, that they allowed no man to have more wives then one at once. For. there is nothing more evident then this, that this mutuall interesse in one anothers body, was never acknowledgeded by Pagans, no cannot be thought to have stand by their Laws. It were to be wondred at, otherwise, that, (whereas, not only the Romans, but, in Greece, the Athenians, and the Germans among the Barbarians, as Tacitus saith, contented themselves with, one man one wife) Gods people should be licensed to have more then one. But, he that reflects upon the consideration, in which these Pagans restrained them∣selves, will not find it strange, that Gods people should be permitted that, which they denied themselves. For, this mutuall Interest in one anothers bo∣dies, which God provided, for the means to prevent the sad effects of mans in∣bred concupiscence, in dishonouring their bodies with uncleanness, we shall not find to have been had in consideration among them, or, that uncleanness seemed at all dishonourable to man, but prohibited as injurious to mens beds, and the successions of families. The Lawes of the Empire made it no adultery for the
man to lye with another woman, which, in the woman it was, as the Christians complain. Lact antius Hist. VI. 23. Non enim, sicut juris publici ratio est, sol mulier adultera est, qu habet alium; maricus autem, etiam si plures habeat, à cri∣mine adulterii solutus est. Sed divin lex ita duos in matrimonium, quod est in cor∣pus unum, pari jure conjungit, ut adulter habeatur, si uis compagem corparis in diversa distraxerit. For the Woman onely is not the adulteress, having another man, but the husband free from the crime of adultery, having more women, as is the course of publick Law. But the Law of God joyns two in wedlock; that is, into one body; upon so equall right, that the party is to be counted an adultererer, which shall part the body so compacted into more. S. Hierome Ep. ad Oceanum. Ali sunt leges Caesarum aliae Christi, aliud Papinianus aliud, Paulus noster praecipit. Apud illos viris impudiciti frna laxantur, & solo stupro at{que} adulterio condemnatis, passim perlupanaia & acillulas libido permititur, quasi culpam dignitas faciat non volunt as. Apud nos, quod non licet uxoribus, aeque non licet viris, & eade ser∣vitus pars conditione censetur. Other are the Laws of the Caesars, then that of Christ; other is that which S. Paul, then that which Papinian prescribeth. Among them, the rains are let loose to mens uncleannesse, and rape, and adultery onely prohibited, ust walks free all over stewes, and maid-slaves, as if the estate, not the will, made the fault. Among us, that which Wives may not do, neither may Husbands; the same obligation is taxed upon equall condition. S. Augustine, de adult. Conjug. II. 8. Sedisti, qu bus displicet, ut, inter virum & xorem par pudicitiae forma ser∣vetur, & potius eligunt, maxime{que} in hac cavsâ, mundi legibus subesse quam Christi, quoniam jura forensia non eisdem fminas quibus viros pudicitiae nexibus videntur astringere; legant quid Imp. Antonius—But those, who like not, that the same form of chastity should be observed between man and wife, and had ra∣ther, especially in this cause, be under the Laws of the world then of Christ; be∣cause the Court Laws doe not seem to tie women by the same bond of chastity as men; Let them read what the Emperour Antoninus—Who knows not the lawful∣nesse of unnaturall lusts among the Pagans, that reads the first Chapter to the Romanes? And, can we think it strange, that Husbands should not be forbid∣den unmaried persons? Wherefore, where the Lawes allowed not one man more wives then one, there they punished not wandring lusts, but provided for mens reputation, and their successions. Whereas, the law of Moses, which gives a man leave to mary a Jewess, sold him for a slave, to himself, or to his Sonne, provides her an interess in his body, for the preventing of uncleanness; as you saw before. And, all those Idolatrous Nations which Gods people were invironed with, using more wives then one, it is the lesse marvail, that God al∣lowed his people something in it, that the race of those that feared him might not be quite extinguished and over-run, by the multitude of them that ser∣ved Idols. And this is the true reason, why S. Paul declares those that are converted to Christianity, not to stand obliged to the Wives or Husbands which they had ta∣ken before, 1 Cor. VII. 12-15. Supposing first, that, by Moses Law, the ma∣riages of Jews with Idolaters were void, and unlawfull to be used, as we see by Ezra IX. X. & Nehem. X. 30. On the other side, that, in the Romam Empire, the wife as well as the Husband, had power to divorce her selfe, and to dissolve wedlock: which is argument enough, how farre they were from being the mariages of Christians. Whereupon I say, that, the mariages of Pagans not be∣ing made upon the same ground as the mariages of Christians, which is the mu∣tuall interess in one anothers boies; as it is no marvail on one side, that S. Paul obliges them not to part as Moses did, (because, those that were not tied by Law, might, for the particular love they had to their wives turned Christians, tie themselves to them alone, and, upon those who did so, the wives had great ad∣vantage to grant them to Christianity, as he alledges) So it is evident on the other de, why he allows them to part; to wit, having no confidence of that faith in wedlock from them, which Christians of necessity professe. The reason, why the mariages of Jews, with Gentiles were void by the Law, is thus gi∣ven by S. Augustine, de adult. Conjug. I. 18. Nam{que} hoc dominus aliquan∣do
per Ezdrm Prophetam fieri jussit, & factm est; dimiserunt Israelit uxores alienigenas, quiun{que} tunc haber tuerunt, per quas fiebat, ut & ipsi ad aliens seducerentur deos, non ut ill per rits vero acquirerentur deo. Nodum enim tanta gracia salvatoris illuxer, & promissis temporaleus vteris T. ad in∣hiabat illius populi multitud. Et propterea, cum bna terrena, qu pro magn ex∣pectaa a domino, viderent etiam his abundar qui mults falss colebant dos, blanditiis uxorum prius s verebantur offendere, did indicebantur & colere. For, this the Lord once commanded to be done by Ezdras the Prophet, and done it was: The Israelites dismissed their stranger wives, as many as then had of the, by whose means it came to passe, that even they were seduced to strange Gods. For as yet so great grace of our Saviour bad not shined o them, and the multitude of that people yet gaped for the temporall promises of the old Testament. And there∣fore, seeing those who worshipped many false Gods abound with earthly goods, which they expected at Gods hands for great maters; first, upon the blandishments of their wives, they were afraid to offend, then, they were induced also to worship them. But under the Gospel, the mariage of Gentiles, not being against Gods Law, be∣comes not unlawfull, when the one turns Christian. And, justice allowing to part for fornication; unbeliefe being a greater fornication, justifies him or her that parts in consideration of it, having never contracted it insoluble. All this is evident, by the ancientest instance of this case that the Church hath; in Justine the Martyrs Apology for the Christians, or rather in Eusebius Eccles, Hist. IV. 17. where the passage of Justine is related intire, which, in R. Stevens Copy of Justine, is maimed in this part. It is the case of a Gentleman so debauched to the ust of women, that he was content his wife should play the good fellow as well as himselfe, that she might not have to reproach him with. It pleased God, the wife, being reclamed to Christianity, thought it necessary to relin∣quish so riotous a Husband: But, being perswaded by her friends, had the pa∣tience to try, whether there remained any hope of reducing him. And when he, being gone to Alexandria, had flown out more loosly then ever into the de∣bauches of the place, that she might not seem a party to his wickednesse, dwel∣ing with him, whom it was in her power to part with, she sent him , saith Justin; such a Leter of divorce, as the Law alloweth the wife to discharge her selfe with. Which example justifies the relation of Basil of Sel∣cia, concerning S. Thecla, the first Martyr of the Woman-kind, in his first Book of her life; that being contracted to a noble man of the Country, called Thyris, being converted to Christianity, by the preaching of S. Paul at Ico∣nicus, forsook her spouse, a declared enemy to Christianity. I say, that there is in all this, nothing contrary to Christianity, the other example justifies. One∣ly, both of them give us sufficient occasion to say, that S. Paul is not well un∣derstood, by them, that would have him to extend that cause of divorce which our Lord had delivered, unto the case of desertion, upon the conversion of the o∣ther to the faith. For, if the premises be true, it is not a divorce which S. Paul allows, but a nullity, which he pronounces, of those mariages, which stand not upon profession of that interess in one anothers bodies, which Christianity re∣quires. And therefore S. Augustine, in his Book de Fide & operibus cap. XIX. doubts of her, who, being a Concubine, professeth, that if her Lord should dis∣miss her, she will never mary any body else, whether she is to be admitted to Baptisme or not. For indeed there is no doubt in the case. Not because the Church, from the beginning, generally condemned those Concubines, who, un∣der a profession of fidelity to their own Lords, (professing interchangeably to know no woman else) contented themselves with that right of a wife which Chri∣stianity requires, without the secular priviledge of dwry, or the right to it, which obliges the Husband to expense answerable. For the same Augustine, de bon conjug. cap, V. declares such a conjunction as this to be mariage, as to Gods Law, though not, as to the priviledges of the world; whereas, not suppo∣sing this profession, he condemns it for meer adultery: And they are expresly allovved by the Council of Toledo, can. XVII. Though S. Leo Ep. XCV. al∣lovv the mariage of a vvoman to a man that already hath a Concubine, as no
maried man. For, that may be, upon supposition, that there never was any such troth between him and his Concubine; Which must be the reason, vvhy S. Au∣stine condemns them in another place, Hom. XLIX. & L. S. Jerome truly, and Genadius de Eccles. dogmat. cap. LXXII. allovv the  effect to a Concu∣bine, as to a Wife, in making a man digamus as to the Caons: And for this rea∣son, Conjugales ergo tabulae & jura dotalia, nn coitu ab Apst condemntur? In the vvords of S. Jerome; Is it then the deed and right of , or carnall knowledge, that the Apostle condemneth? This is not then the reason why S. Au∣stine refuses a Concubine Baptism; but, because she is a Concubine, without mutuall profession of that interess in one anothers bos, which makes her a wife as to Christianity. Nor am I moved to the contrary, by seeing, that S. Au∣stine refused Baptism to those that put away their vvives, and maried others, as Adulterers manifest. Which is the occasion of his Book de ide & operibus, as he sayes in the beginning of it. It vvas but his opinion, or at the most, a locall custome. For Concil. Eliber. can. X. Sia quam Cteche reliquit duxerit maritum, potest ad fontem lavacri admitti. Hoc & circa feminas Cateche it observandum. If a woman dimissed by a pretender to Christianity mry a Husband, she may be admitted to the Fnt of Baptism. The sam s to be observed concerning women that pretend to Christianity; In case thy dismi▪ a Husband that maries again, and then desires Baptism, because of the nullity of mariage made in unbelief, when one party turns Christian. In the Constitutions of the Apostles, VIII. 33 , A Christian man or woman, maried in bondage, let them either part or be ejected. Here, the mariage of slaves is supposed void to the party that turns Christian. The Church further commands it to be voided. How stands that vvith that vvhich went afore? VIII. 32, . If he have a wife, or a woman a husband, let them be taught to contain themselves to one another; according to Christs Law. But, if the one party be not under Christs Law, so that it cannot be presumed that a slave will do so, they must be parted. And by this means it remains demonstrated, that it is our Lord Christ alone that hath introduced a new Lavv into his Church of the mariage of one to one alone. Which, though it be expressed in the Scrip∣ture rightly interpreted; yet, had not the practice of the Church, having recei∣ved this right sense for Law to their conversation, giving bounds to the licenti∣ousnesse of those wits, whose interess might be to destroy the strictnesse of the Lavv; it cannot be imagined, that there should never be any visible attempt, within the body of the Church, to infringe the validity of it. For, seeing there is no more mention in the Scripture, of that dispensation in the first Ordi∣nance of mariage in Paradise, whereby it was lawfull, under the Lavv, to have more vvives then one; and, seeing it is a maxime of such appea∣rance in the Scripture, that, nothing is prohibited by the Gospell which the lavv allovveth, vvould no such pretence have framed a plea for those, that never wanted will, to study the reconciling of carnality vvith Christianity? Supposing the consent of a body, vvhereof they thought themselves to be mem∣bers, it is no marvail that there would not; Not supposing that, it must needs appear utterly unreasonable. As for the insolubility of mariage by divorce, I vvill not say there hath been so absolute a consent in it, by the practice of Christians, as in the mariage of one to one. It is argued indeed, in the late Book, called Ʋxor Ebraica, (pre∣tending onely to relate the opinions and practice of Christians in mater of di∣vorce, but intending, (as it should seem by the Authors opinion declared else∣where, that there is no such thing as Ecclesiasticall Power, or any society of the Church by Gods Law) to inferre, that the Church hath nothing to do vvith Matrimoniall causes, vvhich it hath nothing to do with, if any thing but the lavv of the Church can secure the conscience in point of divorce) p. 543. 544. that, so long as the Christians vvere mingled with the Jews, they observed the judi∣ciall laws of the Synagogue, and therefore corrected all divorces good be∣or God, which were according to Moses Lavv. And therefore, that, vvhatso
ever was in force among Christians before Constantine, was in force meerly by the voluntary consent of Christians, vvhich vvas to give vvay, vvhen the secular Power should otherwise provide, as in mater of divorce, so in other Matrimoni∣all causes. This is th ich seems to be intended p. 559. But this pretence is rooted up, by proving the Church to be a society and Body founded by God, to communicate in the service of God, for the attaining of everlasting life. For, thereupon it remns evident, that the Lavvs thereof came not originally from the voluntary consent of Christians, (unlesse you understand that consent whereby they submit to the Christian faith, that they may be saved, and there∣upon find themselves tie to submit to them from whom they receive that faith, whereby they hope to be saved) but, from those who first delivered Chri∣stianity to the Church, that is, from our Lord & his Apostles. And, had Christi∣ans been left to their own choice, it is not possible they should have imposed upon themselves, (that is, that the whole Church should have received) that charge, of not divorcing, which the Rules and Customes of the Church evi∣dence to have been in force through the whole Church, as by and by it will ap∣pear. As for the time when the Christians observed Moses Law, that excellent saying of Justine the Marty, takes place; . They obey the Lawes, and, by their own lives, go be∣yond the Laws For▪ the Jews Law was then their Civill Law, because autho∣rized by the Romanes, in as much as they restrained it not. So, by complying with the Jews, they gained the free exercise of their Christianity, as well as invited them to admit and receive it. But, did they therefore renounce the Law of Christ, where it restrained them more then the Law of Moses? Did they allow themselves more wives then one, when Moses allowed it the Jews, and they complyed with Moses? Certainly, the Law that allows a man more wives then one, never constrained any man to make use of that allow∣ance. So well might the Christians, acknowledging Moses Law, acknowledge themselves bound not to use the power of putting away their wives, when Mo∣ses Law allowed it. But it is further argued there, lib. III. cap. XXVIII. XXIX. XXX. (at least, it seems upon the same ground to be argued) that the Roman Laws, from Con∣stantine, to the fall of the Eastern Empire, in a maner, do allow divorce upon such causes as the Soveraign thought fit. Which Laws, being made by Christian Princes, intending to limit that infinite liberty, which the former laws of the Empire allowed either party, to dissolve mariage at pleasure, with all that he brought, must needs pretend to secure Christians in point of conscience, divor∣cing upon no other causes then those laws allow. Constantine therefore restrains the liberty of divorce to three causes on either side; On the wives side, if the usband should Murther, Poyson, or Rob graves: On the husbands, if the wife should be an Adulteress, an Impoisoner, or a Bawd. And this, at such time, as he advised with Bishops in all that he did, granting then, an appeal to their Courts, by an act dated the same year, (as it is probable) and lately published in Sirmondus his Appendix to Theodosius his Code, without date for the year, but directed to the same Ablavius, P. P. to whom the form is directed, Cod. Theod. lib. III. Tit. XVI. which Theodosius the younger, a very Christian Prince, extends to many more: Justinian (the legislative humour being then predominant) limits the mater otherwise, as he thought fit; His successor Ju∣stine goes beyond him, in allowing divorce upon consent of parties, though at neither parties choice. Which Law is not found to have been repealed, till it was left out of that collection of Laws called the Basilicae, into which, Leo the wife about the year DCCCC. compiled all the Laws which he meant should stand unrepealed. The particulars you may see curiously collected there. Which I should make no account of, did it not appear also, by sundry testimonies of later times, there alledged, that the Greek Church did proceed according to the said Laws, in blessing Mariages made upon such divorces, and, consequent∣ly, allowing the communion of the Church to those that made them. Balsa∣mon upon Syn. VI. Can. LXXXVIII. defines an unreasonable cause of divorce
to be that, which the Judge (to wit, according to the Law) allows not. No makes he any exception to them, from any Canon of the Church, writing up∣on Photius his Nmocanon, Tit. XIII. 4. 30. And upon Can. Carthag. CV. al∣ledging Justinian Novel. CXVII. he saith; That the Canon▪ is not in force: (to wit, the Law having provided otherwise) referring himselfe to that which he had written upon the VI Synode, quoted afore. Harmenopulus also in Pro∣chicro, sayes plainly, that divorces were judged, amongst them, by the Imperi∣all Laws. And Matthaus Monachus, Quaest. Matrim▪ Juris Grco-Rom. To∣mo. I. p. 507. So also the Canons of Alexuis Patr. CP. about MXXX. alledg∣ed by our Author out of a written Copy, p. 613. And Michael Chrysocepha∣lus, upon Can. Apost. XLVIII. p. 600. Besides Matthus Blastares in Nomocan. alledged by Arcudius p. 517. where he, being a Greek, confesseth, that the Greek Church had sometimes practiced according to the Civill Laws. Which, had they not secured the conscience, it could not, it ought not to have done. And, what case can there be in point of mariage, wherein the Law of the Land se∣cures not the conscience, if, in point of divorce it do? Or, where is the indis∣solubility of mariage, and the Interest of the Church in mariage grounded up∣on it? But because it would be two gross for a Christian to say, that mans Law, al∣lowing divorce, can secure a Christian in conscience against Gods Law, for∣bidding it; (our Lord having said, Whoso puts away his wife but for adultery, , and maries another; and he that maris her that is put away, com∣mits adultery, Mat. V. 32. XIX. 9. Mark. X. 11. 12. Luk. XVI. 18.) it is pre∣tended there, p. 454. that  in the Gospels, signifies any thing that is dis∣honest; and that, what the State judges dishonest, is just ground of divorce. You must know, that, in our Lords time, there was a difference (which is suppo∣sed to be the occasion of the question made to our Lord) between the Schools of Hillel and Shammai, (two great Heads of the Pharisees) about the meaning and extent of the Law concerning divorces, Deut. XXIV. 1—which allows him that likes not his wife, because he hath found, or having found matr of naked∣ness in her, to put her away. For, Shammai confined the intent of it, to that which is dishonest, and deserveth shame, as nakednesse doth. But Hillel ex∣tended it to any thing that offends the Husband; as, say they, for example, if she burn his Meat. As for R. Akiba, that allowed it, if a man can get a fairer wife, his opinion is but the inlargement of Hillels, which expoundeth Moses his words; If he have found in her mater of wickednesse; to signifie, either na∣kednesse, or other mater besides. This question then being on foo at that time, it is argued, p. 478—that our Lord intends nothing else but the reso∣lution of it; the Pharisees demanding nothing else, and therefore making no opposition to that which he resolves, Mat. XIX. 3-9. And, thereupon, great pains is bestowed, cap. XXIII, & XXVII. to show, that our Lords exception, , or , signifies no more then  in Moses according to the opinion of Shammai. For, if we suppose our Lord to have spoke in that Ebrue which the Jews then spake, and now we read in the Talmud and Chaldee Paraphrases, then must he use the word which the Law useth  (which the Gospels must translate ) If in Syriack, the word , properly signifying the uncleannesse of the Stews, is necessarily understood, by the circumstance of the place where it is used, to signifie all un∣cleannesse, but may be extended to all sinne, whereby we go a whoring from God, as the Scripture uses to speak. So, according to this opinion, our Lord, ex∣cluding onely arbitrary divorce, allows it where Moses, according to Shammai, allows it; for any cause of dishonesty, or, that deserves shame, as nakednesse does. And, if these premises be pertinent to that which follows, that is, to ju∣stifie those divorces that are made according to the Imperiall Laws related af∣terwards (for the Author all the while protests to determine nothing, p. 496.) the inference must be this; That, those causes of divorce, which Christian powers by their Lavvs have allovved or shall allovv, are the true interpretation of that
cause, which Moses under the time of  or nakednesse, our Lord of , which is usually translated Forication, alloweth. I forbear to relate any more of that which is alleged to shevv, that , in the words of our Lord, may signifie the same that  in Moses, according to R. Akba; For, the reason which I rely upon, admits no consideration of it. The resolution of our Lord is manifestly inconsistent vvith the Law of Moses, and therefore, with any interpretation that can be thought ageable to it. For, when he saith; Moses for your hard-heartednesse—But I say unto you—What can be more evident, then, that he repeals the provision of the Law, and restrains what Moses had allowed? Is it not manifest, that, whn he llegeth, that God, having made first one man, and one woman, joyned them in mariage to be part∣ed no more; he granteth, that Moses Law had abated of this, and declareth the reviving of Gods first appointment, among his own Disciples? Can the allow∣ance of divorce, according to the Law, stand with the primitive institution of Paradise, more then having more wives at once? Can we suppose the Pharisees come to our Lord to decide between Hillel and Shammai, who condemns all Pharisees? Or is it a marvail, that he, who pretended to be the Messias, should introduce a provision differing from Moses, and rom all that pretended onely to interpret his Law? That there should be no further dispute of the mater of his resolution, when there lay no dispute, but about his authority, whi∣ther from God or not? Suppose our Lord, to them, no more but a Prophe, to his Disciples the Messias; why should they dispute that which they knew his Disciples admitted, when they saw the primitive appointment of God, rela∣ted by Moses, clear on his side? That is to say, why should they not be put to silence now as well as other times, when they could not answer his allegations out of the Scriptures. It is therefore utterly unreasonable to imagine, that our Lord, intending to restrain those divorces which Moses law alloweth, should use a term, of the same extent with that which e intended to restrain. The Jews indeed insist upon this; That a Prophet had alwaies power to suspend the obligation of any positive Precept, for the time, as Elias that of sacrificing no where but at Jerusalem, Levit. XVII. 1-9. Deut, XII. 5-18. 26, 27. XIV. 21-26. when he sacrificed in mount Carmel, 1 Kings XVII. 22-39. But, our Lord introducing a new Law instead of Moses his Law, their acestors cru∣cified him therefore, and they to this day maintain it. Indeed, there is cause to believe, that the Prophet Malachy, reproving the oppressions which the Jews then laid upon their wives, for the love of strangers, which they had maried over their heads, contrary to the Law, Mal. I. 14. 15, 16. propounds the liberty of divorce which the Law allows, for an expedient acceptable to God, as his own provision, when he saith; For the Lord God of Israel saith; If thou hatest, put away, as the Jews there expound it. For, they who construe it; The Lord God of Israel saith, that he hateth putting away; cannot give ac∣count, why the Prophet should mention the mater of divorce, where his pur∣pose is to blame the oppression of Israelitish wives, for the love of strangers maried against the Law. Whereas, when he addeth; For one covereth violence with his Garment, saith the Lord of Hosts,: He aggravateth the same fault by this consideration, that the covenant of mariage (signified usually in the Scripture, by covering the woman with the mans Garment, Ezek. XVI. 8. Ruth III. 10.) is imployed for a means of oppression and violence, upon her, that, out of love entred into it. And the Prophet Malahi, holding his Commission by virtue of Moses Law, how shall he say that God hates that, which, by his law he provi∣ded, though for a remedy of further mischief? There is indeed great dispute, whither the allowance of Moses law did se∣cure them that put away their wives under the law, in point of conscience to God; And it is certain, if that be true which I have setled in the second Book, concerning the inward and outward, the civill and spirituall obedience of God under Moses law, and the difference between them; that it could not alwaies do it. For, could he, that knw he put away his wife for ust, or for wrath, or
for advantage, think that he loved his wife, whom, all men know they are to love above others, being bound to love all Israelites as himselfe? But on the contrary, he that had lighted upon a wife of crooked conditions, and, having done his reasonable indeavour to reclaim her, had found her incorrigible, how should he think he did her wrong, using the power that Gods law had given him so moderately, in putting her away? Had God given them a Law, which could in no case be used without sinne? For, had the nakednesse, which the law allowed for a just cause of divorce, signified nothing else but that which our Lord by his Gospel allows, what question remains, whither the conscience be secured by it or not? But among Christians, covenanting with God upon ex∣press promises of the world to come, under a  and more excellent rule of obedience, with promise of helps proportionable to go through with it, it is marvail, if an obligation be acknowledged, of bearing with patience the maners of the wife, vvhich a man himselfe chuses, never giving over the hope of redu∣cing her to reason, until she falsifie the trust of wedlock? That, when the ma∣ter is come to that point, it should no more be mater of precept, but mater of counsail, to indure such a wife, when the infamy of a mans bed my be saved, and hope of reclaiming her may remain? So that, the question, whether the meaning of Moses his words, be the meaning of Christs, is the same in this particular of mariage, vvhich the Christians have generally with the Jews, whe∣ther our Lord Jesus, persiting the Lavv by bringing in the Gospell, be the Christ or not. The resolution whereof, as it necessarily infers the difference between them, which I have setled in the second Book, so that difference vvill as necessarily inferre, this provision of our Lord to be severall from that of Moses. Out of Origen, in Mat. VII. a pleasant conceit is alleged; Forsitan au∣dax aliquis & Judaicus vir, adversus doctrine Salvatoris nostri dicet, quoniam & Jesus dicens; Qui cun{que} dimi serit uxorem suam exceptâ causâ fornicationis facit  machari, permiit uxo em dimittere quem ad modum Moyses, qum retulit, propter duritiem cordi Judorum hoc prcepisse. Et hanc ipsam inquiet esse cau∣sam fornicationis, per quam juste uxr à viro dimittitur, secundum quam & Moyses praecepit dimitter uxorem, si inventa fuerit res turpis in â. Perhaps some bold Jewish fellow may say, (crossing our Saviours Doctrine) that even Jesus, saying; Whosoever shall send away his wife but for fornication, makes her comit adultery; hath given leave to put a wife away, even as Moses, who, he relareth, did command this for the Jews hard-heartednesse; And will say, that this is the very same cause of fornication, for which a wife is justly put away by a Husband, according to which Moses also commands to put away a wife, if a foul thirg be found in her. Whence it is argued, that there were then, that expounded our Lords words to the same intent vvith Moses. That there were, Origen sayes not, that there might be, I grant. But they must be Jews, and adversaries to our Sa∣viours Doctrine that should do it. For, he that should say so, must blame our Saviour, for pretending to contradict Moses (vvhich Origen supposeth no Jevv could deny) saying, indeed, the same thing Othervvise, he must contradict the Synagogue, for allowing divorce where Moses allowed it not, if the soul thing which Moses allows divorce for, be onely that fornication for which our Lord allows it. Then, he that would make use of Origen, to prove that the terms of our Lord, and of Moses, may signifie the same thing, must first answer the Ar∣gument wherewith he convinces him that thus should blaspheme our Lord. A∣dultery, saith he, is no cause of divorce, but of death by Moses law, therefore that dishonest thing for which the Law allows divorce, is not adultery. In fine, he that examines all that is said, or can be said, of the diverse significations of  in the Scriptures, will find but two; the one proper, in the case of man and wife; the other, by translation to the alliance between God and his people, perpetually compared to a mariage all over the Scripture. That this significati∣on cannot take place here, this may serve to evidence; That the cause upon which our Lord allovvs divorce, must be something betvveen the Wife and the Husband, as it vvas in the Lavv; For, vvould it not be impertinent, to pu∣nish transgression of Gods Covenant, vvith dissolution of vvedlock? The pro∣per
signification of  indeed, is larger in the Scriptures, then according to the Atrick Greek; to signifie all uncleannesse, at the mater requires. For, vvhen S. Paul sayes, 1 Cor. V. 1. —for a man to have his Fathers wife, would not have been  in ordinary Greek. But it is no marvail, if the Jews that spoke Greek, call all that , which their usuall language called  the Syriack  So that  in our Lords words, is exactly expounded by Hesychius, and the Etymologick turning, . Who being Christians, do usually expound that proerty of the Greek, which is usuall among Christians, out of the Bible. And this is demonstrated to be the signification here meant, because it is not possible to show, that ever there was any opinion, rule, or practice received in the Church, that it is lawfull to divorce but in case of Adultery. I do truly con∣ceive, that there was anciently a difference of opinion and practice in the Church, whither it be lawfull to mary again upon putting away a wife for adul∣tery; or, whether the bond of mariage remain undissoluble, when the parties are separated from bed and bord for adultery. But this difference argues con∣sent in the rest; that is, that, excepting the case of Adultery, there is no di∣vorce to be among Christians. Neither do I now speak of the base times of the Eastern Empire, of which, I will give you such an account, as I find most reason∣able, when I come to the difficulty that is proposed. I say it may appear, that the Church originally granted no divorce but for adultery, whether the innocent party, or whether both were allowed to mary again, living▪ the other or not. It is acknowledged by our Author, that Tertullian, cont. Marc. IV. 34. de Pudiciti cap. XVI. both expounds our Lords words in this sense, and determines against divorces out of them; that Origen, in Mat. H. VII. accepts them in the same sense, and disputes for it. That Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. II. sub finem, condemns the divorces vvhich the Roman Lavvs then licensed, and mariage up∣on them. That S. Chrysostome in Mat. Hom. XVII. and LXIII. Libro de Vir∣ginitate. Serm. I. de debitore X. millium. S. Ambrose, in Luc. lib. XVII. S. Je∣rome Epist. XXX. in Mat. XIX. S. Basil. ad Amphil. Can. IX. in Hexaem, Hom. VII. Asterius Hom. ult. S. Austine de adulterinis conjugiis ad Pollentium, ollovv the the same sense, and deliver the same Doctrine, vvhich seems to be also S. Gregory Nazianznes, vvhen he calls a Wife,,  An evill which, being g, is not to be lt go. The record is yet to seek, that may shovv any such opinion in the Church, and, having escaped so diligent hands, I may vvell challenge all the world to produce it. For, vvhereas it is said, p. 155. that Origen ubi supra, argues, that there are faults no lesse destructive to any society or communion in wedlock, then adultery is; And therefore, that adul∣tery is named but as an instance, in a sentence to be extended, by reason of e∣quity necessarily inherent in the case, to all faults equally destructive to mari∣age; I grant that Origen hath so argued, and that Grotius (out of whose Anno∣tations upon Mat. V. 31. 32. all this dust hath been raised) hath seconded him in it. But it is one thing to say, that, by consequence of reason, where the fault is no lesse destructive to mariage then adultery is, there ought to be the same liberty of divorce; Another thing to say, that, by the Leter of our Lords words, all causes of divorce, that Moses Law, or the Civil Lawes of Christian Staes allows, are allowable in point of Conscience. The one leaves the weight of the fault, and the equality of it with adultery, to be judged by the Church: The other takes away the Church, and the judgement of it, which Origen ne∣ver meant to do. Again, I say, that those things which are disputed by Origen, were never held of such consideration to the Church, that either the opinion, or much more the practice of the Church should be valued by them. It is plain he was allowed so to argue, but it is as plain that his arguments took no ef∣fect, either in the opinion, or in the practice of the Church. As for S. Augustine, who was so much perplexed, whither our Saviour might not mean spiritual forni∣cation in those words, Retract. I. 29. having delivered it for his opinion before, in his exposition of the Semon in the Mount; Will any man believe, that he, who so ifly holds, that it is unlawful to mary after divorce, for Adultery, as
S. Austin, in his Books de adulterinis conjugiis ad Pollentium, and elsewhere, does, can allow divorce for any thing but Adultery? The truth is, he that con∣siders the businesse throughly shall see, that it was that supposition that obli∣ged S. Austine to this doubt; as, on the contrary, the improbability of the doubt, is that which chiefly renders the supposition improbable. Which, being a thing not yet observed, so farre as I know, and there being no means to judge what is in the power of the Church, and what is not, in matter of divorce, o∣therwise; I will go out of the way to debate, rather to resolve it, before I go forwards. CHAP. XIV. Scripture alleged to prove the bond of Mariage insoluble in case of adultery, unef∣fectuall. S. Paul and our Lord speak both to one purpose, according to S. Je∣rome, and S. Austine. The contrary opinion more reasonable, and more general in the Church. Why the Church may restrain the innocent party from marying again. The Imperial Lawes could never be of force to void the Power of the Church. Evidence for it. SOme texts are alleged to prove the bond of Mariage undissoluble, which to me, I confesse, do not seem to create any maner of consequence. S. Paul saith, Rom. VII. 2. The wife that is under a Husband, is tied to her Husband li∣ving, by the Law: But if her Husband dye, she is clear of her Husband. So, li∣ving her Husband, she shall be stiled an aduteress if she become another husbands: But if her Husband dye, she is free from the Law, so as to be no adulteress if she be∣come another Husbands. Where, say they, it is plain, that she who maries be∣fore her former Husband is dead, is an adulteress. As also in 1 Cor. VII. 39. The wife is tied by the Law as long as her Huband lives; but if her Husband fall asleep, she is free to mary whom she please, onely in the Lord. And yet it is mani∣fest, that S. Paul, in the first place, speaks according to the Law, in the second, according to Christianity; and, that there is no question, that, under the Law, mariage might be dissolved. Therefore, the words of S. Paul are not superfici∣ally to be considered, when he saith, Rom. VII. 1, Know ye not brethren, (For, I speak to those that know the Law) ; For the meaning cannot be, that the Law hath power of a man, as long as the man lives that the Law hath power upon; but, as long as the man lives who hath power over him by the La; As it is evident, by the inference; For the wife living, is tied by the Law to her Husband; but if her Husband die, she is clear of her Husband. And the comparion fro which S. Paul argues holds thus; As a wife is no longer tied to her Husband, by the power which the Law gives him, when he is dead; so are not Christins ed to God by the Power, wh the Law gives him, when it is voided by the death of Christ; but, by the new bond which the Covenant o Grce knitteth. Now, by the Law, the bond of Mari∣age is not to be dissolved, but by the will of the Husbnd; but, if the Hus∣band will, it is dissolved by a Bill of divorce. And therefore, that exception is necessarily to be understood in S. Pauls words. Which being understood, it will be ridiculous to infere, that therfore the mariage of Christians is indis∣soluble. Though diverse o t Fathers, it is true, hve thought it a good infe∣rence. But among Christians, when S. Paul sayes; the wife is tied by the Law, as long as her Husband lives; his intent can require no more, then, that she is free, when he is dead, to mary again; Not, that she can no way be free while he is alive. Again, Eph, V. 28-32. He that loveth his wife loveth himselfe. For never did any man hate his own flesh, but feed and cherish it, as our Lord his Church. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Therefore shall a man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be∣come one flesh. This mystery is great, but I mean in Christ, and in the Church. The mariage of Adam with Eve, was intended by God for a figure and pro∣phesie of the incarnation of Christ, and his spiritual mariage with the Church,
by virtue of it; as the Scripture, wheresoever it speaks of the first and second Adam, declareth. Therefore, as I said, their mariage was an indissoluble union of one with one, as the mariage of Christians, which reviveth it. Be the mari∣age of Christians then a Sacrament, as much as any man would have it to be; be it a commemoration (if Adams was a prediction) of the incarnation of Christ, and of his mariage with the Church; Let it contain a promise of Grace to them that exercise it as Christians should do; it is therefore indissoluble in the point of right, I confesse; that is to say, it is the profession of an obliga∣tion upon the parties, to hold it indissoluble. But, is it therefore indissoluble in point of fact? May not the obligation so professed be transgressed? And, is not mariage a civill contract, even among Pagans and Infidels, and that by Gods appointment? And, may not the Law which God ath restrained the mariage of Christians to presuppose the conditions of a civill contract? And are not civill contracts void? when one party transgresseth the condition on which they are made? Or, cannot mariage signifie the mariage between Christ and his Church; cannot the observation of it oblige God to give grace, unlesse we understand all such conditions thereby to be extinguished? The union of the word with our flesh, the union of Christ with his Church, depends one∣ly upon that effectuall Grace which himself purposed from everlasting, because, as I said, upon supposition of our perseverance. The union of Wife and Hus∣band signifies it no lesse, though, the obligation being transgressed, it may be∣come void. But, how shall marying as a Christian should mary be the means to obtain Grace unlesse, as well the union, as that promise may be forfeited, by transgressing the condition upon which it is made? The cheife difficulty then lies in the words of our Lord, Mat. V. 30. 31. XIX. 3-9. in which, I must, in the first place, consider, that there are diverse things observable in them, to show that our Lord, though he declared not openly, that the Gentiles should imbrace Christianity, and the Jews refuse it, yet ne∣verthelesse propounds it so, that he must be understood to intend it for the Gen∣tiles so converted, as well as for the Jews. That of Origen in the first place. For, the Law appointing death for the punishment of adultery, what need the exception of adultery to the Jews, among whom divorce for adultery was death? Secondly, his words in S. Mark. X. 11. 12. Who so utteth away his wife and mariet another committeth adultery against her, and, if a wife put away her Husband and mary another, she committeth adultery. For, by the Jews Law, though the Husband might put away his wife, yet the wife could not put away her Husband. And, though Josephus report, that Herods sister Salome sent her Husband a Bill of divorce, yet he reports it as that which never was done a∣fore; and therefore, cannot be thought to have come to a custome in our Lords ime. Thirdly, how could our Lord say, according to the Jews Law, that he who maried a woman divorced committeth adultery, when as, what hindred a man then to mary a divorced wife, out of meer charity, to keep her from com∣mitting adultery? Lastly, if we consider S. Pauls wordes, whereby he teacheth, as I have showed, that, the wife having the same interesse in the Husband, as the Husband in the wife, by the Christian Law, the wife can no more leave her Husband, then the Husband the wife, 1 Cor. VII. 1-5. I. 11. it will appear, that his Doctrine, extending to the condition of man and wife by the then Ro∣mane Law, is derived, as it must needs be derived, from this sense of his Masters. Seeing then, that divorce, not onely among the Jews, but among he Romanes, was alwayes understood to dissolve the bond of Mariage; what appearance can there be, that our Lord, when he sayeth; He that putteth away his wife, unlesse for adultery, and marieth another, committeth adultery, and, he that marieth her who is put away committeth adultery; intendeth not to extend the exception to marying again, as well as to putting away? And therefore, that he who putteth away for adultery, & she who is not put away for adultery may mary again? For, if those whom he spoke to could understand nothing by divorce, but that which they saw, and the divorce which they saw, or heard of, inabled all parties to mary again, then, that divorce which the exception of fornication allows by our
Lords law, understanding that exception, inables to mary again. Two reasons are opposed from our Lords words. First, in S. Mark X. 12. S. Luke XVI. 18. the exception is not expressed, and yet it is said; He that puts away his wife and maries another, commits adultery. To which it is answered; That, the Gospels are, as S. Justine the Martyr calls them, remembrances of the sayings and doings of our Lord, the effect whereof was delivered to, and received by them who were baptized, as the Law of Christianity. And that therefore, in recording them, it was thought enough, to remember the heads of those things which were undertaken to be believed and observed. That therefore, all that undertake to expound the four Gospels, do use to adde, whatsoever any of them hath more then the one which he hath in hand, to make up his sense. In fine therefore, that in this point, the sense of our Lord is not to be measured by that which S. Mark and S. Luke hath lesse, but that which S. Matthew hath more. And therefore, that, when our Lord saith, He that puts away his wife, and maries again, commits adultery: And he that maries her that is put away, com∣mits adultery; He is to be understood with this exception, unlesse for adul∣tery. It is objected secondly; That by this account, she that is put away for a∣dultery may mary again, and neither her selfe, no he that maries her, be charge∣able with adultery; which were a gross inconvenience, that, by the Law of our Lord, a woman, by committing adultery, (or man in like case) should ad∣vantage himselfe, to mary again with a good conscience. For if it be true; He that puts away but for adultery, and maries again; and, he that maries her who is put away but for adultery, commits adultery; then will it follow, that, he who puts away his wife for adultery, and maries another, and he that ma∣ries her that is so put away, commits no adultery. To which I answer, that it follows not, that our Lord so saying, should mean this consequence; But ra∣ther, that he who maries her that is put away for adultery, commits adultery much more: Though he who puts her away is no cause of it, neither charge∣able with adultery for marying again. For, if the Husband be chargeable with adultery, when the wife maries again, being not put away for adultery; why is he chargeable with it that put her away for adultery? If, because he maries a∣gain, not putting his wife away for adultery; putting her away for adultery, why is he chargeable with it? The difficulty will be; Then is the knot of wedlock tied to the one party, and loose to the other? which seems a knot more indissoluble then that of wedlock; but is indeed none at all, if we distin∣guish between the metaphor of a knot tied, and the obligation signified by it. For, though the act of consent to the contract of wedlock, is the act of two parties, whereof a third, that is God, is depositary, to discharge the innocent, and to charge the guilty; yet, the bond or obligation which is contracted by it is answerable severally, by each party, in the judgement of God. And, is there the same reason, that God should call him to account for adultery, who thinks himselfe free of that contract which he stood to till his party transgressed it, as her that gave him cause to think himselfe free by transgressing it? The difficulty then rests in the meaning of S. Paul, when he chrgeth the wife not to depart from her Husband: If she do, to abid unmaried, or to be re∣conciled to her Husband. And the Husband, not to put away his wife, 1 Cor. VII. 12. And that having before charged maried people not to part, even for devotion, but for a time, for fear of temptation by concupiscense. For, can it then be imagined, that he allows them to part upon any occasion, but that of adultery? Therefore, those that are parted for adultery he forbids to marry a∣gain. And these are the Texts that have moved S. Jerome Epist. XLVII. to be of this mind. But S. Austine further, expounding the Sermon in the mount upon this supposition, (as he himselfe professes in the beginning of his books de adultrinis conjugiis, written expresse to maintain it) and desiring to show how our Lords Law injoyns the same with his Apostles; imagines, that our Lord might mean spirituall fornication or adultery, according to which the Psalme saies, Thou hast destroyed all that commit fornication against thee; when he gave it. Which sense compriseth all sinne, that carieth with it a construction of de∣parting
from our Covenant with God, both in truth, and according to S. Au∣stine, de Sermone domini in monte, I. 16. Whereupon the Mileritane Canon, XVII. speaks thus; Placuit ut, secundum Evangelicam & Apostolicam disci∣plinam, ue{que} dimissus ab uxore, ne{que} dimissa à marito alteri conjungantur; sed ita maneant, au sibi reconcilientur: Quod si contempserint, ad poenitentiam redigantur; In qua causà legem Iperialem petendam promulgari. It seemed good, that, ac∣cording to the discipline of the Gospel and the Apostles, neither he that is dimissed by his wife, nor she that is dimissed by her husband, be wedded to another; but re∣main so, or be reconciled to one another; which if they neglect, that they be put to Pe∣nance; and that request be made for an Imperial Law to be published in the case. Where, alleging the Gospel, and S. Paul both, it is plain, the Canon proceeds upon the opinion of S. Austine; For, he was at this Council, and, in all proba∣bility, had the penning of the Canons. That which moved them to be of this opinion, I confesse moves me to be a∣gainst it. I cannot be perswaded that S. Paul in this place, and our Lord in the Gospel, speak both to one and the same purpose. All subjects of the Ro∣mane Empire, when S. Paul writ, had power to leave their wives or their hus∣bands at pleasure, without giving the Law account. But, supposing them Chri∣stians, were they not to give God account? were they not to give the Church account? Certainly if they maried again, they must give the Church account, because our Lord hath said, He that leaveth his wife but for adultery, and marieth again, committeth adultery; For of adultery, account is to be given the Church. And truly, who parts with a wife, it is great odds, does it out of a desire to ma∣ry another; which, all the Church agrees, he cannot do, unlesse she be an adul∣teresse, part of it sayes further, though she be he cannot do it. But, if he mary not another, but part with his wife, he must give God account, whether he be bound to give the Church account or not. And this account S. Paul instructs how to give. He will not have Christians to part bed and bord, much less to repu∣diate, to part families, to send one another a way with that which they brought; but, if they will needs try how good it is living unmarried, he would have them know, that they could not mary elsewhere, because of our Lords Law, which, in case of fornication, he silently excepteth. For, to me it seemeth manifest, that our Lord, in case of fornication, provideth for the reparation of the party wronged, whose bed and issue is concerned; restraining the divorce which the law allowed, onely to the transgression of mariage incted by the institution of Paradise, when two continue not one flesh. But S. Paul, for the conscience of particular Christians, upon what terms they may or ought to forbear ohabita∣tion; to wit, so as they mary not again: Which is exhortation enough, to set aside animosities, and return to bed and bord again. S. Austine, and Venerable Bede upon the Gospel, following him, confesse, that, according to their inter∣pretation, our Lord permits to part, not for the fornication which the other party hath done, but for that which himselfe may do; To wit, which, by the company of an ill disposed yoke-fellow, he may be moved to do. So, divorce, according to this opinion, is grounded upon the precept of the Gospel; If thine eye offend thee pluck it out; and, is that which the Church of Rome at this day main∣taineth, by the XXVI Session of the Council of Trent, Can. VIII. (and that, as I think, according to S. Paul onely, that he leaves it to the Conscience of particular Christians, without interessing the Church the interest whereof, I conceive, cannot be excluded, though S. Paul, here, provide not for it) as Car∣dinall Bellarmine de Matrimoni I. 14. disputeth. But, in case of adultery, it never was, nor ever could seem questionable, (so as S. Paul to decide it) whi∣ther a man might so put away his wife or no; all Civill Law that then was, counting him accessory to the stain of his bed and issue that did not; And there∣upon, the ancient Canons of the Church imposing penalties upon any of the Clergy, who, being allowed to dwell with their wives, should indure an adul∣teresse. And therefore, I conclude, that S. Paul, though he allow not, either husband or wife, to part with wife or husband, as to cohabitation, without re∣nouncing the bond of wedlock, no not for the state of continence,; (as S. Au∣stine
very well argues; if not for continence, then for no other cause) yet▪ forbids not what he allows not. But, seeing such offences fall out among Christians that be maried, as are not easily discernable, where the fault of them lies; no allowing them to part, nor yet condemning both parties, he limits them, in case they do so, not to marry again; imposing thereby, upon the innocent party, the necessity of continence, which his innocence makes to∣lerable, and the Aostles advise, if it proceed not to the parting of families, easily recoverble. As for the guilty, if it prove a burthen, or a snare, he may impute it to his fault. And, as it was not necessary, that the Church should be interessed in it, so long as both parties were inabled by the Law to depart, and neither proceeded to mary again; So, the Law not allowing it, there is no mar∣vail that the Church should interpose. Let us then see how the rest of the Church allowes the exception of adulte∣ry, to the puroe of marying again. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. II. in fine, . The Scripture plainly in∣acteth; Thou shal not a smiss thy wife but upon account of adultery: Counting it adultery to mary while the one of the parted is alive. Athengoras, de resurrect. mortuorum,  A Christian is to abde as he was born, or a one mariage: For, saith he, he that dis∣misseth his wife, and marieth another, committeth adultery. This necessarily concerneth no mor, thn marrying again upon that divorce, which the Romane Law inled eithr prty to make, without rendring a reason; and may well ba the exeption of marying upon divorce for adultery, by the Christian Law. And the s xception may well be understood, in the XLVIII. Cnon of the Aps▪ ▪ If a Lay-man, casting ou his wife, take another, or one that is put away y another, let him stand excommunicate. Proviion is made against taking to wie one that had been put away, for the reputation of the Clergy: For, it must needs be a sain to bring such a one into a mans house. If it be true that Grotius alleges out of severall passages of Tertulliane; that the Church, in his time, admitted them to mary again, who had parted with their wives for adultery, we need no more. But, though those allegations, (as not quoted, so) are no where to be ound; yet Tertullianes opinion is to be seen, by the plea that he makes, contra Marc. IV. 32. that our Lord abrogteth not that di∣vorce which Moses had inacted, though he restineth it; Which could not be said, if the divorce which our Lord alloweth, did not import right to mary a∣gain. Lactantius plainly signifies the same, when he sayes; Adulterum esse, qui à marito dimissam duerit: Et eum qui, praeter crimen adulterii, uxorem dim▪ se∣rit, ut alterum dut; That he is an adulterer, who maries a wife put away by her husband: And that so is he, that shall put away his wife to mary another, ex∣cepting the crime of adultery. The great Council of, almost all the West, at Arles, in the businesse of the Donatists, provides, Can. X. That those who take their wives in adultery, being young Christians, be exhorted not to mary o∣thers as long as they live; leaving thereby, hope of reconcilement. Certainly, they counted it not adultery, which they only exhort not to do. The Council of Elvira, Can IX. That the wife that forsakes her husband for adultery, and maries another, shall not communicate so long as he remains alive; of the husband, nothing. By the VIII. & X. She who leaves her husband without cause, and maries another, is not to communicate, no not at the point of death. (At the date of this Council, before the act of Constantine, man or wife parted without showing cause. Without cause then, is, when that cause which the Church al∣lows, viz. adultery, is not) She that maries him, who, she knew had put a∣way his wife without cause, not till the point of death. This is the difference between committing adultery, and marying him that commits adultery by put∣ting away his wife without adultery. And, it is plain, the wife is stricter used by these Canons then the husband. The Commentaries upon S. Pauls Epistles
under S. Ambrose his name, say plainly, 1 Cor. VII. That the man may mary a∣gain, having put away his wife for adultery, not the wife having put away her husband; because the man is the head of the woman. I do not find this rea∣son sufficient. For, S. Paul maketh the interest of the wife in the husband, and that of the husband in the wife both one and the same. Nor do I find the reason sufficient which Cardinall Cajetane hath given for him, upon Mat. XIX. 9. to wit, because our Lord, saying; He that putteth away his wife, unlesse for adultery, and marieth again, committeth adultery; sayes nothing of what the woman may do in that case. For Mark X. 11. 12. he sayes as much for the wife as for the husband, not expressing the exception; Why then should I not be extended to her, when he addeth it? But I conceive, that, though, by Gods Law, the woman be restrained no more then the man, yet the Law of the Church might restrain that which Gods law restrained not; And so, though the man be onely advised not to mary again, by the Canon of Arles; yet, the woman might be put to Penance, so long as her first husband remained alive, by the Canon of Elvira. For, I see, S. Basil ad Amphil. Can, IX. confesses, that, though S. Paul makes the case of both equall, yet, custome put the wo∣man to Penance, marying upon the adultery of her husband. Some ground of difference nature it selfe inforces, in that, the man taints not the wives issue, nor brings that infamy upon her bed, as she upon his. In the mean time, whatsoever we say of that, it is manifest, they held it not adultery, for the party that parted for adultery, to mary again. And as for Fabiola, who, ha∣ving put away a notorious adulterous husband, & maried another, after the death of this second, did voluntary Penance for it; as you find in S. Jerome, Epist. XXX. It may be the Church exacted it not, because, during her second Hus∣bands time, it is not said that she communicated not; And it may be she fol∣lowed S. Jeromes opinion, which he expresseth Epist. XLVII. Some passages of S. Basil, S. Chrysostome, and Gregory Nazianze, are alleged in vain, signi∣fying onely the insolubility of mariage; which may allow the exception which the Gospel maketh, and must allow it, when we see the custome, testified by S. Basil, to the contrary. And S. Chrysostome, when S. Paul sayes of the wife, If she part—understands him; If she part upon ordinary displeasures, which he calls , or pusillanimities, which, the courage of a true Christian would neglect and over see. Innocent I. Pope, Epist. ad Exuperium, puts them on∣ly to Penance, that mary again, having put away wives or husbands; Not sup∣posing adultery: But Epist. IX. ad Probum Statuimus fide Catholica suffragan∣te, illud esse conjugium, quod primitus erat divina gratia fundatum: Conventum{que} secundaemulieris, priore superstite, nec divortio ejectâ nullo pacto posse esse legitimum. We decree, the Catholick faith voting for it, that to be mariage, which first was founded upon Gods grace: (that was first made according to Christianity) and that the wedding of a second wife, leaving the first, can by no means be lawful. Which exception could possibly signifie nothing, if in no case, (not of adulte∣ry) a second could be maried, while the first is alive. And in the West, Chro∣matius of Aquileia, in Mat. V. as well as in the East, Asterius Homil. an li∣ceat dimittere uxorem; the first damns him that shall mary again excepting a∣dultery. The second would have his hearers perswaded, that nothing but death or adultery dissolves mariage. But do I therefore say, that the Church cannot forbid the innocent party to mary again? or, is bound by Gods law to allow it? All Ecclesiastical Law be∣ing nothing but the restraining of that which Gods Law hath left indefinite? And the inconveniences being both visible and horrible? I conceive, I am duly informed, that George, late Arch-bishop of Canterbury, was satisfied in the proceeding of the High Commission Court, to tie them that are divorced from marying again, upon experience of adultery designed upon collusion, to free the parties from wedlock; having been formerly tender in imposing that charge. The Greek Church may beter avoid such inconveniences, not being tied to any Law of the Land, but the tempering of the Canons remaining in the Gover∣nors of the Church. But, they that would not have the Lawes of the Church,
and the justice of the Land, became Stales and pandars to such vilanies, must either make adultery death, and so take away the dispute, or revive publick Pe∣nance, and so take away the infamy of his bed, and the taint of his issue, that shall be reconciled to an Adulteresse; or, lastly, bear with that inconvenience which the casualties of the world may oblige any man to, which is, to propose the chastity of single life, in stead of the chastity of wedlock, when the security of a mans conscience, and the offence of the Church allows it not. But though this, in regard of the intricacies of the question, and the inconveniences evident to practice, may remain in the power of the Church; yet can it ne∣ver come within the power of the Church to determine, that it is prejudiciall to the Christian faith to do so, as by Gods Law. And the Church, that erres not in prohibiting mariage upon divorce for adultery, will erre, in deter∣mining for mater of faith; that Gods law prohibites it, so long as such reasons from the Scriptures are not silenced by any Tradition of the whole Church. It is easie to see by S. Augustine, de adulterini conjugiis, II. 5-12. that pub∣lick Penance was the means to restore an adulteresse to the same reputation a∣mong Christians, which an adulteresse that turned Christian, must needs recover among Christians. And that is the reason, why the Canon of Arles orders, that young Christians be advised not to mary again, that their wives may be re∣covered of their adultery by Penance, and so their mariage re-estated. I see al∣so that Justiniane Nov. CXVII. hath taken order, that women excessive in in∣continence, be delivered to the Bishop of the City, to be put into a Monastery, there to do Penance during life. And, supposing adultery to be death, accord∣ing to Moses Law, the inconvenience ceaseth. If the Civil Law inable not the Church to avoid the scandall of this collusion, it is no marvail that the Church is constrained to impose upon the innocent, more then Gods law requires, to avoid that scandall which Gods law makes the greater inconvenience. And, thus having showed you, that S. Austines interpretation of fornication is not true, I have, into the bargain, showed you, that it cannot serve to prove divorce upon other causes besides adultery; and so, the insolubility of mariage, excepting our Saviours exception, is as firmly proved, as the consent of the Church can prove any thing in Christianity. I know Origen argues, that poyso∣ning, killing children, robbing the house, may be as destructive to the Society of Wedlock, as Adultery; And he thereupon seems to inferre, that our Savi∣our excepts adultery onely for instance, intending all causes equally destructive to wedlock; as Grotius, who follows his sense, seems to limit it. But Origens opinion will not interrupt the Tradition of the Church, unlesse it could appear to have come into practice, sometime, in some part of the Church. Neither would it serve his turn, that would have those divorces which the secular Power allowes to extend to marying again. For Origen never intended, that his own opinion should bind; but, that it is in the power of the Church to void mariages upon other causes. For, he saith, he knew some Governours of Churches suffer a woman to mary, her former husband living, Praeter Scripturam, besides the Scripture. And that, as Moses permitted divorce, to avoid a greater mischiefe. But I may question, whether they thought that against the Scripture, which O∣rigen thought to be against the Scripture. And, in the mean time, as I do not see, what breach his report can make upon the Tradition of the Church; so it is plain, the Power of the Church, and not the secular, did that which he reports. And truly, what the testimony of S. Austine, (extending that Adultery upon which our Saviour grants divorce to all mortall sinne; but, confining him that is so divorced not to mary another) can avail him, that would intitle the secu∣lar Power to create causes of divorce, to the effect of marying again; let all reason and conscience judge. I shall conclude my argument; Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis. An exception settles the rule in all that is not excepted. Either our Saviour intended, that, who had put away a Yoke-fellow for adulte∣ry, should mary again, or not; If so, he hath forbidden marying again upon o∣ther causes; If not, much more: For, though upon adultery, he hath forbid∣den to mary again. And thus is the Power of the Church in Matrimoniall
causes, founded upon the Law which our Lord Christ hath confined all Christi∣ans to, of marying one to one, and indissolubly, whither without exception, or, excepting adultery. For, seeing that, of necessity, many questions must arise upon the execution of such a Law; and that Civil Power may as well be ene∣my to Christianity, as not; and that, as well professing to maintain it, as profes∣sing to persecute it; to say, that God hath left the Consciences of Christians to be secured by the Civil Power, submitting to what it determines, is to say, that, under the Gospell, God hath not made the observing of his lawes the con∣dition of obtaining his promises. This is that power which Tertulliane in seve∣ral places expresly voucheth, de Pudicitiâ, cap. IV. Penes nos (speaking of Christians, that is, of the whole Church) occultae quo{que} conjunctiones, id est, non pris apud Ecclesiam professae, juxta maechiam & fornicationem judicari percli∣tantur. Among us, even clandestine mariages, that is, not professed before the Church, are in danger to be censured next to adultery and fornication. And there∣fore, Ad uxorem II. ult. Unde sufficiamus ad senarrandam faelicitatem ejus ma∣trimonii quod Ecclesia conciliat? How may we be able to declare the happinesse of that mariage, which the Church interposeth to joyn? de Monogamiâ, cap. XI. Quale est id matrimonium, quod, eis a quibus postulas non licet hahere? What ma∣ner of mariage is that, saith he (speaking of marying a second wife) which, it is not lawfull for them of whom thou desirest it, to have? Because it was not lawful for the Clergy, who allowed the people to mary second wives, themselves to do the same. Ignatius, Epist. ad . It becometh men and women that mary, to joyn by the consent of the Bi∣shop, that the mariage be according to the Lord, and not according to lust. It hath been doubted, indeed, whether we have the true Copy of Ignatius his Epistles or not; whether this be one of them or not: But, that Copy being found, which Eusebius, S. Jerome, and others of the Fathers took for Ignatius his own, and hath all that the Fathers quote, just as they quote it, nothing of that which stood suspected afore; to refuse them now, is to refuse evidence, because it stands not with our prejudices. Not that this power of the Church stands up∣on the authority of two or three witnesses. These were not to be neglected. But, the Canons of the Church, and the custome and practice of the Church ancientr then any Canons in writing, but evidenced by written Law, which could never have come in writing, had it not been in force before it was writ∣ten, suffer it not to remain without evidence. In particular, the allowance of the mariages of those who were baptized, when they were admitted to Bap∣tism, evidenced out of S. Austine, the Constituions, and Eliberitane Canons, evidenceth the Power of the Church in this point unquestionable. And therefore against the Imperiall Lawes, I argue, as against the Leviathan; that is, if any man suppose, that they pretend to secure the conscience of a Christian, in marying according to them upon divorce. Either the Soveraign Power effects that as Soveraign, or as Christian. If as Soveraign, why may not the Christians of the Turkish Empire divorce themselves according to the Aloran, which is the Law of the Land, and be secure in point of conscience? If as Christian, how can the conscience of a Christian in the Eastern Empire be secured in that case, wherein, the conscience of a Christian in the West can∣not be secured, because there is no such Civil Law there, the Christianity of both being the same? For, it cannot be said, that the Imperiall Lawes alleged, were in force in the West, after the division of the Empire. I argue again; That they cannot secure the conscience, but under the Law of our Lord, as contain∣ing the true interpretation of fornication in his sense. And can any man be so senselesse as to imagine, so impudent as to affirm, that the whole Church, agree∣ing in taking the fornication of maried people to signifie adultery, hath failed; but every Christian Prince, that alloweth and limiteth any other causes of di∣vorce, all limiting severall causes, attaineth the true sense of it? Will the common sense of men allow, that Homicide, Treason, Poysoning, Forgery, Sacriledge, Robbery, Mans-stealing, Cattle-driving, or any of them, is con∣tained
is the true meaning of Fornication in our Lords words? That consent of parties, that a reasonable cause, when Pagans divorced per bonam gratiam, with∣out disparagement to either of the parties, can be understood by that name? For, these you shall find to be legall cause of divorce, by those acts of the Emperours. Lastly I argue; If these causes secure the conscience in the Empire by virtue of those Laws, why shall not those causes, for which divorce was al∣lowed or practiced amongst the ancient French, the Irish, the Welch, the Rus∣ses, do the like? For, that which was done by virtue of their Lawes, reported there, cap. XXVI. XXX. is no lesse the effect of Christian power that is Sove∣raign. He that could find in his heart to tell Baronius (reproving the Law of Justine, that allowed divorce upon consent) that Christian Princes, who knew their own power, were not so easily to be ruled by the Clergy, p. 611. can he find fault with the Irish marrying for a year and a day, or the Welch, divor∣cing for a stinking breath? Had he not more reason to say, that, knowing their power, they might chuse whether they would be Christians or not? The dispute being; What they should do, supposing that they are Christians. And therefore, it is to be maintained, that those Emperours, in limiting the infi∣nite liberty of divorces by the Romane Law, to those causes upon which dow∣ries should be recoverable or not, (being made for Pagans as well as for Christi∣ans) did, as it were, rough hew their Empire to admit the strict law of Christia∣nity in this point. And, that this was the intent and effect of their acts, appears by the Canons which have been alleged, as well in the East, as in the West, made during the time when those Laws were in force. For, shall we think the Church quite out of their senses, to procure such Canons to be made, knowing that they could not take place in the lives and conversations of Christians, to the effect of hindring to mary again? If we coulde so think, it would not serve the turn, unlesse we could say, how S. Basil should testifie, that indeed they did take place to that effect, and yet the Civill Law not suffer them to take effect. From our Lord Christ to that time, it is clear, that no Christian could mary again after divorce, unlesse for adultery; some not excepting a∣dultery. In the base times of that Empire, it appears by the Canons of Alexi∣us, Patriarch of C P. and by Matthaeus Blastares, alleged by Arcudius, p. 517. that those causes, which the Imperiall Lawes allowed, but Gods law did not, took place to the effect of marrying again. But, that so it was alwaies from Constantine, who first taxed legall cause of divorce, nothing obliges a man to suppose. For, though the Emperours Law, being made for Pagans as well as for Christians, might inable either party to hold the dowry; yet, the Christian law might, and did oblige Christians not to mary again. The Mileuitane Ca∣non showes it, which provideth, that the Emperour be requested to inact, that no Christian might mary after divorce. For this might be done, saving the Im∣perial Laws. But, when we see the Civil Law, inforce the Ministers of the Church to blesse those Mariages which the Civil Law allows; but Gods Law makes adulteries, the party that is put away, and not for adultery, remaining alive; Then we see what a horrible breach the civil Power hath made upon Christiani∣ty, by hindring the Power of the Church to take place. For, on the one side, the blessing of the Church, seems to concur to the securing of the consciences of particular Christians, that they forfeit not their interest in the promises of the Gospell, by doing that; to which, the Church, for avoiding greater mis∣chiefe, is constrained to concurre: On the other side, that which is done, is, not onely, by the consent of the whole Church, in the sense of our Lords Law, but by those Divines of the Eastern Church, which writ during time that this corruption is pretended, as Euthymius and Theophylact upon Mat. V. con∣demned for adultery. Now, supposing the Law to part Wedlock, the Canon not suffering to mary again, S. Pauls alternative is whole; Either not to part, or parting, to be reconciled, but not to mary again. And therefore the Church had no more reason to interpose in that case, then to censure who does wrong in going to sute. For wrong is alwaies done, but, because it is between two, it is not censurable; onely S. Pauls aim of reconciling them is harder to be at∣tained,
when the dowry is recovered, then when cohibitation onely is parted. And therefore, as that licentiousnesse in divorcing, which the ancient French, the Irish, the Welch, the Russes, and Alysimes, did, or do use, is an evidence that Christianity was not so fully received, or did not totally prevail amongst them; So, when the Greek Church yielded to allow those divorces which the Civil Law allowed, which at the first it did not do, then was their Christianity im∣based and corrupted. Which, though it cannot have come to passe without the fault of the Clergy, yet it is most to be charged upon the secular power, the interesse whereof it inlargeth to the prejudice of Christianity. For, as in times of Apostacy, and factions in the Church, it hath been many times con∣strained to receive or retain those; of whose salvation it cannot presume, at the peril of their own souls; So, when it seems lesse evill to yield to that violence which the secular Power offers, then to abandon the protection thereof, those that impose violence are far more chargeable with the souls that perish by the means thereof, then those that yield to i for the best. And, that this may serve for a great part of excuse for the Greek Church, we have great argument to believe; Because, since the taking of Constantinople, being no more tied by the Civil Laws of the supream Power, they allow no divorce but for adultery: Nei∣ther is there any further difference between them and the Latin Church, but, whither Gods law, upon divorce for adultery, allow marying again or not. Which the Council of Trent hath no further impeached, then, in case it be maintain∣ed that the Church erreth in saying, that the bond of mariage remains inso∣luble, notwithstanding adultery on either side, Conc. Tied. Sess. XXIV. cap. VII. least the subjects of the State of Venice should be condemned unheard, who had alwaies maried after divorce for adultery; as the History relateth. CHAP. XIV. Another opinion, admitting the ground of lawfull Impediments. What Impedi∣ments arise upon the Constitution of the Church, generally as a Society, or parti∣cularly, as of Christians. By what Law some degrees are prohibited Christians. And, of the Polygamy of the Patriarchs. Mariage with the deceased wives Sister, and with a Cousin Germane, by what Law prohibited. Of the Profession of Conscience, and the validity of clandestine Mariages. The bounds of Eccle∣siasticall Power in Mariage upon these grounds. I Am now to propose another opinion, pretending to justifie the Imperiall Laws examined concerning divorce, the moderation whereof I do much esteem above these novelties, tending to cast one Article concerning the Holy Catholick Apostolick Church, out of the common faith of all Christians. It saith, that the secular Power is able to limit the conditions upon which mariage is contracted (as being indeed a civill contract) so that mariage, contracted contrary to the conditions limited by the secular Power, shall be ipso facto void, the persons being, by the Law, rendred uncapable of contracting the same: And that, by the same reason, the same Power is able to prescribe such conditions, as, com∣ing to passe after mariage, are of force to void it by virtue of the provision go∣ing before, declaring it void, whensoever such conditions should come to passe. As, in case of murder, poysoning, treason, forgery, robbery, sacriledge, in case of impotence, absence of long time and the like; for, in case of mutual con∣sent, or, upon reasonable cause, without disparagement, themselves dare not take upon them to say, that the secular power can make any lawfull divorce. This opinion is indeed considerable, in regard of those impediments, which, Canonists and Casuists declare to have the force of avoiding mariage consum∣mate by carnall knowledge. For if they, or some of them, may appear to be well grounded, there can be nothing more effectuall to clear my first intent, to wit, what is the true interesse and right of the Church, in determining Ma∣trimonial causes. I say then, that, upon the suppositions premised, that the Church is a Socie∣ty
founded by God, and that there is a peculiar Law of our Lord concerning the mariages of Christians, it necessarily followeth; that, as there are divere things, which make mariages void, or unlawfull, so the Church is to be satisfi∣ed, that there is none of them to be found in those mariages which it alloweth. If we consider the Church generally as a Society of reasonable people, certain∣ly, those things which render the contracts of all reasonable people, either void or unlawfull, in what Society soever they live, must needs be thought to ren∣der, either void or unlawfull, those mariages, that are so contracted in the Church. As for the purpose; Whatsoever is contracted either by fraud or by force, is of it selfe originally void, supposing that fraud, or that force to have been the cause why it was contracted. The reason being the same, that ties a man to any thing which ever he contracted; which is, his own free consent, in what he is not limited to by the law of God and Nature. For, if this be the reason that obliges, where this reason fails, the obligation of necessity ceaseth. And shall it then be thought, that any solemnity, which the Church may cele∣brate a mariage contracted by force with, can avail to make that contract bind∣ing? Or that a cheat, which, had it not been believed, a man would not have maried, nor the mariage have been solemnized, when it is solemnized, shall have force to oblige? This to those, who, believing that mariage is a Sacra∣ment, do think it consequent, that the solemnizing of mariage, renders those mariages of force to bind the parties, which, otherwise, are not onely unlaw∣ful, but also void. For, though I cannot here balk my order, and resolve how many Sacraments there are, and whether mariage be one of them or not; yet, since I can say, that, supposing it were, this would not follow, for the reason which I have said, nothing hinders ou discourse to proceed, as supposing it were, not granting that it is. In particular, seeing that, by the Law of Christia∣nity, none can mary with one that is bound to another already; the innocent party so married by cousenage, is so farre from being obliged by it, as to be ob∣liged not to use it upon notice. Again, in particular, seeing that Christianity de∣clareth mariage to intend procreation, and the remedy of concupiscence, the uglinesse whereof was never discovered by Idolators and Pagans; wheresoever is discovered a naturall impotence to per-form the act of mariage, there ap∣peareth an error, which had it not been, the mariage had not been made; And therefore, adding the generall to the particular, the contract must appear voide. The same is much more to be said, if, by any deceit, there hath been an error in the sex of one of the parties. Difference in Religion between Christians and Pagans, between Christians and Jews, renders mariage void by virtue of the premises, though it oblige not Christians to make use of their right, by re∣nouncing it, as Jews were obliged to desert Idolaters. But, that there may some new Religion spring up in the world, upon the divisions of the Church, (which, we see, are possible) which, question may be made, whether it be law∣ful, or, whether expedient for Christians, either to mary, or to continue ma∣ried with; (suppose for the present that of the Gnosticks, that of the Pri∣scillianists, that of our Ranters, or Quakers) who can deny? And, suppo∣sing such a question made, and supposing the Church to be a Society trusted with the guard of Gods Law concerning mariage, what determination can secure the conscience of a Christian, but the determination of the Church, in a cause grounded on mater of Christianity, for the guard whereof the Church stand∣eth? Doth not all the world acknowledge a publick reputation of that honesty which Christianity pretendeth, and challengeth to be performed, in the mari∣age of Christians as they are Christians? Do not all Christians acknowledge, that there is a neernesse both of blood and of alliance, within which Christi∣ans are forbidden to mary? You will say to me, that these degrees are limited by the Law of God, in the XVIII of Leviticus, and, that the Church hath no more to do in prohibiting that which is not there prohibited, then in licensing that which is. But that will not serve my turn, having proved, that the Law of Moses, in the first in∣stance, was given for the civill Law of one people of the Jews, and, for their
civill happinesse in the Land of promise, given them on condition of living ac∣cording to it, with a promise of freedom over themselves so doing. The Church, on the contrary, a society of all Christendom, founded upon undertaking the Law of Christ, with promise of everlasting happinesse. For, what appearance is there, that the same Law should contain the condition of temporall and e∣ternal happinesse, in any part of humane life and conversation? Indeed, he that should argue, that, seeing God prohibited to many degrees of affinity and con∣sanguinity in the mariages of his ancient people, whom he treated expresly with upon onely temporall promises; all the same degrees therefore are prohi∣bited Christians, whom God deals with upon the promise of the world to come; I cannot see how his argument could find an answer. But, having showed, that Christians are bound to straiter terms of Godlinesse by the law of Christ, then the ancient people of God, whom God obliged himselfe to for the world to come, but by intimations, which needed stronger inclinations to virtue to im∣brace; will it not follow, that the provision of the Levitical Law, is no excepti∣on to this generall in mater of mariage? Indeed, it is not the power of the Church, that brings in this ground of restraining more then is restrained by the Levitical Law; but the nature of Christianity, which, I showed from the begin∣ning, to be, in order of nature, before the constitution of the Church, and an∣cient to it. But, having showed, that there is no presumption in Christianity to hinder that to belong to the Law of the Church, which is not recorded in the Scripture; by consequence I have showed, that the practice of the Church may be sufficient evidence for it, and, that the power of the Church is not onely sufficient, but necessary, to the determining of that which is not determined by it. I confesse, I have a difficult objection to answer▪ when I read Levit. XVIII. 24. 25. Be not polluted with any of these. For with these were the Nations pol∣luted, which I drive out before your face. And the earth is polluted, and I visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and, she spueth out her inhabitants. For, by this it should seem, that all the prohibitions of that chapter, contained in the gene∣nerall term of these thinge, stood by the perpetuall Law of God and Nature, so that they were never dispensed with before the Law, and that, therefore, there can be no reason to understand any degree to be prohibited Christians, which was not prohibited Jews. The objection were difficult enough, had we not per∣emtory instances to choke them with, that argue thus. For is it possible for any reasonable man to imagine, that God should call those things which the Fathers practised till now, those abominations for which he drives out the seven Nati∣ons from before his people? Is it not manifest, that Jacob was maried to two Sisters at once, that Moses and Aaron came of the mariage of the Mothers Si∣ster, Exod. VI. 20? that Abraham was maried to his brothers daughter, at least? And is it strange, that should be prohibited by Moses Law, which before was dispensed with? But, supposing that difference between the Law and the Gospel that I have proved, were it not strange, that that no more should be prohibited under the Gospel, then by the Law? Of the Polygamy of the Fathers before the Law, I said enough afore, to show that it was dispensed with; how it was dispensed with, I said not, which seems to make men difficult of beliefe in the point. And, truly that which the Fathers say sometimes, that they were taught by Gods spirit, that they might do it, for the maintenance of the righteous seed; seems somewhat strange, if we under∣stood it, as if the world did acknowledge it to be prohibited, till the chiefe friends of God had particular revelation from him, that it was allowed them, being forbidden all the world besides. Now, we have good information from the Jews (which all men of learning do now accept for Historical truth) that, after the flood, there were certain precepts delivered to Noe, and his Sons, (which therefore, they call the seven precepts of the Sonnes of Noe) with an intent to oblige all Nations; among which there was one, that prohibited the uncovering of nakednesse, signifying thereby, the forbearance of all that was then to be counted uncleannesse. Which what it was, and what it was to con∣tain afore the Law, though it be not recorded in Scripture; yet we are to stand
assured, that nothing that we find practiced by the Fathers, was any part of it; Because, being so highly favoured by God as we find they were; we are not to think, that they lived in rebellion against any part of his Law. The Jews in∣deed say, that the same Precepts were all delivered to Adam, and to his poste∣rity, saving one concerning the eating of blood, which was added, when the rest were renewed to the Sons of Noa after the flood; which I think my selfe at liberty not to believe. For then, whatsoever is not contained in these pre∣cepts, must be understood to be allowed all the Sons of Adam, before the flood. Whereas, the Polygamy of Lamech seems to be recorded by Moses, for the first transgression of the originall institution of Paradise. And, when we read, after the world had stood XVC years, that men began to multiply upon earth; there is appearance, that, thitherto, Polygamy was not in use among the children of God, supposing them to be the posterity of Seth, which conti∣nued in the service of God, as the most received interpretation hath it. For, had Polygamy been then in use, they would have multiplyed faster, as after the flood, and, as the Israelites in Egypt. Not that it was not then in use among the children of men, after Lamech had begun it; but because, being not en∣tertained by the children of God, (one halfe of mankind at that time) it took not the like force, even among the children of men, as after the slood. This is the reason why, believing that the institution of Paradise was in force, at least among the children of God; I admit the Tradition of the Jews, con∣cerning the precepts of Noahs children after the flood, according to S. Jerome again Jovinian, where he saith, that neither divorce, nor eating flesh, was licen∣sed untill the flood. Polygamy and divorce being maters of so near kinne, that the one cannot be imagined to have been allowed, when the other was not. For if God gave the Sonnes of Noah these precepts, he gave them assurance of his favour, living within the compasse of them, which is to dispense with the pri∣mitive institution of Paradise. But, I do not therefore think my selfe tied to those bounds, which the Jews limit the meaning and intent of this prohibition of uncovering nakedness with; (namely in the point of simple fornication, which, they no where allow to have been prohibited by it) as the Lawes of Moses (they say well) extend not to them, being made for free Denizens of Gods people, unlesse it be other∣wise expressed; as in the prohibition of eating that which is torn, which they are commanded to give to the stranger within their gates, Deut. XIV. 21. For, seeing that they were utterly prohibited to suffer Idolaters to live within the Land of promise; but, that it is supposed, strangers should live in it, which, be∣ing not tied to their Laws, were not circumcised, and, that they might have slaves of this rank; we have certain evidence, for the truth of the Tradition concerning certain precepts given all mankind after the flood. But if, because there is no punishment assigned for the fornication of strangers, it should there∣fore be thought, it was then no sinne, by Gods Law to all Nations; I should deny the consequence. The fornication of Judah with Tamar, whom he took for a prositute, we see he avowed not. And that of Samsom with Dalilah, I may as easily say, was, under pretense of mariage, as the Jews, that she was a Proselyte of the Children of Noah. For, it is agreed upon, that, by the Law, an Israelite might neither commit fornication with an Israelitess, nor with a Gentile; The one by the Law of Deut. XXIII. 18. & Lev. XIX. 19. The o∣ther by that which you read in the Book de Jure Naturali & Gratium secun∣dum Ebrues V. 12. Wherefore, seeing the Law supposes Harlots, when it for∣bids the Hrie of them to be consecrated to God, Deut. XXIII. 18. it seems to follow, that the Law allow, that trade only to strangers of the Sonnes of Noah, that is to say, not Idolaters, in the Land of promise. For though the Jews will have this Law to take hold of him that lies with a Gentile, or slave, or Jewesse, that is forbidden him, whither by the law of uncleannesse, Levit. XVIII. or any other; yet we find it not punishable by the Law, unlesse it be with a Gen∣tile-slave, who, having partly obtained her freedom, is espoused to an Israelite, Lev. XIX. 20. as the Jews limit it; because, otherwise, they were forbidden to
mary slaves, according to Josephus, Antiq. IV. 8. For, they that counted the dis∣honour of Dinah such a reproach to them, that, notwithstanding all possible reparation tendred, they were to revenge it so deeply in blood; shall we ima∣gine, that they counted it indifferent in the rest of mankind, even those who were retired from Idolatry, to professe the true God, as the Jews their suc∣cessors seem to do? Rather are we to attribute this opinion of the indifference of it to the coming in of Idolatry, which was the Apostacy of the Gentiles from the Law gven the Sonnes of Noah; S. Paul Rom. I 24-27. according to the Author of the Book of Wisedom, III. 12. 16, 19. VI. 3. 6. ascribing that inundation of uncleannessd, which overflowed all the world but Gods people, to the coming in of Idols. And therefore, fornication, though forbid∣den, by the Decalogue, is not alwayes punished in the Israelites themselves; because the law, (which S. Paul saith came in because of transgressions, Gal. III. 29. and, was not given the righteous, but the unrighteous, 1 Tim. I. 9. 10, 11) intending to prohibite the grosser sins, which civil Society is chiefly offended with; expected spiritual obedience, upon the belief of God and his providence, in taking account for our actions here, together with the promise of deliverance by the Messias to come; and not from the constraint of temporal punishment, which the Law was armed with. For, if this were the means of grace provided for the seed of Abraham, well might it serve those strangers, who, renouncing the service of Idol, should joyn themselves to Gods people, & so become parta∣ker of the same means with them, to induce a resolution of spiritual obedience. We have further to perswade us, to admit of this dispensation in the primi∣tive institution of Paradise; the Tradition of the Jews, affirming, the prohibiti∣on of Levit. XVIII. to have belonged in part to the stranger within their Gates, in part not. Which Tradition, being committed to writing▪ so late af∣ter the dissolution of the Goverment, and, having still the force of Law, where strangers should make themselves Jews (which certainly, at the writing of their Traditions, fell out many times) we must needs allow, for the inter∣pretation of that law which was in force while their state stood; though we question, whither it contain the due bounds of this prohibition, as it was first delivered to mankind after the flood. And hereupon, well may wee an∣swer with them, that when Moses saith; that for these abominations the se∣ven nations were driven out before the children of Israel; he is to be understood, respectively to those abominations which were committed against the true in∣tent of the prohibition of uncleannesse, injoyned on all mankind; but not to those things which we see were in use among the Fathers before the Law, nor to whatsoever was committed against the first institution of Paradise. Which if it be admitted, then, all that is established by the Law of Levit. XVIII. will oblige the whole Church, without dispensation by any power of it; though, not because, by the act of giving the Law to the Israelites, the Church is obli∣ged; but, because there is more reason why Christianity should restrain that which was allowed by the Law, then that the Law should restrain that which was allowed by the Patriarchs. And, upon this principle, we shall not need to runne upon any inconvenience, to obtain one degree of affinity, and one of consanguinity to be unlawful for Christians, though not expressed in the leter of the Scripture; to wit, the mariage of the sister to a mans deceased wife, and, that of cousin Germanes. The former is thought to be secured by the Text of Levit. Thou shalt not un∣cover the nakednesse of thy Brothers wife, it is thy Brothers nakednesse. For, the wives sister being as neer as the Brothers wife, the one being prohibited, and, neernesse the onely reason of the prohibition; the other cannot be licensed, saving the reason of the Law. Therefore the provision of Dut. XXV. 5-10. that the next of kin, though a Brother, should mary the wife of the Brother deceased, so that the children should be, in account of Law, the children of the deceased; All this, signifies▪ no more, but that, the Law being positive, this ex∣ception is made to it by him that made it. So that, when it follows, Levit. XVIII. 18. Thou shalt not take a wife to her sister to vex her, to uncover her na∣kedness,
beside her in her life time; It is observed, that in the Ebrue, to take a wife to her sister, is, to take a wife to another wife: And therefore, that this Law is a prohibition of Polygamy, at least when the taking of another wife may be an occasion to vex the former wife; Not, that a Jew was licensed hereby to mary his wives sister after her death. This, indeed, was the interpretation of the Sadduces, and of those Jews that admit no interpretation of the Law of Tra∣dition, but onely by the leter of it; for which they are reproved by the Tal∣mudsts, the off-spring of the Pharisees; in the Book called Pesikta. Though it is to me difficult to believe, that the Sadduces of old, or their successors, the Scriptuary Jewes, did thereupon, tie themselves to one wife. It is, in∣deed, difficult enough to give an evident reason of difference in nearnesse of blood; wherefore the brother, should be prohibited his brothers wife, and the sister allowed her Brothers husband. But, it is one thing to alledge an incon∣venience, an other thing to answer an argument; nor are we to presume, that God doth nothing by his Law, without acquainting them whom he imposed it upon with the reason of it. Now, this interpretation cannot subsist, without o∣verthrowing all that hath been said, to show, that Polygamy after the flood was first prohibited by Christianity. For, when thy Brothers wife is generally prohi∣bited in Leviticus, and afterwards licensed, or commanded, in case he die child∣lesse, it is but a particular exception to a general. But if, in Ex. XXI. 10. a man is supposed to have power of having more wives then one, and by Lev. XXIII. 10. injoyned to have no more then one, in Deut. XXI. 11-15-18. supposed to have more then one; can these be thought reconcilable? Certainly, the tenor of these Lawes imports no such thing as dispensing, but a liber∣ty already in use, which the Law restrains not; but this Law would restrain, if, had it been thus meant. And why should the Law say, in her life time, if the intent of it were, that a man should not have two wives at once? Could there be any question, whether a man might mary a second wife or not? Therefore, that clause must be thought to be added, to signifie, that, after death, this Law forbids not to take the wives sister to wife. And so, that which Jacob had done before, is, by this Lavv, forbidden to be done for the future. For Jacob, vvhen first he found that he had beded his vvives sister, vvas innocent for all that vvas done, but had been utterly disabled to have companied vvith any other for the future, vvithout dispensation in this Lavv; vvhich, vve must imagine, either to have come betvveen Labans proposition of marrying both, and Jacobs assent; or else, to have gone before all the actions of like nature, vvhich the Scripture testifies; vvhereof, vvhither is the more reasonable, let any man of reason chuse. As for the limitation added to the right of having more vvives then one under the Lavv, Exod. XXI. 10. vvhereby, he that hath an inferiour vvife, bought vvith his silver of Gods people, is bound to pay her the benevoence due to a vvife, though it make the mariage void by abuse of his right; (for it is said; He shall let her go free, vvhich implies the dissolution of the marriage) yet, it no vvay signifies, that he vvas not able to mary her afore. And, vvhen the Prophet, Mal. 11. 14. 15. 16. blames the Jevvs for oppressing their vvives, out of love to strange vvives, vvhich, by the Lavv they might not have; be this adultery, if you please, (because such a mariage, as, I have shovved, vvas ipso facto void) be it trea∣chery in transgressing his covenant vvith the first vvife; yet did not he that took a second vvife so as to oppresse the first, violate this Lavv of Levit. XVIII. 18. For, hovv can a mariage that is good and valid, become void by oppressing? but, as an Ebrue slave that one maries is made free by the Law, if she be not used as a wife (and so, no longer his wife) that reliefe being onely provided by the law in that case. Therefore when the Law saith,—to vex her, it is not limitation, but a reason, which the Lavv follows in sisters, because, in them, as it is more likely to come to passe, so it is more unreasonable, as in Jacobs example; whereas, being a perpetual attendant of Polygamy, as in the wives of Elkanah, it was not, nevertheless, admitted for a reason totally to prohibite it. And there∣fore, I say, that I am no waies tied to give a reason, why God, who prohibited two Brothers to have the same wife, should allow two sisters to have the same husband, after death. For, the Lavv being positive, (as it is confessed by the
dispensation introduced by the Law, on the one side) the will of the Law-giver is the reason of those bounds which he limits, and therefore he is not obliged to inact those bounds, vvhereof there is no reason to be seen. His ovvn knovv∣ledge, of what was fitting for his design, of husbanding the restraints of the Lvv, o as to make vvay for the necessity of the Gospel; being the only reason that remain undisputable. And is not the instance manifest, in that, the Fa∣thers sisters being prohibited by the Law, the sisters Daughter is not, vvhere∣upon Herod maried his nece, and espoused his daughter to his brother Phr∣ras, Jos. Ant. XII. XVI? Which he that considers, will not despise a probable reason evident to the Jevvs, though he acknovvledge that it inforces nothing, stting the vvill of the Lavv-giver aside; To vvit, that the young are vvont to frequent their Grand-fathers and Grand-Mothers houses, and there to have convrsation vvith their Fathers sisters, having lesse interess in Brothers houses, and so frequenting them lesse. Which holds also in the brothers house, more then the wives sisters. And so the reasons of the prohibitions, of Leviticus, XVIII. being two, nernesse of blood, occasion of uncleannesse, if the Law had not made the mariages of such persons unclean; this reason may way where the other does not appear. As for the inconvenience that is feared, that Christian people should license themselves to do that under the Gospel, which, it is confessed, that Gods people under the Law, were not prohibited to doe; (for, it is manifest, that some which count themselves great Saints have done it) either people do believe the Holy Catholick Church, or not: If they believe it, they must believe the power of the Church, in limiting that which our Lord Christ hath not limited, in estifying where our Lord Christ and his Apostles have liited, though not recorded to us by the Scriptures; according as I have deduced it in the premises. If not, it is no marvail to see, that, Apostacy from the belief & unity of Gods Church, should now & then draw after it licentious∣nsse in such a point as this is. If the Canons and Customes hitherto reveren∣ced by all Christians, as the remains and evidence of the conversation delive∣red over by the successors of our Lord to his Church, cannot prevail with men, to forbear that which no example but their own warrants; the Scripture can∣not stand long, standing onely upon motives of conscience. It is as ordinary to hear it said, that the Scripture which is contained in the Bible, is not the Scripture, but that which is written in the heart; that the man that was crucifi∣ed at Jerusalem is not Christ, but he that dwels in the her; as it is to see a man mary the sister of his deceased wife. Temporall punishments may de∣terre en from publishing such blasphemies; But, if the unity of the Church come not in, to evidence the motives of faith, and, by consequence, to pro∣cure the reverence of those Laws, whereby onely it may be maintained; it will be as easie and obvious to despise Christianity and the Scriptures, as the Church, and those Rulers, wherby the service of God is maintained in the unity of it. As concerning the Mariages of Cousin Germanes, the premises being sup∣posed, I am not a whit troubled, that I cannot produce such Canons in wri∣ting, as may evidence, that all Christians from the beginning forbore it. For, aving showed, that all the Canons of the Church were in effect and force be∣fore they were written and inacted by Councils; and, that the inacting of them was but the limiting of some circumstances, abating the rigour of primitive cu∣stomes, because, the number of Christians multiplying, could not so easily be hld to it; I cannot see how S. Augustine can be refused, when he tells us, de Civ. dei. XV. 16. Raro per mores fiebat, quod fieri per leges licebat, quia id nec divina prohibeat, & nondum prohiberat lex uman: Verntamen factum eti∣am licitum propter vicinitatem horrebatur illiciti. Seldome was that done, by reason of custome, which by reason of lw might have been done, because, neither did Gods Law prohibite it, nor as yet ad mans Law prohibited it: Notwithstand∣ing, being lawful to be done, it was abhorred for the neighbour-hood of that which was unlawful. Gods Law in Leviticus, had not forbidden it. Nor the Laws of the Empire as yet. How then came Christians to abhorre that, which, the law
of God and Man, saith S. Augustine, (that is to say, the law of Moses, and of the Empire) licensed? Is it possible that Christendom, of it own free motion▪ should conspire to impose upon it selfe such a restraint, having no share in Chri∣stianity? It is still as easie to maintain, that the world was made by the casuall meeting of Atomes, according to Epicurus, denying providence. But, suppose the Apostles and their successors, to have received for a necessary point of Chri∣stianity, that, unlesse our righetousnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall by o means enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and, suppose them to have the allowance of all mariages, that is, the discerning of what is agreeable to Christianity, from what not; and you render a sufficient reason, how such a custome should prevail in the Church, which, otherwise, is not to be rendred. And, supposing such a custome, you grant that, that which Christians abhorred onely because it was neer that which the law of Moses, or the law of the Empire made unlawfull; was become it selfe unlawfull, by virtue of that custome, which, no Christian, that would not offend the unity of the Church, could lawfully transgresse. The saying of Justine the Martyr, Ep. ad Zenam & Sernum, is truly Apostolical, and takes place here again; . They obey the Lawes that are, and in their lives, go beyond the Lawes; speaking of the Christians. But if it were the character of Christians to go beyond the Laws, shall we count it a thing law∣ful for a Christian, to efface in himselfe the common character of Christians? When the Great Theodosius made it a Law to the Empire, not to mary Cousin Germanes (which is the Law that S. Augustine intimates, for which he is so much commended, not onely by S. Ambrose, Ep. LXVI. but by the Heathen Historian Sex. Aurelis Victor in Theodosio) did he do this for a frolick, (all reason of state disswading the imposing of unnecessary burthens, where the necessary were so great) or, did he do it because he would promote Chistiani∣ty, by imposing upon the Empire, before it was all Christian, the custome of Christianity? I know this act was repealed by Justinian, and perhaps upon advice of some Bishops, who alwaies frequented him, as we understand by Procopius. But, neither is the authority of Justinian of weight in the question of Christianity; neither did those Bishops, that might give this advice, act in the quality of Bishops, but of his friends and Counsailers; their opinion as Bishops, would not have served to change the customes of the Church. There∣fore this repeal never took place in the West. For first, the Gothes retained Theodosius his Law, as Cassidore VII. 46. testifieth, (which Cvias saith, is the reason, why, in Gais, (out of whom Justinian took his Institutes for the most part) it is at this day read; Duorum fratrum vel sororum liberi, vel fratris & sororis jungi non possunt. The children of two Brothers or Sisters, or, of a Bro∣ther and Sister, may not mary together; contrary to that which Justinian is known to have inacted) Then, the later Emperours revived the Law of Theodosius; upon which occasion it is still read in many Copies of the Institutes, de Nupt. X. 4. non possunt, expresly against many parts of Justinians Law. And, for the East, how shall we say that Justinians Law was repealed, or, upon what ground, but that the custome of the Church prevailed to move Christian Emperours to repeal it, seeing Christendom scandalized at the license introduced by it? He therefore that alleges Istinian in these cases, or, even Moses, let him allege He∣rods marying his Brothers Daughter, and espousing his Daughter to his Brother Pheroras in Iosephus, At. XII. & XVI. and so allowing the same; which when Claudius for his own lust licensed▪ there was scarce found a Gentleman in Rome that would do the like, as Tacitus reporteth. Indeed, when S. Austine says, this was rarely done afore Theodosius, signifying, that, sometimes it was done; we must accknowledge, not onely that the mariage was not void, that was so made from the beginning (for neither is the mariage of the deceased wives Si∣ster, or, of the neece, void by the Canons of the Apostles, and the Eliberine Canon injoyns, upon marying the wives sister, five yeares Penance, signifying that it was not void) but also we remain uncertain whether it were censured by the Church, or how.
But, when S. Gregory allows Austine the Monk, to allow the first Christian Saxons to mary in the fourth degree, we are not certified, whither according to the account of the Romane Law, or, according to that account which the Popes afterwards brought in use. For, the Romane Law, counting the stock for one, made no first degree in the cross line, but reckoned Brothers the se∣cond, and, by consequence, Cousin Germanes the fourth, determining both legall successions and affinities within seven degrees, which are sometime called six, as you include both terms, or exclude the one, L. X. ff. de gradibus & af∣finibus. Paulus, Sent. IV. 11. ubi Anianus & Modest. L. XLV. ff. de gradibus & affinibu. Whereupon mariage was first forbidden in the West, as far as the seventh degree inclusive, Caus. XXV. q. 2 & 3. & cap. 20. ib. Greg. P P. I. Nic. P P. II. c. 17. ib. & sentent. IV. dist. XL. Isid. Orig. IX. & c. 6. Caus. XXXV. q. 5. Grat. c. 21. whereby it should seem that this degree was dispensed with by S. Gregory, being otherwise, then prohibited. But the Pope afterwards, intro∣ducing a contrary way, of counting brothers for one degree, and Cousin Ger∣manes the second, (which before were the second and the fourth) determi∣ned, kindred by seven of these degrees, which were before just halfe so many Alex. PP. 2. c. 2. Caus. XXXV. q. 5. and all these prohibited, c. 14. Caus. XXXV. q. 2 & 3. till reduced to the fourth by the Laterane Council under In∣nocent III. for the difficulty and burthen of it, (which fourth, is just the eight by the former account) which is now the law of the West under the Pope. A thing which I cannot admire at enough, either how proposed, or how admitted. Whereas in the East, the seventh degree (according to the Roman account) is neither permitted, nor the mariage dissolved if consummate. Ius. Graecorum. L. III. p. 204. lib. IV. pag. 266. afterwards, under Michael Patriarch of C P. Ib. lib. 3. p. 206. the seventh was forbidden, the eighth alwayes licensed. See further, Harmenop. lib. IV. Tit. 5, Arcudius VII. 30. which I allege, all to no purpose but this, that the consent of Christendom, submitting to be restrain∣ed beyond all degrees, any way pretended to be expressed by Gods Law, is an evidence of the two Principles alledged, that they were from the beginning ad∣mitted by all Christendom. Indeed, when it is said, that which the Church cen∣sured not, which S. Gregory dispensed with, which the Romane Emperours and Gothish Kings reserved themselves a power of dispensing in, as appeares by a Law of Honorius and Theodosius, in C. Theod. Si nuptia ex rescipt ptantur and by Cassid. VII. 46. It is no marvail if it be permitted by the Statute of H. VIII. XXXVI. 38. we may see the case hath been not much otherwise with us, since that statute, then with Christendom, before the act of Theodosius. For, as then, the known custome of the Church; so since, with us, the remains of the opinion of that publick honesty, which Christianity first introduced, hath been the cause that few have used the known liberty of the temporal law; and that, with such reluctation of judgement, as hath been thought the occasion of evill consequences. As for those degrees, which, being prohibited by the Popes, are of course dispensed in for paying the fees, without any notice of particular reason in the case; as it is not for me, either to maintain the abuse of Ecclesiasticall power, or, because of the abuse, to yield, the Church to have no power in those causes, which it could have no power in, if that power might not be abused; so, I am able to conclude, that it were more Christian for any Christian state, to undergo a burthen altogether unreasonable, then to shake of a burthen, for which there is so much reason in Christianity, as I have show∣ed, for prohibiting the mariage of Cousin Germanes. Another impediment, of force to void mariage, whether onely contracted, or consummate also by carnall knowledge, pretended by the Church of Rome, and practised in the Eastern Church, is that of profession of single life, to attend upon the service of God alone. For, whether Christians under wed∣lock, upon consent, may part from bed and bord for this purpose, there is no reason for any Christian to make difficulty, the wish of S. Paul, that all were as he, 1 Cor. VII. 1. taking place in them as well as in all others; That to avoid fornication, one man should mary one wife; not taking place, but in them, in
whom no such resolution is supposed. Upon which supposition, they are com∣manded to return to the use of wedlock, after having retired for Prayer and Fasting, least Satan tempt them through their incontinence. But this is dispu∣table, whether it be a dissolution of the bond, or onely a suspension of the ex∣ercise of mariage. It is further pretended, that the one party may, by publishing such a profession, make void the mariage that is not yet consummate by carnall knowledge, leaving the other free to mary elsewhere. This in the Church of Rome. For, in the Eastern Church, I doubt not that those Imperial Laws took place, which made this profession a lawful cause of dissolving mariage in being, per bonam gratiam, as the Romane Law called it; whether the party so desert∣ed, were allowed to mary elsewhere or not. And indeed we find S. Basil, qq▪ fusius explicat XII. and S. Chrysostome, in Mat. hom. LXIX. ad pop Ant. & in 1 Tim. hom. XIV. together with Cassiane in the example of Theonas Collat. XXI. 9. 10. in their zeal to monasticall life, advising maried persons not to stay for the consent of their parties, in making such a profession as this; At such time as the West, where monasticall life was not yet so originally spread, S. Hierome, Epist XIV. and S. Augustine, Epist. XLV. & CXCIX. & de adult▪ conjugiis, maintain the contrary opinion: Which to me, I confesse, seems fa more probable. For, granting single life, duely ordered, to be the ordinary way and means of attaining perfection in Christianity, according to the pro∣mises; this state of eminence necessarily supposeth that which is necessary to the being of Christianity. Therefore, the way to perfection must be grounded up∣on justice. Now, in justice, the contract of mariage among Christians, gives each party that interesse in the others body which mariage exerciseth. Which interesse, noting but consent seems to dissolve. And therefore, seeing there is no Tradition of the whole Church to inforce this right, not onely particular Churches, not allowing it, shall not seem to me to depart from the Unity of the whole in so doing: But also Soveraign Powers, through their severall do∣minions, in regard of the interesse which all States have in the mariage, or single life of their subjects, shall lawfully use their Power, to limit the force of it. But, as for mariage consummate and used, I cannot see, how the party deserting up∣on such pretense, is excused from the guilt of adultery which the deserted may commit, either single or maried again. As for the question that may be made, whither the mariage of one that hath professed single life be void or valid; sup∣posing the profession of single life to be agreeable to Christianity, (as, I con∣ceive, I have showed sufficient reason to believe) there is no consideration suf∣ficient to make mariage after it valid, but the abuse of the profession it selfe, a∣mounting to such▪ a height, as may serve to satisfie a Christian, that, in conside∣ration thereof, it is it selfe in the first place become void. Another impediment yet remains questionable, whether it be of force to dissolve those mariages which are called clandestine, whither for want of con∣sent in the Parents, or the solemnities of the Church. Some think, that want of consent of Parents, not onely makes the act unlawfull, which all agree in, but the mariage void. As if the reverence due to Parents by Gods law, did make a mans contract with a thirdperson void, who is no waies bound to inquire, whither his free consent be lawfully exercised or not. In the Scriptures, we see, Gods people proceed by consent of Parents, and, daughters especially, S. Paul supposes to referre themselves to their Fathers, 1 Cor. VII. 36. But, neither was Esaus mariage taken to be void, because it was made without such con∣sent, Ge. XXVII. 45. Nor was there any particular consent of Iacobs Pa∣rents to his mariages, Gen. XXIX. nor were the Fathers of Iudah or of Tobias, made acquainted with their mariages. And, as for the Romane Laws, which void mariages for want of this consent in some cases, it is no more an argument of the Law of nature, then the power of the Father by the same Laws, which, neverthelesse, allow the Mother none, when as Gods Law alwayes, as well as the Law of Moses, gives them equall interesse. It is therefore manifest, that there is ground in Gods Law, to make this impediment of force to dissolve ma∣riage contracted without it. And that, either for the Church, as the reverence
of Parents, is a part of Gods law now in being, which the power of the Church pretendeth to preserve; Or, for the secular Power, as the interesse of Parents in the mariages of their children, is of consequence to the publick peace and wealth. The same may be said of those mariages that are made without witness, or, without solemnities of the Church, saving that, those solemnities which contain the approbation of the Church, arising upon the account of the Church, it is evidently more proper for the Church, to make this impediment of force to dissolve mariage; For the secular power, to inct the Law of the Church by force of arms and temporall penalties. There remains one cause more to hinder mariage, so as to dissolve it when consummate, being made notwith∣standing it, the condition of slavery in either of the parties, at such time, when as the rights of bondage subsisted. This cause stands now by the Canon Law, and is inorced and limited by the Casuists: But it was not the Canon Law, that first voided the mariage of a slave taken for free, but the Laws of the Empire, as Ivo himselfe, a Collector of the Canons, witnesseth, Epist. CCXLIII. where, having produced the Law of Iustiniane, he thus proceedeth; In tali er∣go contractu, quod lex damnat, non homo sed istitia separat; quia, quod contra le∣ges praesumitur, per leges solui meretur. In such a contract then, that which the law oondemns, it is not man but justice th separates. Because, what is presumed a∣gainst Law, by law deserves to be dissolved. Which reson takes place also in legall kindred, according to the Imperiall Lawes, whereby, an adopted Bro∣ther is disabled to mary his sister by adoption. In imitation whereof, an opi∣nion of the publick honesty of Christianity, so previled in that Church after∣wards, that, being once Gossips, came to be an hindrance of mariage; which opinion, howsoever grounded, notwithstanding, introduced the same kind of bur∣then, and no other, then that of legall kindred by adoptions. These reasons, though not admitted by all professions in Religion that shall meet with this, yet seeing they proceed upon one and the same common ground, the effect and consequence whereof cannot be admitted in some, and refused by the rest: And seeing that some of them are admitted on all sides, there being no other reason sufficient, why they should be admitted; may serve to evidence the in∣teresse of the Church in Matrimoniall causes. And that evidence may serve to inferre, that, though the secular Power hath also an interess in the same; yet in regard of the trouble which concurrence may cause in civill Government, Christian Princes and States, have done wisely (as well as in regard to the inte∣ress of the Church, they have done Christianly) in referring the conduct of Ma∣trimonial causes, almost wholly, to the Church. Especially, supposing that they take good heed, that the laws thereof neither trench upon the Interess of their Crown, not the wealth of their subjects. But, whither secular Power can make laws, by virtue whereof, that which a man voluntarily acts afterwards, shall be of force to void mariage contracted afore, (upon wich ground, the opi∣nion which I propounded last, would justifie the divorces which the Imperiall Laws make, to the effect of marrying again) will be a new question. Seeing that if any thing b to be accepted, it will be in any mans power to dissolve any mariage; and the law of Christ, allowing no divorce but in case of adulte∣ry, will be to no effect. Neither will there be any cause, why the same Divines should not allow the act of Justine, that dissolves mariage upon consent, which they are forced to disclaim, allowing the rest of those causes which the Impe∣rial Laws create. Indeed, whither any accident, absolutely hindring the exer∣cise of mariage, and, falling out after mariage, may, by Law, become of force to dissolve it, I need not here any further dispute. For, so the securing of any Christian mans conscience, it is not the act of secular Power inacting it for Law, that can avail, unlesse the act of the Church go before, to determine, that it is not against Gods Law, and therefore subject to that civil Power which is Christian. The reason indeed may fall out to be the same, that makes impo∣tence of force to do it, and it may fall out to be of such force, that Gregory III Pope, is found to have answered a consultation of Boniface of Mence, in the affirmative, XXXII. q. VII. c. Quod proposuisti. But this makes no diffe∣rence
in the right and power of the Church, but rather evidences the necessity of it. For though, as Cardinall Cajetane sayes, the Canon Law it selfe allows that Popes may erre in determining such maters, cap. IV. de divortiis. c. licet de sponsa duorum, (which every man will allow in the decree of Deuededit Pope, Epist. unicâ) yet the ground of both Power witnessing the Constitution of the Church, as a necessary part of Christianity; as it determines the true bounds of both, so it allows not the conscience of a Christian to be secured by other means. And were it not a strange reason of refusing the Church this Po∣wer, because it may erre, when it must, in that case, fall to the secular Powers, who have no ground to pretend any probable cause of not erring? For he that proceedeth in the simplicity of a Christian heart, to use the means, which God, by Christianity, hath provided for his resolution, may promise himselfe grace at Gods hands, even when he is seduced by that power which is not infallible. But, he that leans upon that warrant, which God, by his Christianity, hath not referred him to, must answer for his errors, as well as the consequences of the same. CHAP. XVI. Of the Power of making Gouernours and Ministers of the Church. Upon what ground the Hierarchy of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons standeth, in opposition to Presbyteries and Congregations. Of the Power of Confirming, and the evidence of the Hierarchy which it yieldeth. Of those Scriptures which seem to speak of Presbyteries or Congregations. NOw are we come to one of the greatest Powers of the Church. For all So∣cieties, according as they are constituted, either by the act of Superiors, or by the will of members, are, by their constitution, either inabled to give themselves Governours, or tied to receive them from those by whose will they subsist. The Society of the Church, subsisting by the will of God, is partly regulated by the will of men, voluntarily professing themselves Christians. If God, having limi∣mited the qualities, and the Powers by which his Church is to be Governed, do referre the designing of persons to bear those qualities and powers, to his Church, it must needs appear one of the greatest points that he hath left to their choice. Therefore, I have made it appear, from the beginning, that the originall of this Power, was planted by our Lord Christ in his Apostles and Disciples, to whom, immediately, he committed the trust of propagating it. And now, that I may further determine, within what bounds, and under what terms, those his immediate Commissaries did appoint it to be propagated to the end of the world; I say, that, by their appointment, the bodies of Christians contained in each City, and the territory thereof, is to constitute a several Church, to be governed by one cheif Ruler, called a Bishop, with Pres∣byters or Priests subordinate to him; for his advice and assistance, and Dea∣cons to minister and execute their appointment: The said Bishops to be de∣signed by their Clergy, that is, their respective Priests and Deacons, with con∣sent of neighbour Bishops ordaining them▪ and by the assent of the people whom they are to govern. I say further; That the Churches of greater Cities, upon which the Government of the lesse dependeth, are, by the same Rule, greater Churches, and the greatest of all, the Churches of the chiefe Cities: So that the chief Cities of the Christian world, at the planting of Christianity, being Rome, Alexandria, and Antiochia; by consequence, those were, by this Rule, the chief Churches, and in the first place that of Rome. This positi∣on excludeth in the first place that of Independent Congregations, which maketh a Church and a Congregation to be all alone, so that the people of each Con∣gregation to be able, first to give themselves both Laws and Governours, then, to govern and manage the Power of the Keyes according to Gods word, that is, according to that which they shall imagine to be the intent of it. For, what∣soever authority they allow their Ministers or Elders; seeing they are created
out of the people by the meer act of the people; and, that the consent of the People is required to inact every thing that passeth; it will be too late for them to think of any authority not subordinate to the people, upon whom they have bestowed the Soveraign. On the other extreme, this position excludeth that of the Romanists, who will have the fulnesse of Ecclesiasticall Power to have been first setled upon S. Peter, as sole Monarch of the Church, and from him derived upon the rest of the Apostles, as his Deputies or Commissaries; So that, the Power which other Bishops, Priests, and Deacons have in their re∣spective Churches, being granted by the successors of S. Peter, Bishops of Rome, is therefore limitable at their pleasure, as no otherwise estated by divine right, then, because God hath setled it in S. Peter and his successors, as the root and source of it. Between these extremes there remain two mean opinions, where∣of one is the platform of the Presbyteries, in which, every Congregation is al∣so a Church, with a Consistory to rule it, consisting of a Minister with his Lay-Elders, (whom now they call Triers, referring to them the riall of those who come to communicate) and Deacons. Of these Congregations, so many as they (without Rule or Reason so farre as I know) think fit to cast into one resot or division, they call a Session or Class, and as many of those as they please, a Synod, and of Synods a Province. So that, as the Churches of all one Sove∣raignty, constitute the Nationall Church, containing all the Provinces thereof; so would they have also Provincial, Synodical and Classical Churches, consist∣ing of the Congregations, Classes and Synods, which each respective Classis, Synod, or Province containeth. The other mean opinion is the frame of the Catholick Church, I as have showed, and shall show it to have been in force from the time of the Apostles; Having first showed, that the visible unity of the Church is a thing commanded by God in the first place, for the communion of all Christians in the true faith, and in the service of God according to the same. For, it is visible, that, the means by which this hath been attained, is the divi∣ding of Christendom into Churches, which we now call Dioceses, providing each of them a sufficient number of Priests and Deacons, under one Head, the Bishop, as well to regulate the faith and maners of the people, as to Minister unto them the offices of Gods service. Therefore, whatsoever means I imploy∣ed at the beginning, to show, that those persons who succeeded the Apostles in time, obtained not their places by force or fraud, but by their will and ap∣pointment, will here be effectual to prove, that the qualities which they held in their severall Churches, were not obtained by force or fraud, but by the same appointment. Wherefore, having showed, that, from the beginning, the unity of the Church, hath been mainained by the mutuall intelligence and corres∣pondence of the chief Churches; (upon whom the less depended) And that this intelligence and correspondence was alwaies addressed and managed by the heads of the said Churches; (nor could it indeed have been maintained, had there not been such Heads alwaies ready to address and manage the same) I have in effect showed, that this was the course, whereby the Apostles executed their design, of maintaining unity in the Church. Is it not plain by the instances produced in the first Book, that the whole Church remained satisfied of the saith of each Christian, upon the testimony of his Bishops, because they rested satisfied of his? That, hereupon, whosoever was recommended by his Bishop, was admitted to communion as well abroad as at home? What other interess had the Church of Rome in the faith of Paulus Samosatenus, or Diony∣sius Alexandrinus, the Churches of Alexandria and Antiochia, in the proceed∣inge of Novatianus, all Churches in the fortune of Athanasius? What other reaon can any man give for that uniform difformity of Ecclesiasticall Traditi∣ons and customes, which ppeareth from point to point, in all maters, the whole Church agreeing in things of highest concernment, but all Churches differing in maters of lesse consequence? Is it not manifest, whensoever, instead of this daily correspondence, Synods were assembled upon more pressing occasions, that onely Bshops appeared in behalf of their respective Churches? For, if o∣thers
appeaed in the name of Bishops, upon occasion of old age, or other hin∣derances; I need not say that it was the Bishops right in which another ap∣peared. Into these qualities and preheminences over the rest; whether of the Clergy or People, that Bishops should be able to innuate themselves all over Christendom, had it not been so appointed by the Apostles; it is no lesse con∣tradictory to common sense; then, that Christianity should ever have been received, had not such men as our Lord Christ and his Apostles, preached and done such things, as the Scriptures relate to make it receivable. Or, then, that all Christians should, of their own inclinations, agree to those Laws which have made the Church one Society from the beginning, had they not found themselves tied to follow the appointment of the Apostles that founded it. Wherefore I will not take upon me, to show you the names of Archbishops, Primates, and Patriarchs, in the Scriptures: Much lesse any command there recorded, that all Churches be governed by Bishops, all higher Churches by higher Bishops. But I pretend to have showed (by the particulars produced in the Right of the Church, Chap. III. in the Primitive Government of Churches throughout, and in the Apostolical form of Divine Service, Chap. IV. and ne∣ver contradicted to my knowledge) that there are express marks left us in the Scriptures, of severall Churches planted in several Cities; so that there is never mention of more Churches then one in one City, but perpetually, of more then one in one Province; of Heads of those Churches, whether Apo∣stles themselves, or their fellows and successors, applyed to the charge of se∣veral Churches. Of chief Churches, and inferiour Churches, according to the capacity of the Cities in which they were first planted. I challenge further here, as proved by that which hath been said in the first Book; That this form of Government hath been in sorce ever since the time of the Apostles, whose immediate successors are to be named in the greatest Seas, upon which, it is evi∣dent, that inferiour Churches depended, from the same time; As manifest by that which hath been said in the places afore-named. That the advice and assist∣ance of Presbyters, together with the ministery, and attendance of Deacons, to and upon the said Heads, is as anciently evident in the Records of the Church, as any Record of any Church is ancient. And upon these premises I conclude; That the same course and way of Government by Bishops, Priests, and Dea∣cons, which afterwards prevailed throughout the whole Church, was first be∣gun by the Apostles, as, without whose authority, it could not have taken effect all over the Church. And, of those that take upon them to depart from the Church, that they may not be so governed, I take my self inabled to demand; where there is any pre∣cept recorded in Scripture, that the Government of the whole Church be set∣led either in Independant Congregations, or in Congregationl, Classical, Sy∣nodical, Provincial, and National Churches: The very names are as barbarous to the language of the Scriptures, s the subject is to the Writers of it. And yet, were all this showed me, I would say, that, as the Magicians of Pharoah, in the third Miracle, so must the Architects of this design fail in the▪ highest point of aecu¦menical or Catholick; Which, having never been compassed but by the means of single heads of the chief Churches, it is absolutely too late for any other form to pretend (I say not to come from any command of the Apostles) but to be receivable in the Church, being founded by God, for one and the same body, to continue till the coming of Christ to judgement. For, if the Apostles of our Lord, determining in part that Order which should preserve the unity of the Church, (which, what it was, the original practice of the whole Church eviden∣ceth) leave the rest to be determined by the Church, for its own necessity and use; That which is so determined by the Chrch, whensoever it becomes ne∣cessary to maintain unity in the Church, shall no lesse oblige, then that which the Apostles determined in specie themselves. The reason is the unity of the Church, not onely of divine right, as provided for by the Apostles, but holding the rank of an end, to which particular provisions of the Apostles, in this mater,
seem but as means. It is true, I am farre from believing, that, had the Refor∣mation retained this Apostolical Government, the Church of Rome would thereby have been moved to joyn in it: But, when I see the Schisme which it hath occasioned to stand partly upon this difference; When I see so many par∣ticulars, begun by the Apostles (as the Scriptures themselves evidence) others determinable by the Church; When I see, those that correct Magnificat, in∣troduce, instead of them, those Lawes which have neither any witnesse from the Scriptures, nor any footing in the authority of the whole Church; I must needs conclude, those that do these things, in as much as they do them, to be causes of the Schism, that is, Schismaticks. For, what authority upon earth can introduce any form reconcileable with that which the Apostles first intro∣duced to procure the vanity of the Church, (being to continue one and the same Body from the beginning to the end) but he must give cause of dissolving the unity of the said Body, unlesse he can convince the rest of the Church, that it is Gods act, to whom all the Church is to be subject, whereas to him they are not? Wherfore let not Presbyterians or Independents, think that they have done their work, when they can answer texts of Scripture, so as not to be convinced, that Bishops are of divine Right. Unless they can harden them∣selves against the belief of one Catholick Church, they must further give account, why they depart from that which is not against Gods Law, to introduce that which it commandeth not. For that is to proclaim to the Church, that they will not be of it, unlesse they may be governed as they list themselves; Where∣as, they cannot be of it, by being governed otherwise, then the whole Church from the beginning hath been. Let them not marvail, that those, who go not a∣long with them in it, forewarn others of making themselves Schismaticks, by communicating in their innovations. But, against the Independants I must further take notice, that, by the suppo∣sition of one Society of the whole Church, the ▪whole pretense of the Con∣gregations is quite excluded. For, if God appointed all Churches to make one Church, by the communion of all in the service of God, supposing the same faith; then did not God appoint all Congregations to be chief within them∣selves, but to depend upon the whole, both for the Rule of Faith, and for the order of Gods service. Again, it is evident to common sense, that the people of one Church can pretend no interess to give Law to another Church: Where∣as, whomsoever we inable to preserve the unity of the whole, those persons must eithr have right to oblige those that are not of their own Congregations; or else, God shall hve provided that the Church shall be one, but excluded the onely means by which it can be preserved one. And therefore, to all those texts of Scriptures, which are alleged to prove the chief Power of the People in the Church, which is the ground of the Congregations, I give here this general an∣swer, which elsewhere I have applied to the said several passages: First, by way of exception, that they can inferre no more now against the Clergy, then they could thn against the Apostles: So that, seeing the Apostles were then chief, notwithstanding all that those Scriptures contain, the Clergy also remain now chief in the Church. Secondly and directly, that they import no more then the tesimony, consent and concurrence of the people, by way of suffrage, or a∣greement, and applause, to the Acts of the Clergy; the interess whereof is grounded upon the sensible knowledge which the people have, of the persons concerned in Ordinations, Censures, or other Acts of the Church, in regard whreof, it is no more then reason requires, that they be duly satisfied of the proceedings of the Church, without making them Judges of maters of Right in it. So that, to make the people chief in Church maters, upon account of this Title, is to make the people of England Soveraign, because English Juries have power to return evidence in mater of fact, either effectual or void. Another reason I here advance, upon supposition of the force and weight of the Tradition of the Church, in evidencing the reason and intent of the sayings and doings of the Apostles, recorded in the Scriptures. Philip, one of the seven, having preached, and converted and baptized the Samaritanes, the Apostles at
Jerusalem send down to them Peter and John, at whose pryers, with ying thr  on them, they receive the Holy Ghost, Act. VIII. 14-17. And so S. Paul yes hnds upon the twelve men that were baptized afore, at Ephe∣sus,  hey receive the Holy Ghost, Act. XIX. 1-8. For, what reason shall we imagine, why, they that were inbled to baptize, were not abled to give the Holy Ghost (baptism being the condition upon which the Holy Ghost was due, by the promise of the Gospel) but to show, that they were baptized into the uniy of the Church, out of which they were not to expect the Holy Ghost; Threfore, that their Baptism may have effect, that is, give the Holy Ghost, the allownce of the Apostles, (upon whose government the unity of the Church dependeth) is requite: Whih allowance, their prayers for the Holy Ghost, and Impoion of hands, impleth and presupposeth. It cannot be doubted, that the visible Grace, of peaking in strnge languages the great works of God, was then given, for an evidence of the presence of the Holy Ghost with Gods people; whereupon it is called by S. Paul, 1 Cor. XII. 7. The ma∣nifestatio of the Spirit. But, evn of this kind of Graces, S. Paul saith again, 1 Cor. XIV, 32. 33. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. For God is not the author of unsetlednesse but of order, as in all Churches of the Saints. If therefore, there come no confusion upon Prophets Prophesying one by one, because God, who is the Author of Order, grants such inspirations and reve∣lations to inferiours, that they cease not therefore to be subject to those which he grants to Superiours; How much more re asonable is it, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost promised to them that are baptized, should neverthelesse deend upon the blessing of the Apostles. So that, when S. Peter sayes to them that were convrted at Pentecost, Act. II. 38. Repent, and be Baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, unto remission of sinnes, and y shall receive the gift of the Holy host; It seems to me no more then reason requires, that he up∣poses the same blessing: As also S. Paul, in those of whom he saith; That, ha∣ving believed in Christ, they were sealed by the Holy spirit of promise; And a∣gain; Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of ran∣some, Ephe I. 13. IV. 30. Unless a reason could be showed, why S. Peter and S. John should travail from Jerusalem to Samaria, to do that, which they need not do at Jerusalem, where they were: Or originally, why the Imposition of the Apostles hands should be requisite, to procure some the Holy Ghost, and not others. This being that which the Scriptures record of the Apostles, all men know, how ancient▪, how general the custome hath been in the Church, for Bishops to confirm the baptized, by praying for the effect of it, which is the Holy Ghost, with Imposition of hands. Professing thereby, that they own their Faith and Baptism, and acknowledge them for part of their flock, as acknow∣ledged by them for their Pastors; Which is that eminence of honour due to the Bishop, in which, the welfare of the Church consisteth, saith S. Hierome, ad∣vrsus Luciferians. For Tertullian also, de Bapt. cap. XVII. reserveth unto the Bishop the right of granting Baptism, though he allow not only Priests and Deacons, but partly also Laymen to Baptize. Now if, from the beginning, this priviledge was reserved the Apostles, in signe of the truth of that Baptism which so they allowed; If those who received Baptism at years of discretion, hing theelves made profession of their faith, were neverthelesse to acknow∣ledge thir Paors, and the Unity of the Church wrapped up in them, as that, uon which the effect of Baptism dependeth; How much more those that are bptized Infans? Who cannot otherwise, according to the original constituti∣on of the Church, be secured, that they profess the faith of the whole Church, but by their Bishops allowance; through whom they have communion with the wole Church. For, as I have showed, that there was originally no other mean to maintain the unity of the Church; but, the faith of the Bishop to secure the whole Church of the faith of his flock: So was the same the onely mean to secure the flock, that they held the faith of the whole Church, which owned their Bishop and his faith. And, howsoever the profession of faith may be li∣mited,
and the Bishop in exacting the same; yet is it necessarily an act of chief Power in the Church, to allow the communion of the Eucharist. So that, when once Presbyterians share this part of the Bishops Power among their Triers, (allowing them to admit to the Communion those that can say the Catechism which they made themselves) First, they put upon us a new faith, which we must own for the faith of the Church: Then, to debauch Partizans to them∣selves, they authorize the malice of gross carnall Christians to domineer over their neighbours; whom they may easily pick a quarel with, for not answering their Catechism, but are not able, either to warrant, or to teach them the truth of the least tittle of it, which, so neerly concerning their salvation, how ne∣cessary is it that it be reserved to the Head of each Church? Besides, that by ac∣knowledging him, they visibly submit to the Laws of the Church by which he governs, and to his authority, in such maters as the Laws do not determine, which is the very means of maintainidg Unity in the Church. And truly, the consideration of this point, discovers unto us the onely sure ground, upon which any man may resolve, what offices of christianity may be ministred by the several Orders of the Church. For, when the power of Con∣firming, proper to the Bishop, evidenceth, that he alone granteth Baptism, (ei∣ther by particular appointment, or by general Law, in which his authority is involved) but a Layman sometimes may minister it; we see what S. Paul means, when he sayes, 1 Cor. I. 17. God sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; Our Lord having said, Mat. XXVIII. 19. Go Preach, and make Disci∣les of all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; To wit, that the Power of appointing it, not the ministery of doing it, is proper to the Apostles and their successors. Which reason will hold in sundry particulars, concerning Ordination, concerning Absolution and Penance, concerning con∣firmation and others: In all which, this being once secured, that no man act beyond the Power which he receiveth, it will be no prejudice to the unity of the Church, that some Orders do that, by particular commission from their Su∣periours, which their Order inables not all that are of it to do; Because, in such cases, it is not Authority, but Ministery which they contribute. As for the order of Priesthood, that the power of consecrating the Eucharist is equall to the Power of the Keys, in which that Order hath an Interest, in the inward Court of Conscience (the outward Court of the Church being reserved to the Bishop, with advice and assistance of his Presbyters) whereas the power of Preaching and Baptizing, is, of ordinary Right, communicable to Deacons; For the proof of all this, I referre my selfe to that which I have said in the Right of the Church, Chap. III. and to that which must be said here in due place. Let not then those of the Presbyteries or Congregations, think their bu∣sinesse done, till they can give us some reasonable account, how all the Christian world should agree to set up Bishops into a rank above their Clergy and Peo∣ple both, if this had been forbidden, nay, if it had not been so ordered by the Apostles. Not that I grnt them to have any more appearance of evidence from the Scriptures, to destroy the superiority of the Bishops, and the concurrence of the Clergy to the maintenance of unity in the Church, then the Socinians have to destroy the faith of the Holy Trinity, and the satisfaction of Christ; But because I do grant these, as I granted the other, that there is that appea∣rance of evidence, which, every one that is concerned to be subject to Bishops, cannot evidenly resolve; as every one that is bound to believe the Holy Trini∣ty, and the satisfaction, is not bound to be able, evidently to resolve all ob∣jections which the Socinians can make against it out of the Scriptures. For it is granted, that S. Hierome hath alleged many texts of Scriptures, to show, that Bishops and Priests were both the same thing under the Apostles; and, that therefore the difference between them, is but of positive humane right by custome of the Church, and hath many followers in this opinion among Church Writers▪ Though with this difference, that it can never be pretended, that S. Jerome, or any Ecclesiastical Writer after or before S. Jerome, ever alleged the words of S. Paul, 1. Tim. V. 17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of
double honour, specially those that labour in the word and doctrine; or any other syllble of the whole Scripture, to show, that any of those that S. Paul pro∣nounces worthy of double honour, were Laymen, that is, of the rank of the peo∣ple: Which is now an essential ingredient of the design, both of our Presby∣teries, and also, so farre as I know, of the Congregations. I do indeed acknow∣ledge, that there is difficulty in expounding those texts of the Apostles which speak to this purpose, so as to agree them with the Originall and universal practice of the Church. And therefore, it is no marvail, if learned men that have handled this point among us, (where, without affectation, I may say, that it hath been most curiously and ingenuously disputed) have gone several wayes, upon severall grounds, in assigning the reason, why the degree of Deacons is mentioned next to the degree of Bishops, in so many texts of the Apostles, having the order of Priests between both, as the original and perpetual cu∣stome of the Church required. For, it is well enough known, that there is an opinion published and main∣tained by many learned observations in the primitive antiquity of the Church, that, during the time when those texts of the Apostles were written, there were but two Orders, of Bishops and Deacons, established in the Church; though Bishops also are called Presbyters, the name not being yet appropriated to the midle order, while it was not introduced, as afterwards it came to be. And this opinion allegeth Epiphanius very fitly, confuting Aerius the Heretick or Schis∣matick, objecting the same, that, at the beginning, the multitude of believers in less places being so small; that one Governour, together with some Ministers to attend upon him in executing his Orders, might well serve them; it is no marvail if there be no mention of any more Orders in so many texts of the A∣postles. And it may be said, that, as there were Churches founded and governed by a certain order, from the beginning that we read of them in the Apostles; so, no Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, was appropriated to any particular Church, till, af∣ter that time, by degrees, they came to be selled to certain Churches by Eccle∣siastical Law and Custome. So that, during the time of the Apostles, themselves, and their companions, whom they associated to themselves for their assistance, were, in common, the Governours of Churches then founded, according as they fell out to be present in these Churches, to whom they had the most relation by planting and watering the faith planted in them; either by virtue of the agreement taken by the Apostles within themselves, or by the appointment of some of them, if we speak of their companions and assistances. But afterwards when the faith came to be setled, then, as those which had been Governours of Churches in common before, became chief Governours of particular Chur∣ches, to whom, by lawful consent, they became appropriated; so were they provided of Priests and Deacons, to assist and attend them, in the execution of their office towards the body of Christians, then mulplyed in severall Chur∣ches. I do confess to have declared an opinion something differing from both of these sayings, about the reason here demanded; As not being perswaded, either, that the Order of Presbyters was not yet introduced into the Church, during the Apostles time, or that chief Governours were not appropriated and setled in some Churches during the same; though I have no need to undertake that in all they were; believing, and maintaining, that the Apostles themselves, in the Churches of their own planting and watering, were acknowledged chief Governours in ordering, notwithstanding their extraordinary, both Power, not confined to any one Church, and graces and abilities porportionable. In which regard, and under which limitation, visible to the common sense of all men of their own and the next ages, I do maintain Bishops to be their succes∣sors. Whereupon it follows, that I allow the name of Bishops, in the Apostles writings, to comprehend Priests also, because of the mater of their function common to both; though, with a chief Power in the Bishop; in Priests, so limited, as to do nothing (that is to say, nothing of consequence to his Po∣wer over the whole Church) without his consent and allowance. But this va∣riety of opinion, in expounding these Scriptures, draweth after it no further
consequence, to prejudice the primitive Law of Goverment in the Church, then this; That there are more waies then one to answer the seeming probabili∣ties, pretending to make the evidence of Catholick Tradition unreconcileable with the truth of the Scriptures, in the agreement whereof, the demonstration of this truth consisteth. I conceive, therefore, I might very well referre my self to the Readers free judgement, to compare the reasons which I have produced, with those that since have been used. Notwithstanding, I shall not think much, briefly, according to the model of this design, to express the sense I have, of the most native meaning of the most texts alleged in this businesse; that I may have opportunity to point out again, the peremptory exceptions which re vi∣sible in them, either to the imagination of mungrill Prsbyteries, compound∣ed of Clergy and People, during the time of the Apostles, or, of the chief Po∣wer of any such Presbyteries in their resepective Churches. CHAP. XVII. The Power given the XII. under the Title of Apostles, and the LXX. Disciples. That the VII were Deacons. Of the first Presbyters at Jerusalem, and the In∣terest of the People. Presbyters appropriated to Churches, under the Apostles. S. Pauls Deacons no Presbyters. No ground for Lay Flders. FIrst then, as the name of Apostle, in the Originall meaning, is very general, to signifie any commissary, Proxy, delegate, or Ambassador; so the use of it, in the Apostles writings, is larger then to be confined to the twelve. For, when S. Paul saith, That our Lord appeared to the twelve, afterwards to all the Apo∣stles, 1 Cor. XV. 5. 7. He must needs understand other Apostles besides the twelve; perhaps the same that he meant, where he reckoned Andronicus and Junias remarkable among the Apostles, Rom. XVI. 7. And that, in another ense then Paul and Barnabas are called Apostles, Act. XIV. 4. 14. For, the name of Apostle intimating whose Apostle he is that is called an Apostle; we have no reason to count Paul and Barnabas any mans Apostles, but our Lord Christs, though they were first sent, with the blessing of such Doctors and Prophets, as the Church of Antiochia then had, Acts XIII. 1. 2, 3. whose authority can∣not, in any reason, be thought to extend so farre, as to constitute an Apostle parllel to the Twelve, which S. Paul so oft so expresly challenges. For, since we see their commission is immediately from the Holy Ghost, that is from God, we are not to value their right, by the solemnity, which it is visibly conferred upon them with: Unlesse you will say, that, by virtue of that Imposition of Hands, they were messengers and Commissaries of that Church, and, that they then appeared to be no more then so, though afterwards, God set on them marks of the same authority with the Twelve. Truly, those whom S. Paul calls false Apostles, transferring themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 1 Cor. XI. 13. must neds be understood to have pretended commission from our Lord Christ himself. For hereupon, they stood upon it, that they had seen him in the flesh, disparaging S. Paul that had not, who, therefore, vindicateth himself to be ne∣verthelesse, 1 Cor. IX. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 10. And indeed, there is great cause to think, that they were of Cerinthus his party, who, as Epiphanius relateth, ha∣ving taught at Antiochia, that Christians are tied to Moses Law, and being disowned by the Apostles, to have received no such commission from them, Act. XV. 1. 24. out of discontent, set up a sect by themselves, borrow∣ing to their former Doctrine something of Simon Magus, (being of that time) as you may see by Epiphanius and Irenaeus; whereof, this may justly seem to have sowed the seeds at Corinth, about that time. As for those who pretended to be Apostles and were not, but were discovered to be otherwise, by the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. II. 2. whose commission they pretended, our Lords, or the Apostles, or what besides, let every man judge. For, those whom S. Paul calls Apostles of the Churches, 2 Cor. VIII. 23. and Epaphroditus, when he is called the Apostle of the Philippians, and minister of S. Pauls necessities, Phil. II.
25. I am confident, their titles import not Apostles to, but from the said Chur∣ches: that is, not sent by God, or any body else, to them (not that they might not have commission from the Apostles, but that it is not here signified by this Title) but, sent by those Churches, with commission to bestow their oblations at Jerusalem; and by the Philippians, to present the offerings which they con∣tributed to the support of S. Paul, Phil. IV. 10-18. Now, our Lord having ordained, not onely twelve Apostles, for the Heads of the twelve Tribes of that spiritual Israel of his Church which he now began to create, but also LXX inferiour Disciples, though not called Apostles, yet sent to preach by our Lord during his life time, Luk. X. 1. answerable to the LXX. Elders of Israel under Moses, and in after ages; Though it cannot be doubted, that, those whom our Lord had set his best marks upon during his life time, were, and were to be of greatest authority in his Church, after the raising of it; yet we have no mark left to show, that these LXX. were, by the said Commission of our Lord during his life time▪ intituled to any rank, or par∣ticular charge in the Church after his death, but by the appointment of the Twelve, and acceptation of the Church. And therefore, I find no difficulty in believing those Ancients, which conceive, that, some of the seven, (which are the first that we read of applied by the Appstles to any particular office or function in the Church) may have been of the number of the said LXX. Dis∣ciples. No not though we allow, according to the sense of all antiquity, that they were properly Deacons to the Twelve, as Governours of the whole Church at that time, comprised in the City of Jerusalem, and the adjacent parts. For, was not their function sacred and Ecclesiastical, which, before the ordaining of them, was performed by the Apostles themselves? Were not the Monies which they dispensed the oblations of Christians, consecrated to God, in the maintenance of the Church? Were not the Tables which they furnished out of those goods, the feasts of love, where Christians, at the beginning, (to have more opportunity of instruction from the Apostles, and to strengthen one another) did eat together, the poor at the charge of the rich, celebrating with∣all the Eucharist? He that doubts of the premises, let him satisfie him∣self by the reasons premised: He that finds the evidence of them, why should he make difficulty in admitting those seven to be Deacons then, more then in admitting those who afterwards, either waited at the Altar, or dispen∣sed the oblations of believers to the maintenance of the poor? The State of Christianity was altered, and so, the maner of exercising their function was not the same; But, if the reason of the difference be no more then follows upon alteration in the state of Christianity, the Society and Corporation of the Church remaining all one, then is the office the same. Let no man then, that believes a Church by divine right, and consecration of the same, imagine the Deacons office to be conversant in temporal things (because in dispensing of monies) those monies being consecrated to God, (for the maintenance of the Faith. Nor let any man, that sees these seven, as soon as they are ordained to wait upon these Tables, fall to preaching the Gospel; (Stephen at Jerusalem, Philip in Samaria, and why not all the rest as occasion may serve?) think this any stranger, then, that the Apostles themselves should wait upon the same Tables at such tims, as, no man doubts that they preached the Gospel. The empty noise of Minister of the word and Sacraments, sounding in the mouth of those, who scorn to acknowledge any error in themselves, or their faction, binds up poor people, like children in a biggin of vain belief, that, by Gods Law, no man is to Preach or Baptize, that may not consecrate the Eucharist: who, were they to prove what they take for granted, would be as silent as their hearers. But, if these seven attend upon these Tables, and that under the Apostles, how comes it, that the Oblations of the Antiochians are consigned to the hands of the Presbyters, by Paul and Barnabas, Act. XI. 30? Forsooth, what were these Presbyters, but so many Lay Elders, to give check to the Apostles,
by their interess in disposing of the Church Goods? Sure, they that have heard of XII. Princes of Tribes, and LXX. Elders, that governed all Israel with, and under Moses, and, in correspondence with them, XII Apostles, and LXX Disci∣ples, the irst fruits of the spiritual Israel under our Lord Christ, will not com∣mit so gross an inconsequence, as not to subordinate them to the Twelve. He that admits that which I said even now, that it doth not appear, that the LXX. Disciples (whatsoever dignity and respect they might have among the Disci∣ples, by being so sent) did hold any office in the Church by virtue of it, but that which they were designed to by the act of the Church; must also al∣low, that, upon such designation, both the LXX. and others, might properly be called Presbyters or Elders. Onely, supposing the name of Presbyters to be relative to the Body of those whereof they are Presbyters, there will be as much difference between them and the Apostles, as between the Twelve Prin∣ces and the Elders of Israel, (to whom all maters of the Law resorted, which could not be ended at home) and every litle Piepouder Judge, that could de∣cide alone, or with two more, upon compromise. Wherefore I will not con∣tend with them, who think it so convenient to say, that those Elders of Acts XI. 30. were Presbyters of the local Church of Jerusalem. For when, upon the mater, the Church of Jerusalem, and the whole Church, were both a thing (the Church of Antiochia being but yet in the Cradle, and therefore those of Iudea and Samaria, mentioned, Acts IX. 31. where the Harvest was lesse, though somewhat elder, yet not more considerable) whither as Elders of the whole Church, that is Bishops; or as Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, that is Priests, (supposing the same Order promiscuously called Bishops and Pres∣byters, which I never doubted, and since hath been largely and learnedly pro∣ved) will scarce be decided by these Texts; and the interesse of the Church will be secure, though it be not decided. For, when the deputation of the Church of Antiochia is addressed to the Apostles and these Elders, when they assemble to consider of it, when the answer containing the decree goes forth in their name, Act. XV. 2, 4. 16, 23. It is still the decree of the Princes and Elders of the Israel of God, whether you take them for Elders of the Church of Je∣rusalem, or Bishops of the whole Church. Nor is the case much otherwise, when Paul and his companions consult with Iames and the Elders, almost a∣bout the same businesse, Act. XXI. 18. though, of the twelve, it seems, there was none then left at Jerusalem but James, (whom, for the many marks which the Scriptures give us, that his care was appropriated, though his power no way confined to that Church, the Church calleth Bishop of Jerusalem) and of those Presbyters, many were either setled in, or dispersed to other functions (as, those whom first we read of in the Church of Antiochia, must have have been of that quality, Act. XIII. 1. no lesse then Barabas and Silas, Act. IX. 27. XI. 22-26. XV. 22.) But, is there any man that can pick out of all this, any maner of pretense, for the equality of, whether Governors or Ministers of the Church, for the concurrence of Lay Elders, to the Acts of their Government? For the con∣currence of the people there may be some pretense, because they are present at passing the decree, and the leter that bears it goes in their name, Act. XV. 4. 23. And because the choice of Matthias and of the seven, proceeds up∣on upon their allowance, and nomination of the persons, Act. I. 20-23. XVI. 3-6. But, that therefore, the cheif interess should be in the people, is an ima∣gination too brutish. Cannot the Apostles, finding themselves obliged to ordain persons so and so qualified, for such and such offices in the Church, appeal to the people, whom they acknowledge so and so qualified: Cannot S. Paul af∣terwards provide, That no man should blame them in dispensing the Power which they are trusted with, 2 Cor. VIII. 20. but a consequence must thereupon be in∣ferred against themselves, that they are commanded by God, to referre things concerning the salvation of Gods people in generall, as the power of an Apo∣stle▪ the order of Deacon, the decree of the Synod at Jerusalem, to the temerity
and giddinesse of the people? When it is evident in the Text, that, the people are neither left to themselves, whither to proceed or not, nor to proceed, but within bounds limited; so, that proceeding within those bounds, hey could not prejudice the Apostles interess, without they, were to be restrained. As for the mater of Faith determined at Jerusalem, is any man so litle a Christian as to doubt, whether it obliged them whom it concerned, or whether by virtue of that act? Those that so readily admitted it, Act. XVI. 4. did not. The whole inte∣ress of the people, consequent to this proceeding of the Apostles, consists, in being reasonably satisfied of mater of fact, concerning persons, and causes, to be justiced by the Apostles, and their successors in the Church. And can no more argue the People to be chief in the Church, then the triall by Juries can argue England to be no Monarchy. Which interesse, when it is shamefully a∣bused to the dishonour of Christianity, I say not I would have it taken away, as in some laces perhaps it is; but, I say, he that would not have the satisfaction which they may demand limited by certain bounds, with force of Law, that it may not be so abused any more, can neither pretend to be reasonable, nor Christian. But, that the people of one Church should do an act which must ob∣lige other Churches, is a thing so gross, that they, who allow their Christians the freedom to be tied to nothing but what themselves please, do, by conse∣quence, allowing others the same, destroy all principles and grounds of one Catholick Church; which having proved as largely as my design admits, I re∣mit those who may pretend themselves unsatisfie in this point, to void me these grounds, before they claim of me that which cannot stand with the truth of them. But, the due interess of the people being thus satisfied, and their pretended interess by the same means excluded; what becomes of the Lay Elders inte∣ress upon their account? For, Lay Elders can be no more then the Foremen of the People, to act that interess which they challenge, to their due advantage. And, in this quality, I have granted elsewere, (and cannot repent me of that opinion) that, in some parts of the Western Church, some of the chief of the People, (that is, that were not of the Clergy) did concur to the acts of the Church, in behalf of the People, and of their Interess. And in this quality, Blondel, the most learned of Presbyterians, claims the Lay Elders of Gnva to be receivable. Which, as he knew very well, and all his party will own, to be utterly inconsistent with the meaning and intent of them who first brought them in at Geneva; So will it, both cut of all pretense for them, that is deri∣ved from any other ground, and leave the claim also to be limited, by that, which the preservation of the whole Church, and the unity thereof will require. In the mean time, the Order of Bishops, and the superiority thereof above the order of Priests, stands exemplified, in the person of S. Iames the brother of our Lord, by so ancient testimonies, concurring with such circumstances of Scripture, marked out Bishop of Jerusalem, whither one of the twelve or no. In that indeed, the reports of the ancients are not reconcileable. But, if not, why should S. Paul be so careful to protest, that he received not his authority from him, no more then from S. Peter and S. Iohn, Gal. I. 18. 19. II. 9. 12. Could there be any question of receiving his authority from any but those of the Twelve? Therefore, and for other reasons elsewhere alleged, I count it, as shouldred by most probbilities, so a subject to least difficulty, to believe him to be Iames the Son of Alphoeus, as having nothing of consequence to answer, but, why Hegsippus, writing so soon after the Apostles, hath not remembred it. But of that, let each man think as he finds most reasonable. Those testimo∣nies of antiquity, which expound those circumstances of Scripture, which mark him out for the head of that Church, do not discharge him from the care of o∣ther Churches, especially of the circumcision, which, perhaps by his care, toge∣ther with S. Peter and Iohn, were wonne to Christianity; according to the di∣vision which S. Paul hath recorded unto us, Gal. II. 9. 10. whereupon, we see him exercise the the office of an Apostle to the Churches of the Jews dispersi∣ons▪ by his Epistle Iames I. 1.
But let us proceed. S. Paul and Barnabas ordained their Presbyters Church by Church, , Act. XIV. 23. And appointed Titus to constitute Presbyters, in Creete, City by City, Tit. I. 5. Be it granted, because Epiphanius hath said it, and it is a thing in it self reasonable, that, in some places, the number of believers was so small, that there needed but a Bishop to govern, and a Deacon or Deacons to attend upon the execution of his orders; That there should be Churches constituted by the name of such Churches, in such Provinces, and no more people any where signified, would make them Chur∣ches that might be, not that were. Tertullians saying, Ubi tres Ecclesia, licet laici, Where there be three, though of the Laity, there is a Church, is not meant of such Churches: But, that three Christians, (or two in our Saviours terms, Mat. XVIII. 19.) that meet to serve God, are a Church, because so assembled, being of the Church. At least in mother Churches of mother Cities, (where the Apostles made their chiefe residence, because the harvest was there greatest, and likewise their Ministers) that there should be no more Christians then one Bishop could govern and teach, during the Apostles time, seems to me to cary no appearance of truth. And to imagine, that, those who were designed for Pastors of Churches in being, were alwaies resident in the mother Church, (though occasions, whereof there is no rule, might and must cause their presence there many times) the reason of their office admits not. But if we admit , to signifie more then one in a City, and a Church, it seems not to be refutable, that they were ap∣propriate to those Churches; The name of Presbyters of such and such Chur∣ches bing relative to the people of their respective Churches, Further, S. Paul, snding to Ephesus, called to him the Elders of the Church, whom, by and by, he saith, The Holy Ghost had placed Bishops over his flock▪ to feed the Church of God, Act. XX. 17. 28. Here , by virtue of the article, may referre us, either to the whole Church, or, to that part of the Church which the speech most concerned, or, in fine, to the very Church of Ephesus. There is a conjecture, that S. Paul makes them Bishops, by saying, that God had made them Bishops of his Church, who were Presbyters when he sent for them. But, I allow not those of the Church of Rome, that our Lord made the Bread and Wie of his last Supper, his Body and Blood, by saying; This is my Body, this is my Blood; But by that which he did before he said it. For the same reason there∣fore, I cannot allow, that S. Paul here makes them Bishops of Presbyters, by saying; God hath made you Bishops in his Church, not declaring, by any thing that he sayes or does, any intent so to do, thereby to be understood. But, I can∣not but consider, that Irnaeus III. 14. tells▪ us, that S. Paul, at this time, called together the Bishops and Presbyters, Qui erant ab Epheso & reliquis proximis civitatibus; Which were of Ephesus, and other the next Cits; and S. Je∣rome, ad Evagr. that he called together, omnes illos apud qus praedicaverat; All those wih whom he had preached. Which if we grant, the article of , will referrs us to that part of the Church that was concerned, whereas the words as they lie, (as he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church) referre us to the Church there mentioned, of Ephesus. When S. Paul addresses his Episle to the Philippians, together with the Bishops and Deacons, Phil. I. 2. when, in his instructions to Timothy, he passes immediately from Bishops to Deacons; 1 Tim. III. 1-8. It is said, that the Bishops of the next Cities to∣gether with their Deacons, were present, or ordinarily resident on the Capital City, according to that which I said even now of Ephesus. And it may be said, that they were Bishops and Deacons at large, in respect to the Church at large, not applyed to the functions either of Bishop or Priests, in this or that Church. And truly, I do remember the words of Clemens, ad Corinth. speaking of the Apostles, . Preaching there∣fore the Word by Cities, and by Countries, and Baptizing, they made the first-fruits of them, (whom they had baptized) Bishops and Deacons of those that should believe
And, that S. Paul addresses his Epistles to the Church that is at Corinth, and to all that called on the name of the Lord in all Achaia, 2 Cor. I. 1. So that, they provided for the ordering of them that should become, or were become Chri∣stians, before they were yet cast into Churches. And, it is reasonable to think, that those were ordained in the mother Cities, and there, stood upon their guard, expecting opportunity of framing their flocks. And, that this was a cause, why the titles of Bishops and Presbyters are promiscuously used and at∣tributed. But I cannot therefore yield, that one Bishop, with one or more Deacons, could serve the Churches of Philippi, Corinth, or Ephesus: Or, that as yet no Governours were affected and applied to several Churches. For, when S. Paul directs Timothy to dispose of the stock of the Church, for the Honour, that is, the maintenance of widows, and Presbyters, to receive accusations a∣gainst Presbyters under two or three witnesses, and to rebuke them that should of∣fend before all, 1 Tim. V. 2. 16-28. it seems not reasonable, to imagine Timothy the Judge of the Biships of inferiour Churches, as regularly every Bishop is of his own Presbyters; that he should rebuke the Bishop of Forie, though inferiour Churches, before the people of his Church of Ephesus; that he should dispose of the stock of his Church at Ephesus, upon Widows or Presby∣ters of other Churches then that at Ephesus: But rather, that the proceeding of Timothy is prescribed as a orm for the proceeding of others, in their re∣spective Churches. Another opinion saith; That the Deacons whom S. Paul puts next to Bi∣shops are Presbyters, called also Ministers of God and Christ, as Timothy, 1 Thes. III. 2. & S. Paul himself, 2 Cor. II. 23. Ministers of the New Testament, as S. Paul, 2 Cor. III. 6. Ministers of the Gospel; as S. Paul, Ephe. III. 7. Mi∣nisters of Righteousness, into whom the Ministers of Satan are transformed, 2 Cor. XI. 15. Ministers of the Church, as S. Paul, Col. I. 25. Observing, that the vulgar Latine of S. Jerome translates ▪ Phil. I. 1. 1 Tim. III. 8. Diaconos, elsewhere, in thirty places Ministros; and concluding, that these Deacons are the same with Presbyters under the Apostles, and the Bishops their next successors, till the order of Deacons was brought in by the Church. Which to me seems strange, that the titles of the Apostles and their companions should constitute or signifie an inferiour order of Presbyters. And therefore, think it more pertinent to the meaning of those texts, to observe the terms which are ad∣ded in them, to limit that Ministery for which they are called Ministers, either by the persons, or subject mater to which it relates. For, the Apostles com∣mission being immediate from our Lord, (as the commission of their compani∣ons, when they became their Apostles, from themselves) and the mater in which the Apostles ministred to God or Christ, (their companions also to them) be∣ing the Word, or the Gospel, (that is the work of publishing it) distinguishes them from the Deacons that are under Bishops in S. Paul, as those that ministred to their respective Bishops, and, by their appointment, to the people, as the VII at Jerusalem, by the appointment of the Apostles. For, if S. Paul be called Mi∣nister of the Church, Col. I. 15. he is so called as Minister of the whole Church, or Minister of God in the work of it, not of this or that Church; which, Dea∣cons are called Deacons, because they minister to, but, at the Order of their Bi∣shops and Presbyters. As for the companions of the Apostles, when they are sent, upon their commissions, to preach the Gospel, they are fitly called Mini∣sters of the word, the Gospel, the New Testament, or Evangelists; when they give personall attendance upon them, the Apostles, they may fitly be understood to be called their Ministers, in the same sense as Deacons are called Deacons, for attending upon their Bishops; allowing alwaies, as much difference between them and ordinary Deacons, as between S. Paul, for example, and the Bishop or Priest on whom the Deacon attends. And, for these two several notions, you have just ground in the texts of the Apostles, Acts I. 17. 25. VI. 1. 4. XIX. 22. 2 Tim. IV. 5. 6, 7, 11. Besides, when Phaebe is alled a Deaconnesse of the Church at Cnchrae, Rom. XVI. 1. when S. Paul sayes, that they who Minister well, procure themselves a good step, and much freedom in the faith which
is in Christ Jesus, 1 Tim. III. 13. I understand not what this opinion would make of Deaconnesses, or what is that faire step which Deacons attain by mi∣nistring well; which, in my opinion, is clearly the rank of Presbyters, as Cle∣mens, Alexand. and others of the Fathers have expounded it. Neither do I think it possible to give a more reasonable reason, why the vulgar, translating  Ministros, so often elsewhere, should translate it Diacones, Phil. I. 1. 1 Tim. III. 8. then to put a difference between that sense, in which it stands for the Deacons of Churches, (which the Greek word Diaconus, had been used to signifie all over the Latin Church) and that signification, in which the Apostles and their companions are called the Ministers of Christ, or of the Gospel; In which, because the Greek Diaconi was not famous in the Latine, therefore he imployeth tke Latine Ministri, that answers it. Plainly, seeing the word  beareth a notion of waiting upon anothers pleasure, in executing his orders, and the word , of ruling and governing; and seeing I have showed, that the Presbyters, according to the ancient custome of the Church (derived originally from the Synagogue) did sit with their Bishop, though in a rank under him, while the Deacons hood, as waiting upon them, (as you may see in the Apostolicall form of divine service, Chap. III. & IV. and in the Right of the Church, Chap. III.) I cannot see how both these names can be accepted to sig∣nifie the same persons: Or, how the degree which S Paul saith, is attained by well performing the Deacons office, can be any thing but the rank of Presby∣ters. There remains the words of the Apostles, 1 Thes. V. 12. 13. Now we re∣quest you brethren, to know those that labour amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And to esteeme them more then abundantly in love, for their works sake. And again. Heb. XIII. 7. 17. Remember your Leaders, which have spoken to you the word, the issue of whose conversation seeing, imitate ye their faith. And; Be ruled by your Leaders, and yield to them, for they watch for your souls, as those that must give account. That they may do it joyfully, and not groan∣ing; For that is not for your turn. Where, it is manifest, he distinguisheth those that first planted the Churches to whom he writes, from those that governed them at present: But, whether it be more reasonable to understand by these words, one governour to one Church, or a Bench of Presbyters to each; whe∣ther assigned to one particular Church, or belonging to any Church as much as to these; I shall willingly referre it to the Reader to Judge. The words of S. Jame, I conceive admit no denyal, Jam. V. 14. Is any man among you sick? let him call for the Presbyters of the Church, and let them pray over him, anoint∣ing him with oyl in the name of the Lord; here are Elders more then one, and those proper and relative to one and the same Church, and, the office which they do, not competible to any Lay Elders, according to any pretense, supposing e∣specially, that which I said afore, to clear the intent of it. In fine, the seven stars, which are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks which are the seven Churches, Revel. I. 20. seem to yield us a pregnant evidence of so ma∣ny Governours, proper to so many Churches: To wit, so many Bishops, as is argued elsewhere; As for the words of S. Paul. 1 Cor. XII. 28. And some hath God set in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Do∣ctors, then miracles, then Graces of healing, helps, Governments, kinds of Lan∣guages; And, Ephe. IV. 11. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some E∣vangelists, some Pastors and Doctors; It is true, the offices of Apostles and E∣vangelists, cannot be confined to one particular Church; but the offices of Pastors and Doctors, may and ought, of Helps and Governments must; At least if we understand them, as I have showed that they are to be understood: to wit, Governours of the sick, impotent, and needy, and their assistants in that work. For, I may freely say, there hath nothing been said to the purpose, of those Of∣fices, but this. And therefore, seeing the Apostle in both places speaks of the whole Church, which consisteth of all Churches. the form whereof is still the same, how much soever they differ in bignesse; it seemeth to me very reasonable to understand by S. Paul, that God hath placed in the Church, as well those of∣fices
which relate to all, or to many Churches, as those which relate unto one; that, by the means of all of them, the University of Christians may be edified in and to the unity of one Body, which is the whole Church. These being the particulars that concern this point, in the writings of the A∣postles, I am not solicitous for an answer to the Puritanes objections, finding in them no ingredient of any of their designs, but onely a number of Pres∣byters of the same rank, in one and the same Church, no wayes inconsistent with the superiority of Bishops, no ways induring the Power of the Keys in the hands of Lay Elders. But, if the writings of the Apostles express not that form of Government by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which, it is manifest, that the whole Church ever since their time hath used; First, neither can it be said to a∣gree any thing so near with any of their designs: And, all the difference is reasonably imputable to the difference between the State of the Church, in ma∣king and made; the qualities of Apostles and Evangelists, not being to be pro∣pagated to posterity any more then their persons, but, the uniformity of succeed∣ing times, not being imputable to any thing but their appointment. As for the reason why the titles of  and , are so promiscuously used, as well in the records of the primitive Church, as in the writings of the Apo∣stles; I admit that of Epiphanius, that, at the beginning, a Bishop with his Dea∣cons might serve some Churches; I admit the ordaining of Bishops for inferi∣our Churches to be framed, and in the Churches of mother Cities, according to Clemens; I admit the ordaining of Clergy to no particular Churches; But, I cannot reject that which I learned from an author no wayes inconsiderable, the supposed S. Ambrose upon S. Pauls Epistles. He, not onely in the words quoted in the first Book, upon 1 Cor. XI. but upon Rom. XVI. and 1 Cor. I. alleges, that, when S. Paul writ, Governours were not setled in all Churches, acknowledging, that Presbyters were. Can he then be thought to make Pres∣byters, and the Governours of Churches all one? But, Amalarius de officiis Eccles. II. 13. (quoting things out of these his Commentaries, which now appear not) and out of him Rabanus, upon 1 Tim. IV. 14. and Titus I. sayes; that they, who, under the Apostles, had power to ordain, and are now called Bishops, were then set over whole Provinces, by the name of Apostles, (agree∣ing herein with Theodoret upon 1 Tim. III. IV. and S. Hierome upon Gal. I. and many others of the Fathers, that extend the name of Apostles far beyond the XII.) as Timothy in Asia, Titus in Creete; The Churches of particular Cities having their own Presbyters to govern them, but, expecting ordinations, and the setling of the more weighty causes, from these their superiours. These were the Presbyters that ordained Timothy, 1 Tim. IV. 14. saith Rabanus; who certainly, being ordained to so high a charge, could not be ordained by the Pres∣byters of any particular Church. Now, the successors of these Apostles or Presby∣ters finding themselves inferior to their Predecessors, saith he, and the same title a burthen to them, appropriated themselves the name of Bishops, which imports care, leaving to Priests, that which imports dignity, to wit, that of Presby∣ters. This, Amalarius allegeth out of the said Commentaries. Adding, that, in process of time, through the bounty of those who had the power of ordain∣ing; these Bishops were setled two or three in a Province, untill at length, not onely over all Cities, but, in places that needed not Bishops. This, being part∣ly the importance of this Authors words, partly that which Amalarius and Rabanus gather from his meaning, gives a clear answer to all that S. Jerome hath objected out of the writings of the Apostles, to prove, that Bishops and Presbyters are, by their institution, both one, because they are called both by the same title. And therefore cannot, with any judgement, be alleged to his purpose. In fine, the same Author upon Ephes. IV. affirmeth, that, for the pro∣pagation of Christianity, all were permitted at the first to preach the Gospel, to Baptize, and to expound the Scriptures in the Church. But, when Churches were setled, and Governours appointed, then order was taken, that no man should presume to execute that office, to which he was not ordained. By whom I beseech you, but by the same, who had formerly allowed and trusted all Chri∣stians,
with all offices, which the propagation of the common Christianity re∣quired? Even the Apostles and Disciples, and their companions and assistants, in whom, that part of power rested, which the Apostles had indowed them with; until, Bishops being setled over all Churches, they might truly be said to suc∣ceed the Apostles in the Government of their respective Churches, though, no body can pretend to succeed them in that power over all Churches that belonged to their care, which, the agreements passed between the Apostles, must needs al∣low each one. Nor need I deny that, which sometimes the Fathers affirm, that even Presbyters succeed the Apostles. For, in the Churches of Barnabas, and Sauls founding, Act. XIV. 28. while they had no Governours but Apo∣sles and Presbyters; it is manifest, that the Presbyters did whatsoever they were able to do as Lieutenants of the Apostles, and in their stead. But, shall any man inrre thereupon, that they who say this, allow Presbyters to do what∣soever the Apostles could do, seeing them limited, as I have said, by the Au∣thors which I allege? For, what if my Author say, upon Ephes. IV. that at the first, the Elders of the Presbyters succeeded upon the Bishops decease? Shall th rule of succession make any difference in the power to which he succeeds? Or, both acknowledge the Laws, which, they that order both shall have appoint∣ed, even the Apostles? Let S. Hierome then, (and whosoever prefers S. Hieroms arguments before that evidence which the practice of the Church creates) have leave to dispute, out of the Scriptures, the beginning of Bishops from the au∣thority of the Church, which, neither S. Hierome, nor any man else could ever have brought the whole Church to agree in, had not the Apostles order gone a∣fore, for the ground of it; provided that the love of his opinion carry him not from the unity of the Church, as it did Aerius: (For, he that saith, that this ought to be a Law to the Church, need not say, that every Christian is bound, upon his salvation, to believe, that it ought to be a Law to the Church) so long as the succession of the Apostles is upon record in the Church, in the persons of single Bishops, by whom the Tradition of faith was preserved, according to Irenaeus and Tertullian, the unity of the Church, according to Optaus and S. Austine; What wilfullnesse can serve to make all Presbyters equal in that power, which, all the acts whereby the unity of the Church hath been really maintained, evidently challenge to the preheminence of their Bishops above them, in their respective Churches? The constitution of the whole Church out of all Churches, as members of the whole, will necessarily argue a pre-emi∣nence of Power in the Bishop above his Presbyters, not to be derived from any agreement of the Church; but, from the appointment of the Apostles. In the mean time, suppong the whole Church to agree in that, which God had in∣abled them to agree in, having not tied them to the contrary, but having tied them to live in vible unity and communion, all Churches with all Churches; they that depart from this Unity upon this account, shall bee no less Schisma∣cks, then, had the Superiority of Bishops been setled by the Apostles. This is that which I come to in the next place.
CHAP. XVIII. The Apostles all of oequall power; S. Peter onely chiefe in managing it. The ground for the pre-minence of Churches, before and over Churches. Of Alex∣andria, Antiochia, Jerusalem and Rome. Ground for the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, before all Churches. The consequence of that Ground. A sum∣mary of the evidence for it. SOme consideration I must now bestow upon that Position, which derives a Monarchy over the Church from S. Peters priviledges. For, I make no scru∣ple to grant, that he was indeed the first and chief of the Apostles, as he is reck∣oned in the Gospels, Mat. X. 2. Mar. III. 16. Luk. VI. 14. and that, in like∣lihood, because he was the first in leaving all to adhere unto our Lord▪ as the man to whom our Lords call is directed, Luk. V. 4-11. though he was first brought to our Lord by bis brother Andrew, as Philip once brought Nathanael that was not of the twelve, John I. 41-46. so that this first call gave them ac∣quaintance, but made them not Apostles. And, from this beginning, we may well draw the reason, why S. Peter is alwaies the forwardest to answer our Lords demands, and to speak in the name of his fellows, Mat. XIV. 28. XV. 25. XVI. 16. XVII. 24. XVIII. 21. XIX. 27. XXVI. 33. Mar. VIII. 29. X. 28. XI. 21. XIV. 29. Luk. VIII. 45. IX. 20. XII. 41. XVIII. 28. XXII. 34. Joh. VI. 68. XIII. 6. Act. I. 13. 15. II. 14. 37. IV. 8. which, it would not become the reverence we owe the Apostles, so impute to S. Peters sorward∣nesse, without acknowledging the ground of it, being visible. But, these pri∣viledges will not serve to make S. Peter Soveraign over the Apostles; The stress lies upon Mat. XVI. 16-19. And Simon Peter answered and said; Thou ar the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said to him Bles∣sed art thou Simon Son of Jonas, for flesh and blood hath not revealed this to thee, but my Father in the heavens. And I say to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give thee the Keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest on earth shall be loose in the heaven. And upon John XXI. 15. 16, 17. where S. Peter, thrice professing to love Christ, receives of him thrice the command of, Feeding his sheep. But will this serve the turn ever a whit more? It must be either by virtue of the mater which our Lord sayes, of or to S. Peter; or, by virtue of his say∣ing it to S. Peter, and to none else. Against this later consideration, I conceive, I have provided by the premises. For, seeing there is a sufficient reason to be given otherwise, why S. Peter answers before the rest, when our Lord demand; whom they acknowledge him to be; the reply of our Lord, addressed to him alone, will give him no more then the precedence, not the Soveraignty over the Apostles. Which is still more evident in S. John, because, S. Peter having un∣dertaken before the rest to stand to our Lord in the utmost of all his trialls, had deserted him most shamefully of them all, denying, udder an oath, to have any knowledge of him. For, it is not observed for nothing, that he professes the love of Christ thrice. Let S. Peter then be the Prince Apostle, or the chiefe A∣postle, let him be, if you please, the Prince of the Apostles, there will be found a wide distance between Princeps Apostolorum in Latine, as some of the Fa∣thers have called him, and Soveraign over the Apostles. When Augustus seized into is hand the soveraign Power of the Romane Empire, nomine Principis, as we read the beginning of Tacitus, under the title of Prince; He was well aware, that, the Title which he assumed, did not necessarily proclaim him Soveraign, which he dered not to do. As for the aer of our Lords words, those that fear where there is no fear, wil have our Lord say; that he buildeth his Church upon the Faith of S. Peter, pro∣fssing our Lord to be Christ; Or, to point at himselfe, when he saith; Upon this Rock will I build my Church. But what needs it? Saith he any more to
S. Peter, then S. Paul saith to the Ephesians, II. 20. Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himselfe being the chief corner stone? Or S. John of the new Jerusalem, Revel. XXI. 14. And the wall of the City had twelve foundations, upon which were the names of the XII Apostles of the Lambe? How then shall S. Peter be Soverign by virtue of an attribute common to him, with the rest of the Apostles? Some conceive, that, when our Lord proceeds to tell him, that, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church; He mean no more, but that he will rescue his from death, by raising them again. But, raising from death, implies raising from sinne in the Old Testament, ex∣presses it in the New; And, the City of God, which is the Church, in the New Testament, referrs to the City of Satan that oppugneth it; And there∣fore, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; Cannot signifie lesse then a promise, that the Church shall continue till our Lords second coming to judge∣ment, notwithstanding the malice of Satan and his complices. But, S. Peter is not the onely foundation of it, though no body else be named here. Again, our Lord gives S. Peter the Keyes of his Church here, as in S. John, he commands him to feed his flock; But is the office of feeding Christs flock S. Peters peculiar? Have not the Apostles the charge of it, even from our Lord? do they do it by virtue of S. Peters commission, or by his appointment? How are they Christs A∣postles otherwise? As for the Keyes of the Church, they are given to S. Peter here, they are given to the Twelve, by the power of remitting and retaining sinnes, as I have shewed John XX. 21. 22, 23. by the power of binding and loo∣sing, they are given to the Church, Mat. XVIII. 18. And, can any man make S. Peter Soveraign over the Apostles and over the Church, by virtue of that which is no priviledge of his, the rest of the Apostles and the Church being all indowed with it? Hear we not what S. Luke saith, Act. VIII. 14. The A∣postles at Jerusalem, hearing that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John? Can S. Peter go upon commission from the Apostles, who gives the Apostles the commission they have? Those that prea∣ched circumcision at Antiochia, had no commission for it from the Church at Jerusalem, Act. XV. 24. It must have been from S. Peter, if that Church had acted then by virtue of his Commission: But he was present, and is signified, as one of them that writ these words. Let any man stand upon it that will, that the false Apostles, whom S Paul writes against, 2 Cor. XI. 13. pretended com∣mission from S. Peter, because of the opposition which they made between him on the one side, and S Paul and Apollos on the other side; 2 Cor. I. 12. (Though I showed you beter reason afore, that they pretended that commission from the Apostles, which they disowned Acts XV. 24.) It is easie for me to say, that they pretended not S. Peters name as Soveraign over the Apostles, but as foun∣der of the Church of Corinth, as well as S. Paul, which Dionysius of Corinth in Eusebius witnesseth. Whereas, when S. Paul pleads his Commission of Apo∣stle from God, and not from man, Gal. I. 1. II. 6, 9. and that, in express op∣position to S. James and S. John, as well as to S. Peter, it is manifest, that they, as well as S. Peter, might have pretended to give it, had he not been an Apostle, but, being an Apostle, none but our Lord Christ. And therefore, when he re∣sists S. Peter, and reproves him to the face, Gal. II. 11-14. understand this re∣sistance and reproof as you please, whither true or colourable; had S. Peter been Monarch, it had not been for an Apostle, to colour his proceeding with a pre∣tense, inferring rebellion against his Soveraign. Wherefore, there may be les∣and greater Apostles, fo personble qualiies; And S. Paul, that is the least of them for his calling, may be inferiour to none, for his labours, 1 Cor. XV. 9. 10. 2 Cor. XI. 5. XII. 11. 12. Nay, S. Peter may have a standing pre-eminence, of Head of the Bench, to avoid confusion, and to create order in their proceedings, and yet their commission be immediate from our Lord, and the mater of it, and the power it creates, the same for substance. Having thus destroyed this ground, upon which, some people claim a Mo∣narchy over the Church for the Pope, by the scriptures, (without seeking for other exceptions, to the pretense that may be made to the same purpose, from
the Tradition of the Catholick Church.) I proceed to setle the ground of that eminence and superiority, which, I conceive, some Churches have over others, for the unity of the whole Church: Because, of necessity, the reason and ground upon which it stands, must be the measure of it, how farre it extends: And, the positive truth thereof, will be negatively, an exception to that Soveraignty, which the Bishop of Rome, by the succession of S. Peter, pretendeth: I say then, that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord Christ, intending to convert the World to the Faith, and to establish one Church of all that should be conver∣ted to it, did agree and appoint, that the Churches of the chiefe Cities should be the chief Churches; and that the Churches of inferiour Cities should depend upon them, and have recourse to them in all things that might concern the common Christianity; (whither in the Rule of Faith, or in the Unity of the Church in the offices of Gods service) reserving unto themselves the ordering of those things, which, being of lesse moment, might concern their own peace and good order, rather then the interesse of other Churches. I do not pretend to produce any act under the Apostles hands, in which this conclusion is sign∣ed; but, to proceed upon the principles premised, to argue, and to inferre, that those things which I shall evidently show, have passed in the Church, could not otherwise have come to pass; unlesse we could suppose, that a constant or∣der, which hath wholly taken place in the Church ever since the Apostles, could have prevailed over those infinite wayes which confusion might have imagined, had there been no ground from whence this certain order should rise. And here, I do profess, that, if any man will needs be contentious, and say, that this or∣der came not in by the appointment of the Apostles themselves; (because, du∣ring their time, the probability of converting the Romane Empire, and other Nations to Christianity, could not appear, and, that it doth not appear by any circumstance of Scripture, that the Spirit of Prophesy was given them to such purposes) I will rather grant all this, then contend about those terms which I need not insist upon; though I do firmly believe, that, before all the Apo∣stles left the World, the conversion of the Gentiles was their design, and the design of their successors: But, I will provide on the other side, that, whither the Apostles themselves, or their companions and successors, in whom the power of governing the whole Church was as fully to all purposes, as in the Apostles them¦selves; (for, though they might be assisted by the Gift of Prophesy in those oc∣casions, as it is probable they were at the Council of Jerusalem, Acts XV. yet must their authority proceed, whether so assisted or not) the obligation upon the Church must needs remain the same, to cherish and maintain that Order which once might have been established by them; the Unity of the Church, which is the end of it, not being otherwise attainable. And, upon this ground, I maintain, that the Churches of Rome, Alexandria and Antiochia, had from the beginning a priviledge of eminence above other Churches; For, Rome being the seat of the Empire, Alexandria and Antiochia, which had formerly been the Seates of the Successors of Ptolomee in Aegypt and Seleucus in Asia, having, from their first coming under the Romane Em∣pire, had their peuliar Governours; it is no marvail, if the Churches founded in them, held their peculiar priviledges and eminences, over the Churches of their resorts, from the very founding of Christianity in these mother Cities, and the propagating of it from thence into inferiour Cities, and thence over the confines. And this is the onely reason that can be rendred, why the Church of Jerusalem, which, in respect of the first abode of the Apostles, and the propaga∣tion of Christianity, is justly counted the mother of all Churches; and, which gave law to that of Antiochia, and the rest that were concerned in the same dis∣pute with it; and, during the Apostles time, received oblations of maintenance from the Churches of the Gentiles; became afterwards inferiour to these, and in particular to that of Antiochia. But, he that shall compare these Cities, and the greatnesse of them, and eminence over their respective Territories, with that of Rome, not onely over the rest of the Empire, but over those Cities, with
find it consequent to the ground of this design, not that the Church of Rome should be Soveraign over the Churches of these Cities; (For, that were incon∣sequent to the power of the Apostles, whence it proceedeth, (who, as I have proved, were equall among themselves) and the authority of their companions and successors, into whom it stood immediately divided) But, that it should have that eminence ovr them, (and by consequence, much more over the Churches of inferiour Cities) as is requisite to the directing of such maters, as might come to be of common interesse to the whole Church, to such an agreement as might preserve the unity thereof, with advantage to the common Christianity. Now, when I name these Churches, of Antiochia and Alexandria, for examples sake; supposing, that the Churches of the chief Cities of other Provinces of the Empire, had also their eminence over the Churches of inferiour Cities within the said Provinces; I suppose also, that they, accordingly, approached to the dig∣nity and priviledges of that at Rome; the power of obliging the whole (which, for the State, under God, rested then in the Emperour alone within the Em∣pire) rosting, for the Church, in the successors of the Apostles, according to this weight and greatnesse of their Churches. For, though Tertulliane, de praescrip. Haerct. cap. XXXVI. challengeth, that the very Chairs which the Apostles sate in, the very authentick leters which they sent to the Churches of Corinth, Thes∣salonica, Philippi, and Ephesus, were extant in his time in the said Churches; yet doth it not therefore follow, that the priviledges of those Churches should be all the same, with all Churches wherein the Apostles sate; which would ne∣cessarily follow, if nothing were to come into consideration, but, that they were founded by the Apostles themselves. For, supposing that the Apostles them∣selves (or their companions and successors, indowed with the same Power; as, not confined by any act of the Apostles, under whom they claimed, to the con∣trary) appointed, that regard should be had to the priviledge of the Cities wherein they were planted; it follows of reason, that S. Peter for the Jews, and S. Paul, for the Gentiles, (at least principally) should make it their busi∣nesse to plant Chistianity, and to found the Church of Rome: And, that the e∣minence of these Apostles, (one chief by our Lords choice, the other eminent for his labours) may very well be alleged for the priviledges of that Church, and yet the consequence not hold in other Churches, for which it may be al∣leged, that they were the seats of Apostles; because, the reason for which these Apostles bestowed their pains there hath a reason for it; to wit, the eminence of that City. Here, you easily see, that, deriving the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, not from S. Peters personall pre-eminence onely, (which, it would be impos∣sible to show how it comes intailed upon that Church, the pre-eminence of the Apostles not resting in all their Churches) but from an Order given out by the Apostles, advancing the priviledges of Churches, according the secular eminence of Cities; I say, you easily see, that, the concurrence of S. Paul, with S. Peter, to the founding of it, is a confirmation of that ground, whereupon the pre∣eminence thereof standeth; whereas, that opinion which derives it onely from the personal eminence of S. Peter, admits not the concurrence of S. Paul, to the constitution of this pre-eminence. Wheresoever therefore you find S. Pe∣ter and S. Paul acknowledged joynt founders thereof, in the writings of the Fa∣thers, all that must be understood, to setle the opinion which I here advance, and to destroy that plea, which derives it from the Soveraign power of S. Peter, over the rest of the Apostles. And Epiphanius is not the onely author where you find it, the disputes of these times will afford you more then this abridge∣ment can receive. But, I conceive, I have made a fair way to the ground for it, by observing some probabilities, that S. Paul should be head of those that turn∣ed Christians of Jews, as S. Peter, of Gentiles, at Rome: Which I will here confirm, by expounding the inscription of Ignatius his Epistle to the Romanes, according to it, othrwise not to be understood. It addresseth to the Church, , Which governeth in the place of the fields at Rome. The word  is here used, as many times besides, speaking of those
places which a man would neither call Cities nor Towns, as Act. XXVII. 2. , being to sail by the places of Asia. , it is plain, signifies the Country,  then must necessarily signifie here the Vaticane, lying in the fields, as a suburbe to Rome, and being the place where S. Peter was buried, and where the Jews of Rome then dwelt, as we learn by Philo, Legatione ad Caium, speaking of Augustus; . He knew that great quarter of Rome, which is beyond the River Tiber, to be held and inhabitated by Jews, most of whom were Romanes, and Libertines. For, being brought captives into Italy, they were set free by their Masters, without constrain∣ing them to adulterate any of their Countrie Laws. Hereupon, the Synagogue of the Libertines, Act. VI. 9. is, the Synagogue of the Romane Jews. Now S. Pe∣ters Church we know, is to this day in the Vaticane, as S. Pauls in the way to Ostia, as from the beginning, we understand by Caius in Eusebius, Hist. Ec∣cles. II. 25. the places of their burials were. Which circumstance points them out Heads, the one of the Jewish Christians at Rome; the other, of those that were converted being Gentiles. For, that the Vaticane was then the Jewry at Rome, we learn also by Tully, in his Oration pro Flacco; where he complains that his cause was heard in the fields of M ars, prope gradus Aurelios, that the Jews, who were offended at Flaccus, for prohibiting them to send their obla∣tions to Jerusalem, when he was Governour of Asia, might come in and dis∣countenance the cause. For plainly, this was hard by the Bridge that passed out of those fields into the Vaticane, where the Gate called Porta Aurelia stood, (hard by S. Peters Church) to which Gate, it seems, there were steps to go up, which he calleth there gradus Aurelios. It is also easie to see, that this supposition draweth the ground and reason of the Superiority of Churches originally, from the act of Temporall Power, which constituteth the eminence of Cities over other Cities; But neverthe∣lesse, immediately, from the act of the Church (or of those that have authori∣ty to oblige the Church) taking the Superiority of Cities, as it is, for the most reasonable ground of planting in them the most eminent Churches; but, by their own authority providing, that so it be observed. Therefore, it is to be considered, that the Church is, (by Gods command, howsoever by his pro∣mise) to continue one and the same till the coming of our Lord unto judge∣ment; But, the dominion of this World, upon which the greatnesse of Cities is founded, changes, as Gods providence appoints: Besides that change which Temporal Power, remaining in the same hands, is able to produce within its own dominions. The consequence of which consideration will be this, that, where Temporal Power makes such a change in the state of those Cities which are the seats of Churches, that, the Government and advancement of Christia∣nity either may proceed, changing the priviledges of the Churches, or cannot proceed otherwise; there the Church either may, or ought to transferre the pre-eminences of Churches from City to City: And therefore, that, where the case is otherwise, the Church is not bound, upon every act of Temporall Power, to proceed to any change. If this seem obscure, being thus generally said, let not the Reader despair, before we have done, to find instances in things that have come to pass, not onely to clear my meaning, but also to evidence the reason upon which I proceed. It is likewise easie for him that considers this supposition, and the effect and consequence of it, to see, that it gives no Juris∣diction to the Church of Rome, (much lesse to the Head thereof, in behalfe of it) over other Churches, then those which resort immediately to it, (as every Diocess is concluded by the mother Church, and every Province by the Synod of it) much lesse the Power of giving Law to the whole, but by the act of those Synods, whereof the whole consists; or, of judging ny appeal that may be brought to it; But it makes the Church of Rome, as other Head Churches, the center, to which, the causes that concern, first the Western Churches in parti∣cular,
then the whole, are to resort, that they may find issue, and be decided, by the consent, and, to the unity of all whom they concern. It is also easily to be observed, that this eminence of the greatest Churches over their inferiours, (which, originally, is no further defined and limited, then, the consequence of this ground, in respect of the rest of Christendom required) might lawfully be defined and limited further, either by slent custome, or by express law of the Church consenting, at lea ffect and practice; (which is the onely real positive Law that rules all Societies) Whereby new rights and priviledges might come to the Church of Rome, as well as to other Churches, which might also be for the good of the whole, in intaining the unity of the Church, together with the common interest of Christianity. But I deny not on the other side, that this Power, the beginning whereof is so necessary and just, the intent so excellent, by the change of the world, and the state of things in it, may be so inhansed, that, though it do provide for the unity of the Church, yet it shall not provide for the interess of Chistianity. But of this, and the consequence of it, in due time. For the present, the reason upon which my position, the effect and conse∣quence whereof I have hitherto set forth, is grounded, is the effect of it, in all proceedings of the Church, recorded, first in the Scriptures, and afterwards in Church Writers, as they succeed; those that I must here principally consider, be∣ing the very same that I considered in the first Book, to make evidence of the be∣ing of the Church, in point of fact, as a body, out of which now, the right which held it together, as the soul, must appear: Adding the consideration of such eminent passages in succeeding times, as may serve to the same purpose. I will not here repeat the marks of it, which I have produced out of the Scriptures, in the right of the Church, Chap. II. For, the dependence of Churches is part of this position, as an ingredient, without which, the unity of the whole is not attainable. I will onely adde here the consideration of that which I alleged in the first Book, out of S. Johns last Epistle, 5-10. Some have thought it so strange, that Diotrephes and his faction should not acknowledge those that were recom∣mended by S. John an Apostle, that they have rather intitled the Epistle to a successor of his, in the Church of Ephesus, whose Tombe S. Jerome saw there, besides S. John the Apostle, whom Papias called John the elder, as he is called in the beginning of these two Epistles, Hieron. Catal. in Johanne & Papiâ, Ens. Ecclesiast. Hist. II. 25. But, he that considers what S. Paul writes to the Corin∣thians, of his adversaries there, will not marvail, that S. John should find opposi∣tion at the hands of Diotrephes, aspiring to the Bishoprick, by banding a faction against the Jewish Christians, whom, it appears sufficiently, that S. John cherished. And therefore, the mark here set upon Diotrephes, is not for intro∣ducing Episcopacy, as the Presbyterians would have it, but for disobeying the superiour Church, whereof S. John was head, to the indangering of Unity in the Whole. For, could Diotrephes hope to make himselfe Bishop in his own Church, when no body was Bishop in any Church besides? Or might not Dio∣trephes hope to do it, by heading a party, that disallowed compliance with Ju∣daism at that time? If then, the Apostles provided not that the Church should continue alwayes one, if this Unity was not alwayes maintained, by the de∣pendence of Churches; let this reproof have no effect in any succeeding time of the Church. But, if the eminence of S. Johns Church, above the neighbour Churches in insuing ages, was a necessary ingredient to the unity of the whole; then be it acknowledged, that S. Johns successors might lay the blame of Dio∣trephes his ambition upon any successor of his that should follow it. Before I go any further, I will here allege those Fathers which do teach, that our Lord gave S. Peter the Keys of his Church, in the person of the Church, and, as the figure of it: Namely, S. Cyprian, Pacianus, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and Optatus, whose words I will not here write out, to inflame the bulk of this Book, because you have them in the Archbishop of Spalato, de Rep. Eccl. 1. VII. 17-29. VIII. 8. 9. Adding onely to them, S. Ambrose de dignitate Sa∣cerdotali, cap. 1. affirming, that, in S. Peter. the Keys of the Kingdom of hea∣ven
are given to all Priests: And cap. II. speaking of the words of our Lord to S. Peter; Feede my sheepe; Quas oves, & quem gregem, non solum tunc beatus sus∣cepit Petrus, sed & nobiscum eas suscepit, & cum illo eas nos suscepimus omnes. Which sheep, and which flock, not onely S. Peter then undertook, but also he with us, and with him we all undertook them. And venerable Bede upon the words of our Lord, Tell the Church; Haec potestas sanctae Ecclesiae Episcopis specialiter commissa est, generaliter vero omni Ecclesiae data creditur. Nam quod dominus a∣libi hanc ligandi solvendi{que} potestatem Petro tribuit, uti{que} in Petro, qui typum ge∣rebat Ecclesiae, omnibus Apostolis hoc concessisse non dubitatur. The power of the Keys is committed especially to the Bishops of the Holy Church, but is believed to be given generally to every Church. For, whereas, our Lord elsewhere gives unto S. Peter this power of binding and loosing, there is no doubt that, in Peter, bear∣ing the form of the Church, he gave it to all the Apostles. Proceeding to allege S. Jerome, and S. Augustine to the same purpose. And upon the words of our Lord, Feed my sheep; Quod Petro dictum est, omnibus Christi discipulis dictum est. Hoc nam{que} fuerunt caeteri Apostoli quod Petrus fuit, pastores sunt omnes, grex unus ostenditur, qui & ab Apostolis tunc unanimi consensu pascebatur, & deincep a successoribus eorum communi curâ pascitur. That which is said to Peter, is said to all Christs Disciples. For what Peter was, that were the rest of the Apostles. They are all shepherds, but the flock appears to be but one, which, as then, it was fed by the Apostles with unanimous consent, so is it since fed by their successors with common care. These Fathers then, when they give this for the reason, why our Lord gives Peter onely the Keys of the Church, with the charge of feeding his flock; that hee bore the person and form of the Church; suppose the Church to be a body compacted of all Churches, (ruled by the same form of Govern∣ment, for the preserving of unity in the whole) as the colledge of the Apostles consisteth of so many persons indowed all with one and the same power, for whom one answers, to signifie the unity of the whole. Whereby it appeareth, first, negatively; That the Church did uot understand any Soveraign Power to be committed to S. Peter by these words: Then positively, that our Lord, speak∣ing to him alone, signifies there by the course which he hath established for pre∣serving unity in the Church; To wit, that, all Churches being governed in the same form, the greater go before the lesse in ordering maters of common con∣cernment. S. Cypriane, from whom all the rest have this doctrine, hath cleared the intent of it, when he thus writeth, Epist. ad Jubai, LXXII. Manifestum est autem ubi & per quos remissa peccatorum datur, quae in baptismo, scilicet, daur. Nam Petro primum dominus, super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam, & unde unitatis originem instituit & ostendit, potestatem istam dedit, ut id solveretur in caelis quod ipse solvisset in terris. Et post resurrectionem quo{que} ad Apostolos loquitur dicens; Sicut misit me Pater, & ego mitto vos: Hoc cum dixisset, inspiravit, & at illis; Accipite spiritum sanctum: Si cujus remiseritis peccata remittentur illi, si cujus tenueritis, tenebuntur. Unde intelligimus, non nisi in Ecclesi praepositis, & in Evan∣gelicâ lege dominica ordinatione fundatis licere baptizare, & remissam peccatorum dare. Now it is manifest, where, and by whom remission of sinnes is given, when it is given in Baptism. For, our Lord first gave to Peter (upon whom he built his Church, and in whom, and from whom he instituted and declared the original of uni∣ty in it) this power, that it should be loosed in heaven, whatsoever he had loosed on earth. And after his resurrection also, speaking to the Apostles, he saith; As my Father sent me, so send I you. And having said this he breathed on them, saying; If ye remit any mans sinnes, they shallbe remitted him; if ye retain any mans, they shall be retained. Whence we understand, that it is not lawful for any but those that are set over the Church, and grounded in the Evangelical Law, and the Ordinance of our Lord, to baptize, and give remission of sinnes. Because Peter received the Keys, therefore all and every Church, that is, those that are over it, and none else, can give remission of sinnes by admitting to Baptism. Shall we think the consequence extravagant, having so clear a ground for it; to wit, the unity of the whole Church, setled upon two ingredients, the same form in all Churches, but with dependence of the lesse upon the greater Churches? If any man say,
all this is disputed by Cypriane, to prove that Baptism given by Hereticks is void; wherein he hath been disowned by the Church; And that therefore the reasons are not well grounded from whence it is inferred: The answer is easie, because he inferrs upon them that, which, though true, they do not inforce. That a man cannot lawfully baptize, is not so much, as that, if he do baptize, his Bap∣tism is void. S. Cypriane took both for one, and therefore his reason is good, though it conclude not his purpose. Why not void, being unlawful. I refer my self to what S. Augustine since hath disputed, and the Church decreed and practised. And here you have one ground for that distinction between the Po∣wer of Order, and the Power of Jurisdiction, comparing one with another, the Bishops and Priests of several Churches, according to the original constitu∣tion of the Church. I allow S. Hierome to say, that wheresoever there is a Bi∣shop, whither at Rome, or at Eugubium (an obscure City near Rome) he is of the same worth, as of the same Priesthood, Epist. LXXXV. For, as to the in∣ward Court of the conscience, the office that is Ministred by the Bishop or Priest of a lesse Church, is no lesse effectual, then by one of a greater Church. But, as to the outward Court of the Church, supposing all Churches governed in the same form, but the Churches of lesse Cities subordinate to the Churches of greater Cities, by the appointment of the Apostles; the act of the lesse Church, of the Bishop or a Priest of it, cannot be of that consequence to the whole, as the act of the greater Church: And so, though the Bishop or the Priest of a litle Church be of the same Order with the Bishop or Priest of a great Church; yet, the authority of the one extendeth without comparison further then the authority of the other can do. And, you may perhaps dispute, whether this au∣thority produce any such as Jurisdiction or not; but, whether there be ground hereupon, to distinguish between the Order, which is the same in both, and the authority which it createth, in which there is so great difference, you cannot dispute. Certainly, the office of a Deacon in a greater Church, may be of more consequence to the whole, then many Bishops can bring to pass. As the assist∣ance of Athanasius in the office of a Deacon, to Alexander Bishop of Alexan∣dria, at the Council of Nicaea, was of more consequence to the obtaining of the decree of the Council, then the votes of many Bishops there. CHAP. XIX. Of the proceedings about Marcion and Montanus at Rome. The businesse of Pope Victor about keeping Easter; a peremptory instance. The businesse of the No∣vatians evidenceth the same. Of the businesses concerning the rebaptizing of He∣reticks, Dionysius of Alexandria, Paulus Samosatenus, S. Cypriane, and, of the Donatists under Constantine. AMongst the proceedings of the Church, I will first alledge that of the Church of Rome, in refusing Marcion her communion, because excom∣municated by his own Father the Bishop of Sinope in Pontus, in bar to the pre∣tense of Soveraignty in the Church of Rome. For, if Marcions Father, Bishop of Synope in Pontus, if Synesius Bishop of Ptolomais in Cyrenaica, could oblige the Church of Rome and all Churches, not to admit unto the communion of the Church, those whom they had excluded, because the unity of the whole could not be preserved otherwise; then is not the infinite Power of one Church, but the regular Power of all, the mean which the Apostles provided, for the attain∣ing of Unity in the whole. Not as if the Church of Rome might not have ad∣mitted Marcion to communion with it selfe, had it appeared, that he had been excluded without such a cause, as obliged any Church to excommunicate. For, in doubtful causes, the concernment being general, it was very regular to have recourse to the chief Churches, by the authority whereof, the consent of the rest might be obtained. But, could it have appeared, that such a thing had been done without any cause, then would it have been regular for any Church, to
have no regard to such a sentence. In the next place, the consideration of Mon∣tanus his businesse at Rome, there alledged, shall evidence some part of my in∣tent. Being condemned and refused by the Bishops and Churches of Asia, he sends to Rome, to sollicite a higher Church, and of more consequence to the whole, to own the spirit by which he pretended to speak, and to admit those stricter orders which he pretended to introduce. A pretense for those that would have the Pope Soveraign; but not so good as they imagine, unlesse they could make it appear, that he made the like address to no other Church but that of Rome. For my part, finding, in other occasions, frequent and plentiful re∣membrance of recourse had to other Churches, as well as to Rome, in maters of common concernment; I find it necessary, to impute the silence of his other addresses, to the scarcity of records left the Church: Not doubting that he, and the Churches of Phrygia ingaged with him, would do their utmost to promote the credit of his Prophesies, by perswading all Churches, to admit the Or∣ders which he pretended to introduce. And, how much greater the authority of the Church of Rome was, then that of an ordinary Church, so much more had he prevailed by gaining it. That no man may imagine, that all lay in it; nor yet, that the consent of it signified no more then the consent of every Church. For, consider the Church of Carthage, and the choler of Tertullian, expressed in the beginning of his Book de Exhortatione Castitulis, against Pope Aphyrine, for admitting adulterers to Penance. And, in consequence there∣unto, consider what we have upon record of Historical truth from S. Jerome, Catal. in Tertull. and the authorities quoted afore; that Tertullian, falling to the Doctrine of Montanus, upon affronts received from the Clergy of Rome, set up a communion of his own at Carthage, which continued till S. Augu∣stines time, by whom, his followers were reduced to the Catholick Church. For, what occasion had Tertullian to break from the Church of Carthage, be∣cause of the affront received from the Church of Rome, in rejecting Montanus, had not the Church of Carthage followed the Church of Rome in it? The same is the consequence of that which passed in that famous debate of Victor Pope, about breaking with the Churches of Asia, because they kept not Easter on the Lords day, as most Churches did; but, with the Jewes, observing the Passion upon the full Moon, celebrated the Resurrection of third day after that. For, might, not, or, ought not the Church of Rome, refuse to com∣municate with these Churches, had the cause been valuable? In case of Heresy, in case of any demand destructive to the unity of the Church; you will say, that, not onely the Church of Rome, but any Church whatsoever, both might and ought to disclaim the Churches of Asia. But I have to say again, that, in any such case, there is a difference between that which is questioned for such, and that which is such, and ought to be taken for such: And, that nothing can light∣ly be presumed to be such, that any Church seems to professe; But that, in redu∣cing such unavoidable debates, from questionable, to be determined, the authority the chief Churches is, by the constitution of the Church, requisite to go before, and make way towards obtaining the consent of the whole. And, that it can∣not be thought, that Victor would have undertook such a thing, had it not be∣longed to him, in behalf of his Church, to declare himself in the businesse, in case there had been cause. All this while, I would not have any man imagine, that, Victor having withdrawn his communion from the Churches of Asia, the rest of Christendom were necessarily to think themselves obliged to do the same. It is true, there were two motives that might carry Victor to do it. For, seeing the Council of Nicaea did afterwards decree the same, that he la∣boured to induce the Churches of Asia to, it is too late to dispute, whither side was in the right; For, that which was for the advancement of Christianity, at the time of that Council, was certainly for the advancement thereof, at the time of this dispute: And, though in S. Johns time it might be, and was with∣out doubt for the best, to comply with the Jews in maters of that indifference, for the gaining of opportunities to induce them to become Christians; yet,
when the breach between the Synagogue and the Church was once complete, that reason being taken away, the reason of uniformity in the Church, upon which the unity thereof so much nependeth, was to take place. And therefore a man may say, with respect to those Churches, that the zeal of their Predeces∣sors credit, seduced them into that contentiousnesse which humane frailty in∣gendreth: And those that, after the decree of the Council, persevered in the same practice, are not without cause listed among Hereticks, taking that name largely to comprehend also Schismaticks. So I allow, that Victor had just cause to insist upon his point. But it is also vident, that it would have been an in∣crease of authority and credit to Victor, and to his Church, to seeme to give law to those Churches, by reducing them to his Rule. For, reputation and credit with the world, necessarily follows those that prevail. And, Victor, being a man, as I have granted his adversaries were, might be moved with this advantage, as much as with the right of his cause. But, though I allow, that Victor had rea∣son to insist upon his opinon, yet I do no way allow that he had reason to in∣terrupt the communion of the Church, because those of Asia did not yield to it; The mater it self not being of consequence to produce such an effect, no, uniformity in all things necessary, though conducing to the unity of the Church. And therefore, I do no way allow, that other Churches could be obliged to fol∣low the Church of Rome in this sentence; the unity of the Church, which is the end, being of nearer interest and concernment to them all, then the authori∣ty of Victor, or of his Church, or then uniformity in this point, which is but the mean to obtain it. Which as it is true, so was it indeed the reason that Ire∣naeus alleged to Victor, o divert him from that resolution, in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist.▪ V. 25. 26. where you may see, that his credit, and the cre∣dit of the rest of those that held communion with both, prevailed to void those leters which Victor had issued, to break of communion with the Churches of Asia. And therefore, I cannot wish to show you better marks, both of the de∣pendence of Churches, and the superiority of the Church of Rome; and also, that this superiority was regular (and not soveraign as that of a Monarch) when the greatest of inferiour Churches have recourse and respect to it as the center of their communion; and yet do not absolutely give up themselves to yield to the authority of it, as they do to the sentence of the Council of Ni∣aea, because it could not be reasonable for the Churches of Asia to stand out with it: Whereby you see the difference, between the authority of the Pope, and the authority of a general Council. The businesse of Novatianus will not require many words, to evidence the same consequence by it. The Church of Rome it self was the seat of the busi∣nesse, and the calamity thereof, suffering a Schism within her own bowels, the occasion of it. And, I appeal to the experience of the world, whither intestine dissension do not discover the respect all men owe to their Neigbours, by the need they have of them, for the composing of it. But, not to speak of occasi∣on of advantage, but of termes of right; that Church having gotten two Heads, Cornelius and Novatianus, who was then judge, which side ought to be accounted the Church of Rome, o that, the other party should be obliged to submit and joyn with it? For, had it been a Law that obliged the whole Church, that those who had fallen away in time of persecution, be not admitted to Pe∣nance, and, by consequence to the communion, any more; (which was the motive and ground, why Novatianus was made Bishop against Cornelius) cer∣tainly, the rest of the Church must have acknowledged Novatianus, who main∣tained it, not Cornelius who waved it; Notwithstanding that Cornelius was made by sixteen Bishops of the then resort of that Church, Novatianus but by three. For, though the Canon of the Apostles, requiring onely three Bishops, or two at least, to the ordaining of a Bishop▪ may very well seem to be the an∣cienter custome in the Church, then the IV Canon of Nicaea, which provideth, that it be done by the consent of all the resort, either present, or, under their hands, referring themselves to three that are present; yet is it plain, that the
act of three, o two at least, was accepted upon presumption of the consent of the rest, an  dispatch of businesse, because Ordinations would otherwise have been nronbly troublesome. But, this Canonicall advantage of Cor∣nelius▪ his cuse could no have wayed against the Novatians plea, had it been inded a  ds Law to the whole Church, that Apostates be not read∣itted o ▪ For this, not onely the Novatians stood upon, but after∣wards,   persution of Diocletian, the Meletians fell away from the  o other quarrel, as you may see by Epiphanius, Haer. LXVIII. In th , the Authority of the rest of the Church must have over∣sway▪  of the reort of the Church of Rome, the greatest part wh  for Cornelius. And, because it was a point hitherto not decide▪  questionble in the Church, therefore it comes to the sen∣tence ▪ Now it is a question, not to be answered by those who make  of the Church of Rome, Monarch over the whole, how then th  giving Law to that Church, should depend on other Churches, as here  i doth. For, the common interet of Christianity, whether in mater o  is the ground of the dispute, or in the unity of the Church,  calleth in question, is that which makes the Novatians, whi∣ther  Shismaticks, not acknowledging Cornelius, after that he was aknowle  y the rest of the Church. And, for this cause it is, that the Churh o ochia (that is, the Synode whereof that Church was the He)  a return from the Church of Rome, for the favour they did it in ▪ Cornlus, which they made great difficulty to do a great while, as you  by that which I related in the first Book. For, supposing that  of Antiochia did no more in the businesse then right required; yet,  goes, he that hath right done him, may well acknowlge him∣selfe  that doth him right. In the mean time, S. Cypriane, and the Chur ▪ with the dependences of it, declare for Cornelius from the  , with his Church of Alexandria, and the dependences there  normation, are wonne to their side: Neither could Fabi∣us, an  Chres that resorted to Antiochia have stood out, without great mischie   whole: And therefore, what thanks soever they may deserve of the Church  Rome, for doing their duty in such a distresse of it; Who can say, that the Sovaign Power of the Church of Rome, obliged them to make it So∣veraign, de facto, (which, being divided, de jure, it was not) when it is so evident, that the unity o the Church obliged them, each in their several ranks, to con∣cur to that means which God had provided for the maintenance of it, by estab∣lishing the Church of Rome in the first place? In the businesse that ell out about rebaptizing Hereticks that returned to the Church, when we see the Church of Rome alone ingaged against the Churches of Africk▪ and o the East both, (for, you must remember what I observed a∣fore, that, thoe who made the mot difficulty in disowning Novatianus, were the same that stood for rebaptizing Hereticks, with the African Churches on their side) we are ound to presume, that many and great Churches depended upon it, to wigh against so great a consent as opposed it? For, in point of fact, it is evident, that it was the consent of the geatest part, that obliged the rest to joyn with it: And, in point of right, the presumption i peremptory, that the greatest part ould not agree to determine against Gods Law, but walked with∣in those bounds which God had confined his Church with. We are not then to marvail so much at the heats which passed between Stephen, Bishop of Rome, on one side, and S. Cprian or Cartage, and Firmilianus, chief Bishop of Pontus, on the other side. or it is evident, that they referred not themselves to Stephens opinion concerning Gods Law, whose successors are now pretended infallible; And yet, did refer themselves to the judgement of the whole Church, depart∣ing from their rigour in consideration of it. In the mean time, it must not be neglected, that Rome, having Dionysius of Alexandria to side with it, was able to weigh against so great a consent; Which giveth no leave to abate any thing
of the regular pre-eminence of it above other Churches. But, when we see, that neither Rome prevailed, that no Hereticks should be rebaptized, nor the adverse party, that all; but, an abatement is made by the Council of Nicaea, in rebaptizing Samosatenians; of Laodicea, in rebaptizing Motanists; by the Churches of Africk, (the practice whereof Optatus relateth) in rebaptizing Sa∣bellians (to say nothing of other Rules mentioned in the first Book) did they take, shall we say, the breast of the Pope for the cener of infallibility in the Church; and the voice of the whole Church for evidence of Tradition from the Apostles, or the sentence thereof to be without appeal in maters not determined by it? Neither will I passe by that litle that we have upon record in the case of Dio∣nysius of Alexandria, complained of to Dionysius of Rome, as inclining to that which was afterwards the Heresy of Arius, in things that he had written against Sabellius; Without observing, (not, as most do, that, in so great▪ a case, recourse is had to the Church of Rome, and to no Church besides it) but that there is no remembrance left, of any recourse had to other Churches, when as there is re∣membrance of the recourse that was had to the Church of Rome, in it. For, i appeareth by the course that was held in other cases, that the ordinary way was, to communicate maters concerning the common interest, with as many Chur∣ches as there was convenience to do; As, expecting reress by their conur∣rence and assistance. And therefore, I count it ridiculous to suppose, that a a∣ter of so great concernment, was not referred to any but the Bishop of Rome, because it is not recorded of any besides it. For what reason or sense is there to expect, tht, when we are so scned of records in the first ages of the Church, we should ind, in every particular businesse, remembrance of that which was alwayes done? But when in this, as in all other cases which I have touched, you find recourse alwayes had to the Church of Rome, but very little or no menti∣on of other Churches, (in the West especially, though concerned in the ma∣ter as much as it) shall we not take it for an argument, that they usually refer∣red themselves to the Church of Rome, expecting satisfaction in their common interests, from the trust which they reposed in it? In the mater of Samosatenus, there are two passages, expresly signifying the two chief points of my position. Read the leter of the Synod, giving account of their proceedings to all Churches, and tell me who can have the confidence to maintain, that the force of their sentence depended onely upon the Popes allowance? It is true, the leter is written, on purpose to obtain the consent of other Churches, by giving them account of their proceedings. For, they did no presume of the justice of them, upon any visible circumstance of the per∣sons, place, maner or form in which they were assembled, This they expected from the mater and ground of their sentence, and the way of proceeding to it. But, when the same account that is given to Rome, is given to other Churches, evry one as they were of consequence to the Whole; neither can the appro∣btion of one be supposed to oblige the Whole, nor doth any thing hinder it to be held for the Head or prime part of the Whole, and of most consequence to sway the resolution of the whole; in which, the presumption that the sen∣tence is according to right becometh compleat, But when the seculr Power is called upon to give execution to it by the force of this World; Aureliane the Emperour suspendeth his proceeding upon the resolution of Rome and Italy: Whereby he sheweth, that these were held to be of most regard and consequence in maters that concerned the whole. For, seeing Aureliane, at that time ha∣ving a good opinion of Christians (whom a while after he persecuted) deter∣mined to do them a favour in quiting their differences by way of right; it can∣not be imagined, that he would take a course which they should refuse, but such as the order of the Church, established before, did require. And therefore, the allowance of the Bishops of Rome and Italy, is expressed for a just presumption, that an act done by such a Synod, and afterwards acknowledged by them, could not be disowned by the rest of the Church. In the mean time, when he names the Bishops of Rome and Italy, I must not omit an opinion that hath been pub∣lished
many years since, because it seems considerable. The ground whereof is this; That Sex: Aurelius Victor, Epit. in Adrian, reports, that, the Govern∣ment of the Romane Empire, which was afterwards established by Constantine, was first moulded and framed, in the most materiall points of it, by Adriane. Whereupon it becomes probable, that, when Aureliane refers himselfe to the judgement of the Bishop of Rome and Italy, the meaning is, to the Bishops of Rome and Milane, and the rest of those Churches that resorted unto Rome and Milane, as the chief Churches upon which they depended. For, that, after Con∣stantine, Milane was the Head of all the rest of those Provinces of Italy that reorted not to the Church of Rome, it is so manifest, that I will not trouble the Reader with proving it here again: There are, besides, some cases mentioned in S. Cyprians Epistles, of great force, to clear the terms, upon which the unity of the Church subsisted, as well as the being and constitution of it, which, some of them have been already alleged to evidence▪ Basilides, Bishop of Asturica in Spain, convicted of Apostasy in per∣secution, to the worship of Idols, was deposed by the Bishops of those quarters, and another setled in his stead. He repairs to Stephen Bishop of Rome, to ob∣tain, by false information and favour, his sentence, to restore or to confirm him. S. Cyprian excuses Stephen as circumvented, blaming him th ▪did it, but not for going to Rome, or seeking to be restored by that means. For, to say truth, he must have blamed the contrary party, that had recourse to Carthage, seeking to maintain what they had done, by the sentence of the Church of Car∣thag, which that LXVIII. Epistle caries, as well for Martialis, Bishop, it seems, of Emerita in Spain, as Basilides, whom for the like crime, he judges unworthy to hold his Bishoprick. Again, Martianus, Bishop of Arles, adhered to No∣vatiaus, as S. Cyprian was informed by the Bishop of Lions. Hereupon he writes to Stephen at Rome, to write into Gaul, for the deposing of Marcianus, and the settling of another in his stead, Epist. LXVII. Again, Felicissimus and Fortunas, Presbyters of the Church of Carhage, under S. Cyprian, with others, to the number of five, having made a party to restore those that were fallen a∣way in persecution, contrary to the resolution of the Church, which had refer∣red it to a Council, as we learn by S. Cyprian, Epist. XXXVIII. & XL. with For∣tunatus, a Bishop of this party, betaking themselves to Rome, are first refused by Cornelius; but, upon appearance of a party in his Church for them, put him to a stand. In this case S. Cyprian, writing his LV. Epistle, acknowledges the Church of Rome the seat of S. Peter, and the principal Church, whence, the unity of the Priesthood was sprung; but maintaines, that every Bishop hath a portion of Christs flock assigned him to govern, upon his account to Christ: And therefore, that causes are to be ended where they rie, and the good intelligence between Bishops, ought not to be interrupted by carying causes abroad to be judged a∣gain. Is not all this true, supposing the case? For, who cn chuse but blame a schismaticall attempt? But, could any man hinder Basilides and Martialis from seeking the Church of Rome, had their cause been good, seeing their adverse pa∣ty did, and might seek to foain Churches? Was it not necessary to seek both to Carthage and to Rome, for the freeing of the Church of Arles under Marci∣nus, from communion with the Novatians? Here, I coneive, lies the truth. Some causes of necessity have recourse to the Church of Rome; to wit, such as necessarily concern the whole Church, either in the faith, or, in the unity of it. Such was the cause of Marcianus, which could not be ended but by the same consent which cast the Novatians out of the Church. Was the cause of Basi∣lides and Martialis of the same weight; was it not meerly personal, and concr∣ning mater of fact, whither they had indeed sacrificed to Idols, or not; no question remaining in point of right, that such could not be Bishops? yet, could not the Bishops of Spain over-rule the Bishop of Rome, not to receive infor∣mation from the aggrievd. Their way was, to have recourse to other Churches, the consent whereof might out-way the Church of Rome, together with the goodnesse of the cause. And the Church of Carthage must have done the same, had Felicissimus and Fortunatus found reception at Rome, and credit to
balnce their cause against S. Cyprian, and the African Church. So that, causes of Faith necessarily concerning the whole Church, whensoever they rendr the peace thereof questionable; those that, for their weight, do not concern he whole, will concern it, when they render the peace thereof questionable. And, so long as Law provideth not bounds to determine, what causes shall be ended at home in the parts where they rise; what cause is there that may not be pre∣tended to concern the whole; and, by consequence, the Church of Rome; which being the principal Church, what cause, concerning the whole, can end without it? He that admits not this supposition, consting in the regular pre-eminence, denying the unlimited Power of the Church of Rome over other Churches, will never give a reason, why recourse is alwayes had to the Church of Rome; and yet, if the cause require, to other Churches, to ballance it. The unity of the Church, and communion with it, is the thing that is ought: The consent of the greatest Churches, (that of Rome in the  place) is the meanes to ob∣tain it. This businesse therefore is much of kin to that of the Donatists triall under Constantine, when they petitioned the secular Power, that they might be heard by the Bishops of Gaul, intimating, the reason vvhy they declined the Bishops of Italy to be; because they might be tainted with falling away; or shuffling, in the perecution of Diocletian, which they charged their adverse party in Africk with, because they expresse this for the ground of their Petition, in Optatus I. that, under Constantius, there had been no persecution in Gal. Here I must pass by the consideration of any thing that may concern the dispute between secular and Ecclesiasticall Power, as not concerning this place. But, when Constantine, by his answer, assigns them for Judges, the Bishops of Rome and Milane, with such and such of their suffraganes, joyning with them the Bishops of Collen, Au∣tun, and Arles in Gaul, to satisfie them, it is plain, that he refuses them to trans∣gresse; that respect, which the constitution of the Church challenged for the Churches of Rome and Milane; that such causes as concerned the unity of the Church in the Western parts of the Empire, should be determined, (not by the Pope alone, no the Church of Rome alone, but) by the Churches of Rome and Milane, as the chief Churches of that part of the Empire; the Church of Rome alwayes in the first place. On the other side, when the Donatists, not satis∣fied with their sentence, petition the Emperour again, that it may be review'd, and the Emperour adjourns them for a second triall to a Council at Arles; it is plain, that hee allowes them not an appeal from the former sentence, because, many of those that were Judges in the former Synod, did vote in the later Sy∣nod: But it is as plain, that the parties then held not the Popes judgement (either alone, or in Council) unquestionable, unlesse all were madd, in preten∣ding to give either check or strength to that sentence which was originally un∣questionable. If therefore, a sentence given by the Pope in a Council of Italy, which some Gaulish Bishops joyned thereunto, might be revised in a fuller Council of Gaulish Bishops, with the concurrence of many others, as well Italian and Spanish, (to say nothing of three from Britaine, the first unquestion∣able record of the British Churches) is it not manifest, that Euclids axiome, that the whole is greater then any part of it; takes place in the Church, as well as the words of S. Jerome, Orbis major est Ʋrbe, that the world is greater then the City of Rome? Surely if S. Austine, Ep. CLXII. say well, that the Donatists might have appealed to a General Council, had they been justly grieved by the sentence at Rome; his saying will hold, if they had been grieved by the Coun∣cil of Arles, though concluding the Western Church: But it will hold also of the Council of Arles, that it had been madnesse to call it, had not the generali∣ty thereof extended, to conclude the Western Church, further then the former at Rome, though the cause came not to it by appeal.
CHAP. XX. Of the constitution and authority of Councils. The ground of the pre-eminences of Churches in the Romane Empire. The VI. Canon of the Council of Nicaea. The pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, and that of Constantinople. Some in∣stances against the superiority of Bishops, out of the records of the Church; what offices every Order by Gods Law, or by Canon Law, ministreth. HEre, the next consideration for time being that of the Council of Nicaea; the VI Canon whereof first limited by written Law, the pre-eminences of Churches in the Empire, having taken place by custome before; I will not repeat that ground for Councils, and for their authority, which I have laid in the first Book; nor bound the right of Civil and Ecclesiasticall Power in giving force to the acts of them, which I reserve for the end of this third Bood. But, to e∣vidence the constitution of them, from whence, their authority in the Church must proceed; I maintain here from the premises, that the originall constitu∣tion of the Church, determineth the person of the Bishop, to represent his re∣spective Church in Council: And, that the constitution of Councils, consist∣ing of Bishops, representing their respective Churches, evidenceth the authori∣ty of Bishops in the same; Which produceth the effect of obliging, either the whole Church, or that part which the Council representeth, by the consent of Votes. The act of the Council of Jerusalem under the Apostles, Act. XV. was respective to the Churches of Jerusalem and Antiochia, with those which were planted from thence, by Paul and Barn, made by an authority sufficient to oblige the whole Church. The El concurred to the vote with the Apostles, those that will be so ridicul for Lay Elders of Presbyters; But will never tell us, how the V Elders should ob∣lige the Church of Antiochia, and the plantations y were the Elders, who, joyned with the Apostles, (from whom they could not be dis-joyned) were able to oblige the whole Church. And indeed, there is no mention of them in the acts of chusing Matthias, and the seven Deacons, Acts I. VI. which acts concerned the whole Church. And therefore, there is appearance, that, the au∣thority which they alwayes had, in respect of the Church to be constituted, was by that time known to be limited, by the allowance and consent of the Apostles. But, when I granted, that S. Paul seems to allow both the Romanes and the Corinthians, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, as Gods creatures; I did not grant, that his authority could derogate from the act of the Apostles: But, that the act of the Apostles was not intended for the Churches represented at the doing of it. As that which was done, Act. XXI. how great soever the authority might be that did it, seems to extend no further then the occasion in hand. That which remains, then, in the Scriptures, agreeth perfitly well with the o∣riginal practice of the whole Church. It cannot be denied, that there are here and there, in the records of the Church, instances evidencing the sitting of Pres∣byters in Council, which, I deny not, must needs import the priviledge of vo∣ting. But, the reason of their appearing there, appears so often to be particu∣lar, by commission from their Bishops, and, to supply their absence, that, there is no means in the world to darken this evidence for the superiority of Bishops. For, can it possibly be imagined, that the Bishop should alwaies represent his Church in all Councils, without choice, or other act to depute him, were he no more then the first of the Presbyters? Is it not evident, that the whole Church alwaies took him for the person, without whom, nothing could be done in the Church; which, whither in Council, or out of Council, never dealt with his Church but by him, alwayes with his Church by his means? Now, for the authority of Councils thus constituted; though, for peace sake, and because an end must be had, the resolution of all Councils must come from number of Votes, which swayes the determinations of all Assemblies; yet there is, there∣upon, a respect to be had to the Provinces or parts of the Church, which those
that vote do represent, unlesse we will impute it to blame, to those that suffer wrong, if they submit not themselves to the determinations of those, whom themselves have more right to oblige. This consideration resolves into the grounds of the dependence of lesse Churches upon greater Churches, all stand∣ing in the likelihood of propagating Christianity out of greater Cities into the lesse, and of governing the Church in unity, by submitting lesse residences to greater, rather then on the contrary. Which is such a principle, that all men of capacity will acknowledge, but all would not stand convict of, had not the Church admitted it in effect from their founders, before they were convict of the effect of it by humane foresight. Upon this supposition, the Church cannot properly be obliged by the plurality of Bishops, who all have right to vote in Council; but, by the greatnesse and weight of the Churches for whom they serve, concurring to a vote. And hereof there be many traces in the Histories of the Church, when they mention the deputation of some few Bishops, repre∣senting numerous Provinces, which, for distance of place, or other peremptory hinderances, could not be present, to frequent as others. For, can this be a rea∣sonable cause, why they should be obliged by the votes of those who were present in greater number? The true reason, why the decrees of Councils have not alwaies had, nor ought alwayes to have the force and effect of definitive sentences, but of rong prejudices, to sway the consent of the whole: Because there was never any Council so truly Generall, that all parts concerned were represented, by number of Voes, proportionable to the interesse of the Chur∣ches for whom they serve; For, certainly, greater is the interest of greater Churches. Which case, whenoever it comes to passe, those that are not con∣tent, have reason to allege, that they are not to be tied by the vote of others, but by their own consent. And therefore, the nnity of the Church requireth, that there be just presumption, upon the mater of decrees, that they will be ad∣mitted by those who concurre not to them, as no lesse for their good, then for the good of the rest of the Church. In the mean time, the pretense of the Popes infinite Power remaines inconsistent with the very pretene of calling a Council. For, why so much trouble, to obtain a vote, that shall signifie nothing without his consent, his single sentence obliging no lesse? These are the grounds of that Aristocraty, in which the Church was originally governed, by the constitution of the Apostles; (unlesse we will think, that a constant order, vible in all the proceedings there∣of, could have come from the voluntary consnt of Christendom, not prevent∣ed by any obligation, and drawing every part of it, towards their severall inte∣rests) which makes the obligation of Councils, and their decrees, harder to be obtained; but, when once obtained, more firm and sure; as, not tending to destroy the originall way of maintaining Unity, by the free correspondence and consent of those who are concerned; but, to shorten the trouble of ob∣taining it. And, if this were understood by the name of the Hierarchy, why should not the simplicity of Apostolical Christianity own it? Now, because the greatnesse of Churches depended, by the ground laid, upon the greatnesse of the Cities, which was in some sor ambulatory, till it was set∣led by the rule of the Empire, begun by Adriane, and compleated by Constan∣tine; my meaning will neither be clear nor evident, unlesse  limite the greatness of Churches, by such degrees as took place afterwards, when Constantine, ha∣ving put the civill Government of the Empie under some Praefectis Prtorio, (whom we may call in English, Masters of his Palace) appointed every one of them several Lieutenants in their severall quarters: As him of Gaul, (to speak of the West, which concern us most) one in Britain, one in Gaul, and one in Spain: Him of Italy, one at Rome, one at Milane, and one at Carthage, in Africk, which was laid to that Government: Him of the East, one at Alexan∣dria, for Aegypt, one at Antiochia, for that quarter which was properly called the East of the Empire, one at Casarsa for Pontus, one at Ephess for Asia, and one at Constantinople for Thrace: And him of Illyricum, one for the East of it at Thessalonica, one for the West of it at Sirmium. For, every one of these
Lieutenants, having under his disposition, a certain mass or number of Provin∣ces; and every one of these Provinces a certain chief City, (the seat of the civill Government, as well as the chief Church of the Province) and the resi∣dences of the Lieutenants themselves, being the resorts of the appeals out of the Provinces, the Rule of the Church remains setled by the subject of it; the Churches of the Head Cities of every Diocese, (so theycalled that Mass of Provinces which was allotted to each Lieutenant) challenging a regular pre-e∣minence over the Churches of the chief Cities of other Provinces, as they over the Churches of ordinary Cities, within the same Province. But, as it would be ridiculous to attribute these pre-eminences to the secular Power, because it createth the civill pre-eminences of the Cities, and not to the Church, which, presupposing the act of civill Power, cast it selfe into the like fom; (for the same rule was in force, when the Empire, enemy to the Church, did nothing in it) So, I shall challenge all men that have their senses exercised to discern of such maters, to judge, whither all Christians could have agreed of their own heads, to yeeld these pre-eminences, had they not found the rule delivered them by the Apostles to require it. For, it is manifest, that, from the beginning, a∣fore Constantine, there was respect had to the pre-eminence of Churches, pro∣portionably to the greatnesse of their Cities, in the Government of the Em∣pire; The instances of Rome, Alexandria, Aniochia, Ephesus, Corinth, Thes∣salonica, Csarea, Carthage Milane, Lions, and others, as others come to be mentioned in the records of the Church, not admitting any visible exception to a rule so originally, so generally, so evidently received. Therefore, as for that plea, which the Church of Rome advanceth so farre beyond reason and measure, of S. Peters Headship by divine right, of his sit∣ting last at Rome, before at Antiochia, and by his Deputy S. Mark at Alexan∣dria, as if all the Churches of Asia, Africk, and Europe, were, by this means, of his lot; if we take it as it sounds, it will appear a contradiction to the light of common reason, that the Church of Rome should have that pre-eminence by being the seat of the first Apostle, to which other Churches have nothing pro∣portionable, by having been the seats of other Apostles. For, had there not been more in the case, that which Epiphanius, Haer. LXX. saith; That, had the controversie about keeping Easter, risen before the removing of the Church of Jerusalem to Pella, at the beginning, under the Apostles, it must have resorted thither; must have taken place alwayes: That is, the Church of Jerusalem, which was, at the first, the seat of all the Apostles, must have been for ever the chiefe Church. But, if we suppose, that the Apostles order was, the greatest Churches to be those of the greatest Cities; we give a reason of the greatnesse of the Church of Rome, from the priviledge, not of S. Peter alone, but of S. Peter as the chief Apostle, and as S. Paul, as him that laboured most, when they, upon that agreement, made choice of Rome for their seat, and the exercise of their Apostleship. But, that the Church of Alexandria, (the priviledges whereof never extended beyond the Diocese of the Governour of Aegypt, Lieutenant in that quarter) should have right over all the Churches of Africk; that the Church of Antiochia (the priviledges whereof were never visible beyond the Diocese of the East) should have right over all the Churches of Asia, by S. Peters Headship, (and yet Alexandria, where he never sat but in and by S. Mark, before Antiochia, where he sat in person seven years) is such a devise, as nothing but prejudice and faction can make probable. For the right, then, of summoning and ordering Councils, if we speak of Provincial Councils, it is manifestly in the Bishop of the Mother City, which, succession hath called the Archbishop▪ If of a greater resort, in the first Bishop of a Diocese, cal∣led since the Primate; If it were gathered out of severall Dioceses, (whereof we have an instance in that of Antiochia against Samosatenus, out of Pontus and Asia, as well as the East) it is to be ascribed to the authority of the greatest and next Bishop, concurring to quench the fire in their neighbour Church, as Fir∣milianus of Caesarea, and Macarius of Jerusalem, were presidents in that of Antio∣chia. For, though the priviledges of the Church were setled upon the form of the
Empire; yet, it seemeth, thre was alwayes an exception for that of Jerusa∣lem, (as having been the Mother Church before the Rule was to take place) not onely by the Canon of Nicaa, which now I come to, but by the act of Chalce∣don, which made it absolute within certain quarters, utterly exempted from Antiochia, by a concordate confirmed in Council. The Canon of Nicaea, which I spoke of, is thought to have been made upon occasion of the Schism of Meletius in Aegypt, which had with-drawn the Chur∣ches there from their obedience to Alexandria; For it orders, that the anci∣ent rights thereof be maintained, as also those of Antiochia, (with an excepti∣on for Jerusalm, saving the respect due to the Mother Sea of Caesarea) be∣cause the Church of Rome also hath the like priviledge over these Churches, which Ruffins, in his Histories of the Church, translates Suburbicarias. This Transltion hath occasioned many Books, to show, what were these Ecelesiae subbicariae, whereof, it seems, there are but three meanings possible. There was then a overnour of the City of Rome, to whom resorted all appeals from the Magistrates of the City, and within a hundred miles; all which Country be∣ing comprised in one title of Regiones suburbicariae; there is an opinion, that the Churches of that Precinct, by the name of Ecclesiae suburbicariae, were then of the Popes Jurisdiction, and they alone. Another conceit may be, that urbs in the ivative suburbicariae, is opposed to Orbis, and all Churches in the World, bjcted by the Canon to the Church of Rome, as all Cities were to Rome. Wih  for nothing. For, what Jurisdiction had any civill Magistrate that govrnd Rome over other Cities, without the Precinct o it? And yet, shall we be so iulous; the Canon describing the priviledges of the Church, of Rome, by those of Alexandria, which extended as far as the Government of Aegyp, o confine those of the prime Church of the Empire, within the ? I suppose, therefore, they have farre the best cause, who suppose  to be called Regiones suburbicariae, which were under the Lieutenant of Rome, in oppotion to the Lieutenant of Italy, resident a Milane, having un∣der him seven of those Provinces, into which that Government was then divi∣ded: In which regard, the other ten Provinces, which were under the Lieute∣nant of the City resident at Rome, are properly called Suburbicariae, though prt of them were the Isles of Sicilia, Sardinia, and Corsica &c. And here lies the greatest question, nothing else bearing water in my judgement. For, by this Canon, ll the right and title of the Church of Rome is to be measured by the right o any one of those Churches, which were the Heads of Dioceses; (taking Dioceses for the residences of Lieutenants) all which are to be sup∣poed equall in power, granting onely Rome the precedence, which all Order requies. For, what right can the Church of Rome challenge, which this Ca∣non acknowleges not? Is it right or wrong, which the decree of the whole Church alloweth not? Strongly argued, I confess; which, notwithstanding, I am not satisfied with. For, the intent of the Ganon, being to setle the lights of Alexandria, is satisfied, by rehearsing the like rights in the Churches of Rome and Antiochi, which, by supposing, as in force of old, it setleth for the future. But, is this to declare and limite the Title thereof, in regard of the rest, especi∣ally for the Western Church, which the Councill had no occasion to meddle with? Judge first, by that which appears. In the greatest concernments of the Church, concerning Montanus, concerning the keeping of Easter, concerning the cause of the Novatians, of rebaptizing Hereticks, of Paulus Samosatenus, of the Donatists, of Dionysius Alexandrinus; In fine, concerning those which I mentioned out of S. Cyprians Epistles. What one Church can there be na∣med, to the concurrence whereof, the like respect hath been had, in things con∣cerning the Faith and Unity of the Whole, as that of Rome? For that which follows, I think there remains no dispute, the priviledges thereof still increa∣sing, as well by the acts of Councils, as by custome and use. And, of that I must demand a reason, how they should come to be cast upon one, had there not been, from the beginning, a stock of Title, exclusive to any other of the greatest Churches (acknowledging the order of the Apostles to have provided
no further, then, that the Churches of the chiefe Cities should be the chiefe Churches, leaving the rest to the Church, upon consideration of the State of the World, to determine.) One particular I must insist upon, for the eminence of it. I have already mentioned the generall Councils, whereof, how many can be counted General, by number of present votes? The authority of them then, must arise from the admitting of them by the Western Churches; And this admission, what can it can it be ascribed to, but the authority of the Church of Rome, eminently in∣volved above all the Churches of the West, in the summoning and holding of them, and by consequence, in their decrees? And indeed, in the troubles that passed between the East and the West, from the Councill of Nica, though the Western Churches have acted by their Representatives, upon eminent occasions, in great Conncils; (as the Churches of Britaine had their Bishops, at the I. Council of Arles, at the Councils of Sarica, and of Ariminum) in other occasions, they may justly seem to referre themselves to that Church, as resolving to regulate themselves by the acts of it; So that S. Jerome might very well name Rome and the West, as the same paty, in his LXXVII. Epistle; Hae∣reticum me cum Occidente, haereticum cum Aegypto, hoc est, cum Damaso Pe∣tro{que} condemnent. Let them condemn me for an Heretick, with the West, and with Aegypt; that is, with Damasus, Bishop of Rome, and Peter, Bishop of Alex∣andria. And, against Viginus, he calls the Western Churches the Churches of the Apostolick See. So S. Basil calls the Bishop of Rome, , The Crown of the West, Epist. X. and S. Austine cont. Jul. Pelag. I. 2. Puto ti∣bi eam partem Orbis sufficere debere, in quâ primum Apostolorum suorum voluit dominus glorioso Martyrio coronare. Cui Ecclesiae praesidentem Beatum Inocentiu si audire voluisses—I conceive, that part of the world should serve your turn, in which, it pleased God to Crown with a glorious Martyrdom, the first of his Apo∣stles. The President of which Church, blessed Innocent, if you would have heard—He supposes Innocent, being over the Church of Rome, to be over the Western Church. In the Council of Ephesus, S. Cyril threatens John of Jerusalem, that, those who will have communion with the West, must submit to the sentence of the Synod at Rome, against Nestorius, Part. I. cap. XXI. the leter of Pope Aga∣tho to the Emperour in the VI. General Council, Act. IV. supposes the Synods of the Lombards, Slaves, Frankes, Gothes, and Britaines, to belong to the Sy∣nod of Rome, and that the Council was to expect account of them from it. No otherwise, then, to the leter of the Synod of Rome, to the second Generall Council, ninety Bishops of Italy and Gaul concurred, according to Theodoret. And Cornelius in S. Hieromes Catalogue, writ to Flavianus Bishop of Antio∣chia, from the Synods of Rome, Gaul, and Africk. Whereby it may appear, how the Western Churches alwayes went along with that of Rome. Which, though it give not the Church of Rome that priviledge over the Churches of eight Di∣oceses, which, the canons of Nicaea do confirm to the Bishops of Alexandria, over the Diocese of Aegypt, and the Church of Antiochia, over the Eastern Diocses; yet, necessarily argueth a singular pre-eminence in it over them all, in regard whereof, he is stiled Patriarch of the West, during the regular Go∣vernment of the Church; and, being so acknowledged by King James of excellent memory, in his leter to the Cardinall of Perrn, may justly charge them to be the cause of dividing the Church, that had rather stand divided then own him in that quality. But, granting the Church of Rome to be regularly the seat of the chiefe Patriarch, (for so he is stiled in the Council of Chalcedon, Act. III. so the Emperour Justine calls Hormisdas, so Justinian calls the Bi∣shop of Rome, Nov. CIX. And the VI Council, Act. XVIII. counts five seats of Patriarchs: And if Gregory, Epist. XI. 54. acknowledge Spain to have no Patriarch, and Innocent III. C. grave de Praeb. & dignit. C. antiqua, de Privil. count but four, it is because they would make the Pope more then a Patriarch) it will neverthelesse be questionable, how fare it injoyes the same rights throughout the West; or rather unquestionable, that he did no consecrate all the iops of the West, as he of Alexandria did all the Bishops of Egypt▪ and
he of Antiochia, all those of the Eastern Diocese. On the other side, it will be unquestionable, that all causes that concen the whole Church, are to resort to it. And, if Innocent I. mean none but those, when he sayes, that they are excep∣ted from the Canon of Nicaea, that forbids appeals, Epist. ad Victricium Ro∣thm. He sayes nothing but that which the constitution of the Church justifies. Bt the cases produced before out of S. Cypriane, show, that there was muh lft for custo to determine. Nay, rules of discipline, which, in my opinon, the good of the whole Church then requird, that they should be common to all the West, re of this rank; no could any of then ever oblige the West, without the Bishop of Rome. But, that he alone should give rules to ty all the West, may have had a regular beginning, from voluntary references, of Hime∣rius Bishop of Farracona in Spain, to Syricius, of Exuperius Bishop of Tolou∣se, and Victricius of Roven to Innocentius, but argues not that it is the origi∣nall right of that Church; But, that it hath increased by custome, to that height, as to help to make up a claime for that infinite power which I deny, in stead of that regular Power which I acknowledge. Judge now by reason, suppo∣sing the obligation upon all, of holding unity in the Church; and, the dependance of Churches the mean to compass it. For, this will oblige us to part here with the Parallel of the Empire, which, having a Soveraign upon earth, will require the Ministers of thereof, immediate or subordinate, to be of equall power in e∣quall rights, Praefects, Lieurenants, and Governours. But, the Head of the Church being in heaven; and, his Body on earth, being to be maintained in Unity, by an Aristocraty, of Superiours and Inferiours; whither was it accor∣ding to the intent of those who ordered the pre-eminence of greater Churches, tht, that the Church of the greatest City should be equall in power to the head Churches of o her Dioceses; Or, that the general reason should take place between them all, an eminence of power following their precedence in ranck? So that, whensoever it become requisite to limite this generality by positive constitutions, the pre-eminence, of right, to fall upon one, exclusively to ohers? Surely, though we suppose, that all Christendom, of their free consent, agreed in this Order, yet must we needs argue, from the uniformity of it, that it must needs come fro the ground setled by the Apostles. For it is manifest, that the rights of the head Churches of Provinces, had a beginning, beyond the me∣mory of all records of the Church, which testifie the being of them, at the time of all businesse which they relate; That the head Churches of Diocesses were not advanced in a moment, by the act of the Empie; but moulded asore, as t were, and prepared to receive that impression of regular eminence, over in∣feriou Churches, which the act of the State should stampe the Cities with, over inriour Cities; yet cannot be maintained, that the greatest respect was and is by the Apostles act to be given to the greatest Churches (that is, the Churches of greaest Cities) and yet, that the riledges necessarily accruing by positive con∣stitution, might as justly have been placed upon the head Church of any Diocess, as upon that of Rome. I know I have no thanks for this of the Romanists; (for, as S. Paul syes, How shall I serve God, and please men both, in such a diffe∣rence as this?) but, seeing the canon of Nicaea doth necessarily confine the Church of Rome to a regular Power; is it not a great signe of truth that those things which appear in the proceedings of the Church, do concur to evidence a ground for the Rule of it; inferring that pre-eminence which the Churches of Alexandria and Antiochia cannot have, but, the beginning of the canon, esta∣blishing ancient custome, settleth? Let us see some of those proceedings. After the Council of Nicaea, the Arians, (having Eusbius of Nicomedia for their Head) desire to be heard at Rome by Pope Julius in Council, concerning their proceedings against Athanasius. Here, shall I believe, as some learned men conjecture, that Pope Julius s meerly an Arbitrato named by one part, y whom the other could not refuse; and that any Bishop, or at least any Primate might have been named, and must have been admitted, as well as he? Truly, I cannot; considering, that, their hope being to winne themselves credit by his sentence; I must needs think, that they addresse themselves to him, by
whose sentence they might hope to draw the greatest prejudice on their own side. It cannot be denyed indeed, that whereas, in a case of that moment, the last resort is necessarily to the whole Church, whither in council, or by reference; by referring themselves, they brought upon their cause that prejudice, which necessarily lights upon all those that renounce the award of the Arbitrators whom they have referred themselves to, in case they stand not to the sen∣centence. But, though they had not been chargeable with this, had they not re∣ferred themselves; yet must they needs have been judged by the Bishop of Rome, among the rest of the Church, and in the first place; and, his sentence must needs weigh more towards the sentence of the whole Church, then the sen∣tence of any other Arbitrator could have done. For, let me ask in the mean time, is this an appeal to Pope Julius, or to him and his Council? let the sequee judge. For, he that condemns the Arians for not appearing at the Council which they had occasioned; he that condemns the Council of Antiochia, (at the dedication of the golden Church, presently after, where they were present) for revereing the Creed of Nicaea, and condemning S. Athanasius, notwithstan∣ding the sentence of Julius and his Council; necessarily shows us, that they were not quite out of their wits, to bestow so much pains for procuring a de∣cree at the Conncil of Antiochia, that must have been void ipso facto, because the mater had been sentenced at Rome, that is, in the last resort, afore. Therefore, I coneive, Julius had right to complain, that they took upon them to regulate the Churches without him, nor can I much blame Socrates or Szomenus, in justifying his complaint; Because Athanasius his cause, as well as the Creed of Nicaea, concerned the whole Church: And, for them to condemn him whom Ju∣lius and his Council held at the instance of the Arians had justified, was to make a breach in the Church; though, at present, we say nothing of the Faith. Nei∣ther had they reason to alledge the good they had done the Church of Rome, by their compliance in the cause of Novatianus, or to expect the like from Julius in a cause of the like moment, because of the sentence of the Nicen Council al∣ready past, in the main ground of the cause, and, because of the sentence of the Synod of Rome past in the cause. Now, when this difference comes afterwards to be tried by a General Council at Sardica, shall this trial inferre the infinite Power of the Pope, or the regular Power of a General Council? For surely, the Council of Sardica was intended for a General Council, (as the Emperor Justinian reckons it) being summoned by both Emperours, Constantius and Con∣stans, out of the whole Empire. When the breach fell out, and the Eastern Bi∣shops withdrew themselves to Philippopolis, the whole Power, in point of right, ought, I conceive, to remain on that side which was not the cause of the breach. But, the success sufficiently showeth, that it did not so prevail. For, many a Council might then have been spared. The soveraign regard of peace in the Church, suffered not those that were in the right to insist upon the acts of it, as I suppose. In the mean time, the Canons thereof, whereby, appeals to the Pope in the causes of Bishops are setled, (whither for the West, which it re∣presented, or for the whole, which it had right to conclude, not having caused the breach) shall I conceive to be forged, because they are so aspersed, ha∣ving been acknowledged by Justinian, translated by Dionysius Exigus, added by the Eastern Church to their Canon Law? Or shall I not ask, what pretense there could be, to settle appeals from other parts to Rome, rather then from Rome to other parts, had not a pre-eminence of Power, and not onely a pre∣cedence of rank, been acknowledged originally in the Church of Rome? But, though I think my self bound to acknowledge, that such Canons were made by the Council at Sardica; yet, not, that they took effect by the act of it. The Canons of Councils had not effect, as I said afore, till received. The troubles that succeeded, might well hinder the admitting of them into practice. And, that this exception is not for nothing, I appeal to all that shall but con∣sider, that the Canons of the Council of Antiochia, which the Eastern Bishops at Sardica stood for, made part of the Code of the whole Church, which the
Council of Chalcedon owned; The Canon of Sardica being no part of it till af∣ter times. And this is the point, upon which, the dispute between the Pope and the Churches of Africk▪ about appeals, most depends. The case that brought it to issue, was the case of Apiarius, a Priest onely, that appealed to Rome. The Popes Legates pretended, that appeals to Rome were settled by the Council of Nicaea. The Churches of Africk▪ finding no such Canon of Nicaea in their records, desire, that recourse might be had to Alexandria, and Constantinople, for the true Copies. The true Copies import no such thing; but it is alleged, and it is reason it should be alleged, that the appeals of Bishops are setled by the Canons of the Council of Sardica, the very terms whereof are couched in the instructions to the Council of Africk. The Council of Sardica was not the Council of Nicaea, but the acts of it were done by those who pre∣tended to mantain it. Whither it were justly done, or imported an intent of imposture, to challenge the authority of the Canons of Nicaea, for the Canons of it, I dispute not. But, had the case in question been the case of a Bishop, as it was onely the case of a Priest, what could the Churches of Africk have al∣ledged, why they should not be tyed by the Canons of Sardica, who acknow∣ledged themselves tyed by the Canons of Nicaea? For, there was onely the Bishop of Carthage present at the Council of Nicaea, but there was six and thir∣ty Africane Bishops at the Council of Sardica; enow to represent all the Diocese of Africk, and to tie those whom they represented. What could they alledge, but the inexecution of the Council of Sardica? Or what greater evi∣dence could they alledge for the inexecution of it, then that there was no Co∣py of any such Canon in the records of all their Churches? Or, how could the Pope desire a fairer pretense for the execution of it for the future, then the concurrence of the African Churches, by so many Bishops? For, though the Council of Sardica is quoted in that which is called the VI Council of Car∣thage; yet, the whole issue of the businesse was onely, whither they were Ni∣cne Canons that were alleged or not; and, when it appeared that they were not, the dispute was at an end, and the Africane Synode, by the leter extant in the Africane Code, desires the Pope to stand to terms of the Nicene Canons. Therefore, it is clearly a fault in the Copy, that the Council of Sardica is na∣med; which could not be pleaded, because all knew that it was not in force, as the Council of Nicaea was, in the Churches of Africk▪ So that, the act of the Council of Sardica necessarily presupposeth, that the Church of Rome was eff∣ectually acknowledged the prime Church of the West, (and by consequence of all Churches) because it setleth the right of appeals upon it before other Churches, in certain causes, though it appear not what effect it took, unlesse you allow the conjecture which I have to propose. Within a few years after this contest, there appears a standing Commission of the Popes, to the Bishops of Thessalonica, to be their standing Lieutenants in Illyricum, mentioned in the leter of Pope Leo to Anastasins of Thessalonica, as derived from their predeces∣sors. Had the Bishop of Rome been no more then the Bishop of Thessalonica, how came this to be his Lieutenant, rather then on the contrary? And truly, where those priviledges of the Church of Rome over the Churches of Illyricum began, whereby the Popes had made the Bishops of Thessalonica their standing Legates, appears not by the records of the Church: So that, it is as free for me to conjecture, that they come from the Council of Sardica, as for others to conjecture otherwise; For, it is not unreasonable to think, that it might take ef∣fect upon the place where it was made, with fuller consent of the Bishops of that Diocese, present in greater numbers then strangers, though scarce known in Africk after some LXX. years. But, at such time as Rome disputed with Africk about appeals, and injoyed regular priviledges in Illyricum; can the Church of Milane, or any Church of Spain, or Gaul, or Britaine, be thought parallel to it? From this time, the rescripts of the Popes are extant, unforged, and directed to divers prime Churches of Gaul and Spain. And, the Heads of them were added by Dionysius Exigus, about DXXX, unto that collection of
Canons, which, what force it had in the Western Church, appears in that Cresco∣nius, abridging the Canons which the African Church used, referrs them to the Heads which he follows, both beginning at Syricius, Cresconius ending at Gela∣sius. And, the Copies of Dionysius his Collection, that now are extant in the Libraries of France, have, at the beginning, a leter, whereby Pope Adriane I, directs it to Charles the Great. As you may see in Sirmondus his Councils, To∣mo II. ad annum DCCLXXXVII. This subordination, being nothing but the limiting of the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, in the common con∣cernments of the Western Church, suffers not any terms of equality betwixt them, unlesse we could think, that they who received such instructions from Rome did send the like to Rome in the like case. Nor yet to attribute the ine∣quality to the rescript of Valentinian the III. in favour of Pope Leo, against the Bishop of Arles, though that might be, (and was without doubt) a goodly pretense for the Popes to inhanse their priviledges while the Empire stood, and when it was fallen, to maintain them upon the title of ancient custome. Be∣sides the greatness of the City Rome, in comparison of any City of Gaul or Spain, or Britain; besides the pre-eminence of S. Peter; it is to be considered, that Innocent I. Pope, affirmeth all the Churches of Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africk, Sicily, and the Isles that lie between, to have been founded by those who were ordained by S. Peter and his successors: And therefore, that they ought to fol∣low the order of the Church of Rome, Epist. ad Decentium. For, with him a∣greeth herein; as for Africk, Tertulliane, de Praescript. cap. XXXVI. and S. Gregory, lib. VII. Indict. I. Epist. XXXII. Nor do I think that Cyprian meant any thing else, when he describes the Church of Rome to be the Church, und unita Sacerdotalis exorta est,  From whence the unity of the Priesthood had the rise, to wit, in Africk; Of Gaul and Spain, I perceive, no question is made. And, he that will free the beginning of Christianity in Britaine from fables, must acknowledge; that, as it is agreed among men of learning, that it was first planted from Gaul, so, from thence also it must have received Christianity. Of Illyricum, the same cannot be said. Nor do I find any title for the Jurisdiction of Rome over it, more ancient then the division of the Empire among the Sons of Constantine. For, the Council of Sardica, being assembled upon this account, by both Emperours, and parted in two, the Eastern Bishops of it plead, that it was a Novelty which the ancient custome of the Church abhorrs, that the East should be judged by the West. And Constantius writes to the Western Bishops in the Council of Ariminum, that no reason would indure them to decree any thing of the Eastern Bishops: both in the fragments of S. Hilary. Which, as it is constitutes the regular, but destroyes the infinite power of the Pope, (be∣cause it concludes no man without the Synode to which he belongs) so, it shows no ancient custome, by which, Illyricum should belong to the West. And Pal∣ladius an Arian Bishop in the Council of Aquileia, under S. Ambrose, excep∣ting; that he was not to be sentenced without the Eastern Bishops, who had been writ to, to come; S. Ambrose answers, that, knowing the custome, that the Synode of the East should be held in the East, of the West, in the West, they were not come; intimating, that Palladius, in the mean time, must look to be judged by the Synode of the West, leaving those of the East to take their course, in a cause of common concernment. Here is then, a reason, why Illyri∣cum should belong to the Western Church. Whither or no, the holding of the Council of Sardica in Illyricum, might occasion the Canons thereof to take place in Illyricum, which came not to effect in Africk, let those who hav the skill judge. I see, the act of Pope Hormisda, making the Bishops of Tarracona and Sevile his Lieutenants, Epist. XXIV. and XXVI. is attributed to the Ca∣non of Sardica; which, I have showed, was not known in Africk about a hundred years fore. Therefore, let those that have skill judge. I am willing to allow a better reason for the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome over Illy∣ricum, when I shall see it rendred. In the mean time, the rescript; of the Popes are extant, evidencing the resort from Illyricum to Rome, no otherwise then from Gaul, or from Spain, or from Africk.
What shall we say of Britaine? For, all this while I show, that the Church of Rome cannot be reduced to the rank of the Head Churches of Dioceses, though the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antiochia were onely Heads of one Diocese. They knew Pope Caelestine, when he joyned with the Synode of Gaul, to send Germanus and Lupus to deliver them from Pelagianism; as well as Ire∣land, a British Isle, knew him, when he sent first Palladius, and then S. Patrick▪ with effect to convert it; S. Hilary of Tours having sent S. Keby afore, to no great purose. They knew the Pope, when they amitted that order for keep∣ing of Easter, which afterwards they would not part with, when S. Austine de∣manded it, for a mark of subjection, at their hands. For, it appeares by my L. Pris Antiquities, that the rule which they held was the same, which the Church of Rome had first imbraced; Onely, whereas, in process of time, a fault of two days was discovered in it, which Severus Sulpitius, in Gaul, is said to have mended; They, having received it with this amendment, would not part with it, when Austine demanded it of them, for a mark of subjection to his Bishoprick. This you may see in those Collections, pag. 925—They knew him, when S. David sent the Synodes, which he had held against the Pelagians, to Rome, for the approbation of the Pope; When S. Kentigerne went to Rome, to purge the irregularity which he was under, by being ordained Bishop of Glsow by one Bishop. In fine, they knew him, in all the corresponce which they had with their fellow British Churches in France, who exercised daily com∣munion with Rome. And therefore, when they say, they knew him not, we are to understand, by a figure of speech, that they knew him not to the purpose that was demanded, o as to be subject to the new Bishop of Britaine; Which, the Canon of the Apostles, providing, that every Nation should have their own Bishop, inabled them to refuse. And, the just jealousie they had, that the ad∣mitting of him might be a snare to their civil freedom, obliged them to refuse. For, when they say, they are ready to acknowledge the Pope as brotherly love requires, they may well be thought to acknowledge him with that Canonicall respect which ancient custome required; without which, brotherly love subsist∣eth not among Christians. But, I must come to the priviledges of Constantinople, begun by the Canon of the second General Council, established by the fourth, in the last Canon, which the Popes, to this day, acknowledge not, though the effect of it hath suffered no interruption by their disowning of it. I know not how I should give a clearer evidence of the ground I propose, for the pre-eminence of Churches, then the alteration which succeeded upon the erecting of Constantinople into the second Head of the Empire. For, within fifty years, the Council of the East be∣ing held there, makes it the second Church, and head Church of Thrace Diocese, which the Chalcedon Council extends to the Dioceses of Asia and Pontus, ex∣alting it so arre above Alexandria and Antiochia, as might seem, afarr of, to call for a kind of subjection at their hands. If this be rightfully done, what shall hinder the whole Church, to dispose of the superiority of Churches, when the greatnesse of their Cities makes it appear, that the dependence of the Churches of less Cities upon them, is for the Unity of the whole, in the exercise of true Christianity? And, what can be said, why it should not be right for the East to advance Constantinople to the next to Rome; the same reason being visible, in it, for which Rome had the first place from the beginning? It is true, whereas Rome was content to take no noice of the Canon of Constantinople, the Legates of Pope▪ Leo present at Chalcedon, and inforced, either to admit or disclaim it, pro∣tested against i. But, upon what ground, can he, who, by being part of the Council, conclues himself by the vote of it, refuse his concurrence to that which he alone likes not? Or, to what effect is that disowned, which takes place with∣out him who protests against it? unless it be to set up a monument of half the Church, disowning the infinite power of the Pope; the other halfe not pleading it, but onely Canonicall pre-eminences by the Council of Nicaea. I suppose indeed, the Pope had something else to fear: For, Illyricum being so much nearr Constantinople then Rome, there was always pretense of reason to sub∣ject
it, as Asia and Ponus, o Constantinople, to the prejudice of those pre-emi∣nences which Rome injoyed there. Especially since Illyricum was surrendred by Valentinian III, upon the mariage of his Sister, to Theodosius the younger, (as that learned Gentleman John Marsham (hath observed) and thenceforth become part of the Eastern Empire; For, hereupon followed the Law omni Innovatione ces∣sante, still extant in the Code, requiring the Bishops of Illyricum to give ac∣count to Constantinople, of all▪ maters that should pass. Besides, had the Em∣pire continued in force in Italy, why might not Constantinople, in time, have pre∣tended to the first place, Rome being no more the prime City, and yet still of the Empire? And therefore Pope Leo, (as wie for the privileges of his Church, as stout for the Faith) did his own business, when hee pleaded the Canon of Ni∣caea, and the second place for Alexandria. And, whatsoever contests passed af∣terwards, between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, the privileges of Rome in Illricum continued, till the time that Gregory the Second with-drew his City from the obedience of the Empire, pretending his Soveraign to be an Heretick, for destroying of Images. I said afore, in the first Book, that others relate this otherwise. And Anasais, in the lives of Gregory II and III. owns no more, but, that they exommunicated the Emperors, which, notwithstanding, occasioned the Italians to all from the Empire. But, hereupon, the Empeo commands not onely Illyricum, but Sicily, and that part of Italy which con∣nued subject to the Empire, to resort to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Con∣stantinople; and, as in case of such jealousie, was necessarily to be obeyed. Here∣upon, Pope Adrian, in his Apology for Images to Charles the Great, complains, that they deprived the Church o Rome of the Diocese, together with the pa∣triony which it held in it, when they put down Images; and had given no an∣swer from that time. And Nicolas I. Epist. . revives the claime. Which, with the rescripts of the Popes between, concerning Illyricum, as well as the rest of the West, (see also the life of Hadriane II in Anastasius) and much more that might be added, shows, that this was the state of the Church till that time. Du∣ring the time that Rome, on one side, stood upon these terms which Constanti∣nople, on the other de, was continually harassed by the Lombards, (who had no reason to confide in it, we▪ see, because they were not long after destroyed by it) there is no marvail if Milane, head of the Lombards, and Ravenna, head of the Exarchate, (that is, of the Dominion that was governed by the Emperors Lieutenant there resident) did, by the Secular Power of their Cities, set up themselves to contest with the Pope, about several privileges of their Churches. For, alass, what can this signifie, of competition for the Primacy, with Rome, if wee compare the respect of Milane or Ravenna with that which Rome hath ound among other Churches, in the concernments of the whole? Therefore, I will mention here onely one action more, carried through in so high a tune, by Glasius and other active Popes, that it is much insisted upon by those, who would plead for the Popes infinite Power if they durst, because they would not have it regular, which is the same; (for, what bounds can that Power have, that acknowleges no Rule to limit it?) It is that troublesom business that ell out in Egypt, about the Council of Chalcedon, when, John of Alexandria having fallen under the jealousie of the Emperor, and Acacius of Constantinople, goes to Rome with Leters from Antiochia, to complain of the intruding of Pe∣trus Mongus into his Sea; Who, being an enemy to the Council of Chalcedon, but pretending fair, to promote those means, by which, the Emperor Zeo and Acacius pretended to re-unite Aegypt to the Church, having never received that Council; was, thereupon received into communion by Acacius; The Rule of the Church being undispensable, whosoever communi∣cated with Hereticks, to stand for an Heretick to the Church, whatsoever hee be∣lieve otherwise. This cause having bred a world of trouble for many years, the Popes never condescended to be re-united in Communion to the East, till it was granted, that all the Bishops of Constantinople since Acacius, though they had professed the true Faith, and some of them suffred for it, should be con∣demned as Hereticks, by raising names out of that list, in which, the godly Bi∣shops were remembred at celebrating the Eucharist. Though, the reason why
they had continued communion with Hereticks was onely for fear of making the breaches of the Church wider, and more incurable. Here, it may seem to have been the Power of the Pope, that brought, even the second person of the Church, to the justice of the Canon, so much more evident, by how much there was lesse reason to insist upon the rigor of the Canon, in comparison to the end to which it was subordinate, the unity of the whole; Yet, to him that reasons aright, it will easily appear, that it was no duty, that, either the Emperors or the Bishops of Constantinople owed the Popes, that made them submit to the Canon, but the obligation they had to the Unity of the Church, for the maintenance whereof the Canon was provided. And that Zeno, taking the course that Con∣stantius had done in the mater of Arius, to reconcile Egypt to the Church, by waiving the Council of Chalcedon, for an expedient of his of his own; (for, Constantius sought no more, than to reconcile all by waiving of the Council of Nicaea) and Acacius, by communicating with Hereticks; did necessarily, as all offenders do, make them their Superiors, who maintain the Laws for the good of the whole. In fine, that, whatsoever the Popes did, by virtue of the Ca∣non, can be no ground for any irregular Power in themselves, the Canon as justly maintaining the poor Britaines against the Pope, as the Pope against Ze∣no and Acacius. But the first General Council makes full recompence, for all, the Church of Rome may pretend to have gained, by the business of Acacius. Pope Vigilius being in Constantinople, and refusing, at the summons of the Em∣peror and Council; to sit, it proceeds, and condemns three Articles which hee had declared for, and so prevails, that he himself thought best at length, to con∣curr to the Act; And, all this being done, is disowned by the Bishops of A∣frick, (Facundus by name, whom hee had set on work to write for the three Articles) and Istria, till all was reconciled. I question not the point of He∣resie, either in this case, or that of Honorius, whose constitution, whereby hee thought to silence the dispute concerning the two wills in our Lord Christ, made him to be condemned for an Heretick in the sixth General Council. Onely I count it a pitifull excuse, to imagine, that the Synod is falsified in this point; the VIIth Synod, in the last session, bidding anathema to Honorius, and so many records testifying the same. And, where it is said, that the Synod might err in point of fact, that Honorius held Heresie, though not in point of right, in con∣demning that for Heresie which is not; (as the Jansenists at this day, admitting the condemnation of five propositions by the late Pope, admit not, that they are contained in Jansenius his book) not to dispute of that, it will appear, that the Pope may be judged by the Church in other cases besides that of Heresie, if Honorius, being no Heretick, is by the Council, condemned for an Heretick. Indeed, there is no cause that concerns the whole Church, but the whole Church may judg it. Nor can any cause lightly concern a Pope, that concerns not the whole Church. The reason why Popes have been so seldom judged, is not for want of right, but for fear of division in the Church, which makes it not expedient to use that right. There are many particulars of less consequence pleaded for the Popes Power, which I will not examine, admitting a regular pre-eminence for him above all other Bishops, (which is seen in the recourse had to him before others, in maters concerning the whole Church) but deny∣ing that infinite Power, which, nothing can be alleged to prove. I acknowledg indeed, that this regular pre-eminence not onely might, but, supposing the Church to continue in Unity, must needs be further and further de∣termined, by Canon or by custom, whether inlarging or restraining it, as by the Canons of Sardica, allowing appeals to him in the causes of Bishops. For, the causes of Bishops do not all necessarily concern the whole Church, unless the subject of them be mater of Faith, or otherwise, that which calleth in question the Unity of the Church; and then, Lay-mens causes are no less. So, an appeal to Rome, so constituted, is properly an appeal there to be sentenced in the last resort. But, when recourse is had to the Pope in the first place, that is no ap∣peal, but a course to bring the cause to the sentence of the whole Church, where∣of his sentence is the first part, and a great prejudice to that which follows, be∣cause of the respect which all that depend upon that Church owe his sentence.
And, this increase of the Popes power, I do think to be always a just cause, of excluding from the Unity of the Church, for refusing obedience to it. For, the Unity of the Church being of Gods Law, and so, inbling to limit the terms up∣on which the Power of the Church is held and exercised, by Canonical right; it cannot be in the power of any part to cast off those Laws by which it is bound∣ed, within the compass of Gods Law, at pleasure: because they are the conditi∣ons upon which the Unity of the whole stands, which, no part can say they will renounce, unless they may hold it upon such terms as they please. But, whether these limitations may not be so excessively abusive to the liberty of the whole, so prejudicial to the service of God in the truth of Christianity, for which they, and the whole Church stands, that parts of the Church may and ought to provide for themselves, and their Christianity, against the oppression of them; that I re∣ferr to the last consideration, when I shall have showed, how maters in difference are to be valued by the principles that are setled. In the mean time, I must ob∣serve, that, from the time that the Pope was re-imbursed of his loss of Jurisdi∣ction, and possessions in those Provinces, which, upon his rebellion, the Empe∣ror with-drew from his obedience, by the liberality of Pepin and Charlemaine, bestovving upon him the Exarchate, vvhich, vvith the Kingdom of the Lombards, they had taken from the Greekish Empire; Though I cannot say, that, from that time, regular proceedings were laid aside, in the Western Churches; Yet I must say, that from thence the Popes had a ground, to reduce the regular proceedings of Councils to their own will & interest, & to introduce their own rescripts in stead of all Canons, for Law to the Western Church. And this, though I must not prove here, yet here I may allege, why I go no further here in this dispute. It remains, that I gather up some fragments of instances that have been pro∣duced, to show, that Episcopacy is not of divine right, because, from the begin∣ning, either all, or some Churches have had none. Of the authors whereof, I must first demand, whether the Unity of the Church be of divine right or not. For, unless they will put the whole cause upon a new issue, that there is no Law of God, that the Church should be one; I demand of them, how this Unity could have been preserved by the equality of all Presbyters, which, by the Hie∣rarchy, I have showed, was maintained. Till they show mee this, I think my self secure of all their litle objections. For, if the Hierarchy cannot be imputed to chance, or, to the voluntary agreement of all Christians, as uncertain as chance; certainly Episcopacy, the first ingredient of it, can be imputed to nothing but the provision of the Apostles. And therefore, I must here renew my answer to the question that is made; Supposing the superiority of Bishops to consist in the Power of doing some act which a Priest cannot do; what act is it, that a Bishop, by his Order can do, a Priest cannot. For, all Priests have, by their Order, the Power of the Keys, and by virtue of the same, of baptizing, and giving the Eucharist to those, whom the Laws of the Church, not their private judgment, admits; unless it be in cases which their private judgment stands char∣ged with. And, that which they shall do upon such terms, is to as good ef∣fect towards God, in the inward Court of Conscience, as if a Bishop had done it. But, because there be cases that concern the unity and good estate of that parti∣cular Church whereof each man is a member, others, that may concern the whole, others, some part of the whole Church; the constitution of the Church necessarily requires, in ry Church, a Power, without which, nothing of mo∣ment to the State thereof shall be of force in the outward Court, as to the Bo∣dy of the Church. This, the Chief Power of the Apostles, this, S. Pauls in∣structions to Timothy and Titus, this, the Epistle to the seven Churches, this, the practice of all Churches before the Reformation settles upon the Bishop. And therefore, I should think, that I showed you a peculiar act which Bishops can do, and Priests cannot, if I could onely show you, that, according to this Rule, nothing is to be done without the Bishops consent. For, whatsoever either Law, or unreprovable custom, may inable a Priest to do, that hee doth by the consent of his Bishop, involved in passing that Law, or admitting that custom. And hereof, the Bishops peculiar right of sitting in Council is full evidence, which; if the practice of the Church could justifie nothing else, would be an act, peculiar
to the Order of Bishops, according to the premises. It was an ancient Rule in the Church, that a Priest should not baptize in the presence of a Bishop, nor give a Bishop the Eucharist: To show, that it is by his leave that hee acts, as Tertullian saith of the right of Baptizing, de Bapt. cap. XVII. So, the Canons which allow not a Priest to restore him to the communion, that had done pub∣lick Penance, in the face of the Church, require the consent of the Bishop to acts that concern the Body of it. That ancient author that writ de VII Ordini∣bus Ecclesiae, among S. Jeromes works, reckons divers particulars, some whereof, hee complains, that the Bishops where hee lived did not suffer the Priests to do. Doth hee therefore make Bishops and Priests all one? Certainly hee speaks my sense and my terms, when hee sayes, the Bishop is the Priests Law; That Bi∣shops in Council, give Law to the Clergy as well as the people, out of Coun∣cil, that which is not otherwise determined, nothing but his Order can deter∣mine. And this is the ground of the difference between the Power of Order and the Power of Jurisdiction, comparing the Bishop and Presbyters of one and the same Church one with another. For, the Order of Priesthood import∣ing the Power of the Keys in baptizing, in binding and loosing in the invvard court, in giving the Eucharist; it is plain, there is a Power of Order common to both. But the use of it, without limiting any due bounds, at the discretion of e∣very Priest, would be destructive to the Unity of the Church, which I suppose. That Power therefore, which provideth those limitations, according to vvhich the common povver of the Keys is lawfully exrised, whether it be properly called Jurisdiction or not, is necessary to the being of every Church, even by the common Power of the Keys, upon which the foundation of the Church standeth. I can therefore allow the said author to complain, that Priests in his part were not suffred to do those acts, which, in the Fast, in Illyricum, in Africk, they did do; For, all those parts were governed by Synods of Bishops. But I allow not his argument; Because a Priest can celebrate the Eucharist, which is more. It is more to the salvation of those that receive, toward which, the Eucharist im∣mediately worketh, no less if a Priest, than if a Bishop give it. But it is not so much to the Body of the Church, as to excommunicate, or to restore him that is excommunicate. That therefore, some offices may be done by both, and that, according to the order of the ancient Church, is no argument that both are one; but, that it is no prejudice to the Chief Power of the Bishop, that they are done by a Priest. Let Confirmation be the instance, for our author instances in it. Certainly, there never was so great necessity for it, as since all are baptized in∣fants. For, it expresly renueth the Covenant of Baptism, not onely in the con∣science, between God and the soul, but as to the Body of the Church, implying an acknowledgment of the obligation then contracted; And of the Church, to which this acknowledgment is rendred. For, hee that desires baptism of the Church, at years of discretion, desireth it upon those terms which the Church tendreth. And therefore, hee who is baptized an infant, and afterwards confir∣med, submitteth to the same terms in his own person; which hee could not do when hee was baptized. It is not therefore said; That none can be saved that is not confirmed. For, let him observe the rule of Christianity, and that, within the Unity of the Church, and hee wants nothing necessary to the common sal∣vation of Christians. But, how effectual a means the solemnity of this profes∣sion might be, to oblige a man to his Christianity, and to the Unity of the Church, let reason judg. Now, S. Hierome saith most truly, that this office is reserved to the Bishop, for the preserving of Unity in the Church, by maintaining him in his prerogative. But, is that an argument, that his prerogative is not original, but usurped? To me it is not, who acknowledg the Eucharist of a Priest as effectual to the inward man, as that of a Bishop; the difference between them standing in reference to the visible Body of the Church. Our author acknowledgeth the same that S. Hierome advers. Luciferianos teacheth: Demanding onely, that it may be lawfull for Priests to consecrate the Chrism which they confirmed with, in case of necessity, which, hee saith, was done in many Churches; and protest∣ing,
not to impose Law on the Bishop, vvho, saith hee, is Law to the Priest. The supposed S. Ambrose says, that in Egypt, Priests did confirm in the Bishops ab∣sence. It is no news, that Gregory the Great alloweth Priests to confirm in Sardinia, Epist. III. 26. for, Durandus hath made him an Heretick for it, in IV. Dist. VII. Quaest. IV. and Adriane, himself afterwards Pope, Quaest. de Con∣firm. in IV. art. ult. yields thereupon, that a Pope may rr in determing mater of Faith. And, the Instruction of the Armenians by Eugenius IV. in the Council of Florence, acknowledges it had been done by Priests, the Chrism being conse∣crated by the Bishop afore. The limitations of necessity, of the Bishops absence, of Chrism consecrated by the Bishop, import his allowance, and that, his pre∣rogative; Though, as the case is now, that all are baptized infants, the recog∣nisance of our Christianity then received cannot be made to so good purpose, as, limiting the solemnity thereof to the Bishops own hands. I could say the same of Ordination, and would say the same, if I did finde a∣ny irreprovable custom for Priests to ordain. The Canon of Ancyra I have expounded otherwise, and Eutychius his relation hath been rejected for a fable elswhere. I finde by unanswerable arguments, that the consent of the Church made Ordinations good, which, for the act of those by whom they were solem∣nized, were utterly void. The case of Ischyras and the Meletians is famous. Pretending to have been made Priest by Coluthus, a Schismatick Bishop under Meletus; by the Council which Hosius was at, hee is made a Lay-man with the rest of the Meletians. And upon this account, Athanasius, Apolog. II. insists, that there could be no sacrilege committed in breaking his Chalice, because there is neither Consecration nor Church among Schismaticks. Yet were these Ordinations admitted for good by the Council of Nicaea, provided, they stood to the Order of it. Therefore Athanasius excepts further, that Meletius did not give up Ischyras his name in the list of his Clergy. The same had been the case of the Donatists, had they been admitted by the Church, every one in his or∣der; as, I said, Melchiades Pope was content they should be. The same is the case, which Leo I resolves Rusticns Bishop of Narbonne in, Epist. XCII. cap. II. allowing those Ordinations to stand good upon certain terms, which, of them∣selves, were void. If it could appear, that the Church did at the first, accept for Bishops of Alexandria, whomsoever XII Presbyters of his Church should in∣stall; I would conclude him no less Bishop, by the consent of his suffragans, whom the Priests, advancing to the higher Throne, had set over themselves, then▪ had three of them consecrated him by imposition of hands. But, finding that a fable, and no other instances alleged upon any good ground, I conclude S. Jerome and S. Chrysostomes credit unquestionable, witnessing no more than they might see, and affirming the Power of Ordaining to be the Bishops peculiar, as indeed most concerning the state of his Church. It is said, that Novatus, Presbyter of the Church of Carthage, made Felicissimus Deacon of that Church. S. Cy∣priane Epist. XLIX. But it is said also, that hee made Novatianus Bishop of Rome: Both by the hands of his Faction, whose names you have there Epist. LV. It is said that, Eustathius being removed from the Sea of Antiochia, in the year CCCXXVIII, Paulinus who was not made Bishop there till CCCLXII, govern∣ed the Church there with his fellow Presbyters: As also, when Meletius was set asidea while after, did Flavianus and Diodorus, Theodoret Eccl. Hist. I. 21. II. 28. IV. 12, 14. Surely, having Catholick Bishops on all sides, they might govern the widowhood of the Church, without medling with the Bishops peculiar. It is said, that Apollinaris was made Bishop of Laodia by a part of the Clergy and people, and by him, Vitalis, Bishop of the party which he had gained at Antiochia. Theodoret V. 3. that the Novatians had their Churches in Constantinople, and the adjacent Provinces, yet never were headed by any Bishop that fell from the Church; and therefore, made themselves all Ministers. As if Apollinaris could not as well finde Bishops to ordain him, bearing up the party that chose him, as Audius in Epiphanius Haer. LXX. found a Bishop, as ready as himself, to fall from the Church, and to make him a Bishop. As if the Novatians, being, in likelyhood, planted from Rome, could not have their Bishops ordained by their
party there. Crtainly it is a desperate attempt, to perswade us, that, in the time of Gregory of Tours, any Priest should ordain, as Bishop of Clermont in Auvergne, because hee reporteth Hist. V. 5. that, one of them, being chosen by a party of the Clergy and people, kept possession for above XX years. For, pretending that the neighbor Bishops did him wron, in not consecrating him, hee might, by favor at Court, hold the possession which hee had got, not medling with imposition of hands. But, the Christianity of Scotland makes a great noise, even during those times, when, it cannot be made to appear, that any Scots dwelt in Scotland. Which makes mee mervail, that this objection should be sound in the Preface to the X English Histories. For, that the relations of Hector Boise or John Maire, or Buchanan, (as ignorant as his predecessors, though in better Latine) should be swallowed by those that could not judg, though it had been against their in∣terest, it had not been strange. But that a man of such skill in all antiquiies should repeat an ungrounded relation of certain Priests called Cldi, that ae their own Bishops, without any mark of historical truth upon it, is an argument of more will than skill to do ischief in the Church. But, after Christianity was planted, as well among the Picts, as the Scots in Scotland by S. Columb, it is argued, that the Bishops of Duresme and ohers in England, that sprung from that plantation, were made by Priests onely of S. Columbs Monastery in his Island▪ Which men of learning would not do, if common sense could persuade them, not to imploy their learning, to make men believe that it is not light at noon. S. Columb himself is condemned, by the Bishops of Ireland of S. Patricks plan∣tation, to Penance, for having a hand in bloud, as you may see by the Collecti∣ons already quoted. A Bishops Sea is planted in the Island where hee builds his Monastery. Shall wee imagine S. Columb made him a Bishop, who lived and died a Priest and an Abbot; or the Bishops that sent S. Columb upon this worthy im∣ployment, for an abatement or commutation of his Penance? It was the time when S. Kentigerne, his good friend, went to Rome, to clear himself, that hee was made but by one Bishop, as his life relateth. Is there any age in which it can be said, that there was Christianity among the Scots, and not Bishops, unless it be the time of Buchanans fables? And therefore, though, as Bede saith, that Monastery ruled even the Bishops, for the reverence of their learning and holi∣ness; Yet, for the authority of Ecclesiastical proceedings, there is no doubt to be made, that such things must come from the Bishops, though there is no mention of thm, because neither Bede, nor any soul could think, there would ever be any man so extravagant as to question it. Yet that learned Preface argueth, that certainly the Culdei in Scotland had the Power of making their Bishop or Bishops from this beginning, and that they held it till Turgot was made Bishop of S. Andrews MCVIII. That Ninianus Bi∣shop of Galloway was no otherwise made, because Plecthelm was ordained up∣on a new account afterwards, which certainly, can be imputed to no other rea∣son than this. That Wine Bishop of Winchester, in Bede III. 28. was the onely regularly ordained Bishop of his time; which cannot be true otherwise. A thing to be wondered at, that so knowing a man should look so farr for a rea∣son evidently false, having a true one in the text of Bede before his eyes. For, what is more evident, than, that the English Bishops of Austines plantation had their Ordination from him, not from any Priests? But if from him, then from one Bishop, which was not regular; The Nicene Canon requiring the Repre∣sentatives of the Province, the Apostles Canon, two at least, if not three. Whe∣ther S. Gregory and his Successors intended, that their Power, giving Austine his Commission, should supply the formality of the Canon; or supposed that the Welsh Bishops should joyn with him, (which, afterwards, upon the difference that fell out between them, either they would not grant, or hee would not de∣sire) the consecration of the Bishops of that plantation must needs be irregu∣lar, because it came from Austine alone. Nor need wee any other reason why Wilfride went for his consecration into France, as the same Bede relateth. For, that there was the same irregularity also among the Welsh Bishops, appears by S. Kentigern, who went to Rome to purge it, as his life relateth. And therefore,
though Wine, having been regularly ordained in France, as Malmsbury saith, de Gestis Poutif. II. joyned with him two Welsh Bishops, to consecrate regular∣ly; yet, their regularity which might be in the consecrating of the said Bishops, might alo move Wilfride, rather to go into France, than to rest content vvith the same. But, that Niniane, being a Welsh Bishop, at such time as the Welsh had other Bishops, should be ordained by Priests; because a vvritten Copy Hist. Dulm. in Biblioth. Coton. sayes, after his time, that Galloway had yet no Bishop; is a conjecture too slight for a man of that knovvledg. For, there is appearance enough, that, under the Welsh, the Sea vvas trnslated to Glascow, for Kentigern, after Niniane. And that Plecthelm vvas first Bishop of Galloway under the Sa∣xons, after that the Kingdom of Cumberland vvas become English. Of the ul∣dei in Scotland, vvhatsoever is said before the Plantation of S. Columb, I challenge or a meer fable. After it, though Bede saith, that his Monastery, after an unu∣l vvay, ruled even th Bishops; yet, vvhere there vvere Bishops, no reason can presume, that their authority did not ordain, though they thought fit, that the knovvledg of the Monastery, vvhence they came, should direct, vvhom. And there∣fore, vvhatsoever the rights of these Culdei in Scotland might aftervvards be, it cannot vvay a sravv rds the cause of Episcopacy, because never extant in the Church of Scotland, but undr it. They that shall peruse vvhat the late Lord Pimate hath vvritten, in his antiquities of the British Churches, and from his infomation, Sir H. Spelman in his Glossry, vvill not allovv them to be any other than Cnons, that vvre to attnd upon the service of God in the Church. Which, whether or no, before the division of Dioceses in Scotland, they might have that right, in advaning of Bishops to all Seas, which the Clergy of every Churh had in respct to their own Church; I leave to their antiquaries to de∣termine. The extrcts of Philostorgius I give more credit to, than to any thing that hath been said of the Scottish Culdei. And they, I admit, relate II. 5. that the oes who dwelt on the North of the Black Sea, had Christianity some LXX years before Ulphilas was made their Bishop. For, having caried ome of the Clergy captives in an inrode, they were by them taught Christianity, saith Philostorgius. But, they might have Priests ordained by the next Bishops, all having that power in that case: Or, they might have other Bishops before The∣ophilus, whom the Ecclesiastical Histories reckon at the Council of Nicaea, be∣fore Ulphilas; The want of records will not evidence, that those Clergy did all acts of Ecclesiassical power before, or, made themselves Bishops to do what themselves could not do; that is, give them the power which they had not themselves. I am secure of all that can be said, from the state of rural Bishops, called Chorepiscopi, in the ancient Church; Not doubting, that any Bishop may communicate any part of his power, within his own Church, the rule and cu∣stom of the whole Church inabling him to do it. Socrates and Sozomenus testifie, that, whereas, generally, there were no Bishops but in Cities, in Cyprus they were settled in Boroughs. I have elwhere observed the same in Africk and Ireland. Either Cities were something else there, than in other Countries, or else the number of Cities could not be so great as the number of Churches, in the numerous Africne Synods, and, when S. Patrick sounded as many Chur∣ches in Ireland as there are dayes in the year▪ Was this any breach upon S. Pauls rule or practice, setling Churches in Cities? divide a Province or Soveraignty in∣to more or fewer Churches, it wayes the same to the whole Church, not accord∣ing to the number of those that vote in their own Synods. Unless the Council of Trent could oblige Christendom by a plurality of them that voted there. One Diocese of Lincoln will better allow, half a douzain rural Bishops to be cut out of it, than many Cities, in some parts, can have Bishops. In a word, the Rule of the Church supposeth the act of some State, which it cannot regulate. And is it then strange, supposing the superiority of Bishops, so much differing in Ju∣risdiction, though for Order the same, as I have said; that some of them should have a Bishop under him, (that is, answerable to him immediately, and, to the Synod of the Province by him, though according to the Canons of the same) with power to Ordain Priests, according as the said Synods should allow or with∣draw
it? I will say further, that, supposing all that I have said (of the Hierarchy to be an Ordinance of the Apostles, because received by all) to be a meer ima∣gination of mine own, but granting the unity of the Church to be of Gods Law, and the means of maintaining it self to be the consent of the Church, and this consent executed by the establishment of Episopacy through the whole Church; I can by no means excuse those that go about to put it down from being Schismaticks. Whither, upon an erroneous conscience, they imagine that to be a transgression of Gods Law, which, the whole Church, for so many ages, imbracing, maketh evident to be according to Gods Law; Or whether, God having commanded the unity of his Church, and his Church having introduced it for a mean to preserve that unity, they think it lawfull for themselves to refuse it; not believing it to be against Gods Law, and therefore within the power of the Church to appoint it. For, whatsoever can be said of the several customes, which severall Churches allowed, cannot take place in that which is supposed to be setled and received in all Churches. Not is it possible, that the Church should continue one, as a visible Society and Body, in the visible communion of the same offices of Christianity, if it be free for the parts of i, to withdraw themselves from the Lawes, which have been received by the whole, to limit the circumstances of their communion, though not the conditions of it. I have but one point more to mention, before I leave this subject, concern∣ing what offices, every degree is, by Gods Law, or by Canon Law, able to mi∣nister in the Church; necessary here to be mentioned, where I have showed, what persons are inabled to give Law to the Church, and to do, by consequence, those acts wherein the execution of Law consisteth. For, by the premises, the truth of that which I have proposed in the Right of the Church, more clearly appears, then it could appear there; that the offices of Christianity, which se∣verall degrees are inabled to minister, do argue the interest of those respective degrees, in the Government of the Church. Ordinations therefore wholly re∣served to the Bishop, as not to be made without his consent; Saving such Or∣dinations of inferiour Ministers, as, not much concerning the state of his Church, he may, by way of delegation, referre to his Presbyters, or rurall Bi∣shops. Excommunications likewise, as, concerning the beeing of every Chri∣stian, as a member of the Church. As for the assistance, concurrence, and con∣sent of the Presbyters of each Cathedrall Church, in and to the Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons, I referre my selfe to that which I have said elsewhere; Seeing it were a thing ridiculous to require, that all the Presbyters of each Dio∣cese should concurre to all such Ordinances. As for the ordaining of Bishops, the rule is plain, that, being a part of the Provincial Synode, no meere Bishop is to be ordained without the consent of the Synode, the Bishop of the Mother City alwayes concurring; Though, all reason requiring, that he who is to go∣vern, be taken out of the bosome of those whom he is to govern; there is a right and priviledge of nomination due to the Clergy, and of approbation or suffrage, to the people of the Church. For, it is a thing most certain, that the interest of the People in the Elections of Bishops, in the ancient Church, (which is still more clear in the Election of Presbyters) was grounded onely upon the knowledge, which they must needs have, of persons proposed, either to approve them, (which was called their suffrage) or otherwise: Not that they had any right to go before their leaders, the Clergy, in nomination, or to oblige the consent of the Synode of the Province: Though it is true, that, many times, they did prevent both, and prevail, and might without inconvenience so do, when the eminence of some person was so discernable, that their grosser judge∣ments could no mistake in the choice; though transgressing their rank, in de∣manding even the worthiest, before their turn came. The same rule holds in the ordaining of superiour Bishops, seeing they have all their Church, their People, their Clergy, and their Synode. The difference that S. Austine, Breviculo Col∣lationis, III. diei, observes in the consecrating of the Pope, that it is done by he Bishop of Ostia, not by any Metropolitane, is an exception to a rule. So
was Dionysus ordained in the year, CCLIX. if we belive the acts of S. Lau∣rence. And therefore, that Pelagius I. was ordained by two Bishops, and a Priest of Ostia, as his life in Anastasius relateth; by the strictness of the Ni∣cne Canon, voids it: For, how can he have caried the greater part of the Bi∣shops? The condescension of the Apostles Canon, and consent ex postfacto might make it good and valid, by the same reason as afore. The state of particu∣lar Christians is not of such consequence to the Chrch, that it should be regu∣larly the businesse of a Synod; though, for the assistance, concurence, and con∣sent of the Clergy of each Church, I referre my self to that which I have said elsewhere, nd which would be too particular to be debated in this abridgement. As for the mater of Penance, in things that come not to the knowledge of the Church, I have no cause to repent me of tht which I have said in the Right of the Church; where I have showed, that Pnance and Absolution in the inward Court of the Conscience, extends as farre as the Communion of the ucharist, from which Penance excludes, and to which Absolution restores. That all Priests, and none but Piests receive, by their Ordination, power of celebrating the Eu∣charist; that is to say, of consecrating and communicating the same, and, that it cannot be done by any other, without very great Sacrilege▪ And that, for an ar∣gument of the Power of the Keys in the hand of every Priest, though limitable by the rule and custome of the Church, to the inward Court of the conscience. That the offices of Preaching and Baptizing, re regularly communicable to Dea∣cons, but, in case of necessity, even to thoe of the people, alwaies by delegati∣on from their Superiors the Bishops: In sign whereof, neither was it the cusome that any man should consecrate the Eucharist, Preach or Baptize, in the Bishops prsnce, but himself, or by his appointment. As for the reading of the Scrip∣tures, and the snging of Psalms in the Church, it is so well known to have been the Deacons office in the ancient Church, that there were severall ranks of Deacons appointed for those svral works, Lectores & Pslae (which now like those in the Church of Rome, help to make the inferiour Orders) the rule of the Church, being grounded upon undeniable wisdome, and the authority of S. Paul, forbidding novces to be promoted; that exercise in the inferiour offices of the Clergy, might be a condition requisi to advance unto superiour degrees in the Clergy. Now, for th celebrating and blessing of Mariage by Priests only, I must go no further at present; because, having showed, that it is to be allowed by the Church, I have not yet showed, that it is to be solemnized by the bles∣sing of the Church.
CHAP. XXI. Of the times of God service; By what Title of his Law the first day of the week is kept Holy. How the Sabbath is to be sanctified by Moses Law. The fourth Com∣mandment, the ground upon which the Apostles inacted it. Ʋpon what ground the Church limiteth the times of Gods service. Of Easter, and the Lent Fast afore it. Of the difference of meats, and measure of Fasting. Of the keeping o four Lords Birthday, and other Festivals, and the regular hours of the day for Gods service. HAving thus showed, first, what are the Powers of the Church; and then, in whose hands they rest; and, having said before, that, the determining and limiting of all circumstances for the exercise of those offices of Gods service, for the Communion whereof the Church stands; and also, of thoe qualities which render men capable to communicate in that same, is totally reserved to the Church, so farr as Gods Law hath not prevented the determination of it; We are now to consider the time, the place, the maner and form, the cere∣monies and solemnities whereby the celebration of Church offices is either al∣ready determined by Gods Law, or remains determinable by the Law of the Church. And this I cannot do better, then, beginning with the times of divine service, and considering what Laws of God, what Laws of the Church, all Chri∣stians ought to be tied to in that point; whence it may appear, what may be the subject of Reformation in it. Where, I find it requisite in the first place to de∣bate, by what right the first day of the week, called Sunday, is set apart for the service of God, under Christianity. There is an opinion too well known amongst us, that the first day of the week is kept by Christians in virtue of the fourth Commandment, which obliged the Jews to keep the seventh day of the week. Which opinion if it be true, they have some ground for confining the service of God to it. But it can∣not be maintained without two assumptions. The first; That the seventh day, in the fourth Commandment signifies, not the seventh day of the week, on which God rested from creating any more, but one of the seven dayes: The second, That the resurrection of Christ upon the first day of the week, is a reason that necessarily determines all Christians, to do that which they are bound to do on one day of the seven, upon the first and none else. Neither of which is true, though the later have farre the more appearance of truth in it. For it is manifest, that the will of God may be, having obliged the Jewes to keep one day in seven, to oblige Christians to keep one day in six, or lesse, unesse it be o∣therwise determined by some commandment of Gods. Now it appeareth, that the first day of the week was kept in the times of the Apostles, our Saviour having peared unto them after his Resurrection upon that day, Joh. XIX. 26. Act. XX. . 1 Cor. XVI. 2. Apoc. I. 10. But, of any precept to make this a Law to all Chri∣stians, nothing appears in the Scriptures of the New Testament. Again, it may be said; That the Gospel requireth more plentiful fruits of obedience then the Law: And therefore, if the Law required one day of seven for the service of God, that the Gospel requires more. Nor will it concern me here to prove that this opinion is true: It is more then enough that I can say, that, before this no∣velty came into England, it cannot appear that ever any Christian thought other∣wise. For, I argue no more in this place, but that, the rising of our Lord upon the first day of the week, doth not necessarily determine the Church to keep one day of the seven, as the command of God doth. For, had God commanded one day of seven to be kept under the Gospel, as under the Law, there had been no room for further consideration. But, so long as there is onely a reason on the one side; That the Resurrection to Christians is as the Creation to Jews: And a reason on the other side; That it becomes Christians, in this as in all, to do more then Jews; I cannot deny that there is a sufficient reason, for him that
hath power of determining that which God hath not determined, to appoint the first day of the week; but I utterly deny, that there is any Law of God, before the act of this power, to determine it. And the reason is plain: For, in maters of this nature, there may be sufficient reason for several determinations, because it is not the substance, but the circumstance of that which is by nature necessarily good, and Gods service. Again, supposing that Christians are bound to keep one day of seven for Gods service; may I not ask why the passion of Christ should not determine them to keep the sixth, as well as the Resurrection the first day of the week? Especially in the sense of them, who think they have reason to feast on good Friday, and to celebrate their Fasts on the Lords day? For, if the resurrection of Christ be no reason to make the day thereof Festivall, nor his Passion, why we should rather fast on the day of it; certainly, where both can∣not be kept, the one concerns us as much as the other do, and therefore there is as much reason to keep this as that. This to the later of the two assumpti∣ons. But in the former, there is no colour of truth; Nor do I see how any thing can be more strange then this; That so many men professing learning, and zeal to the Scriptures alone, should read in the Commandment, that God resed the seventh day from making the world, and therefore commanded the seventh day to be kept holy; And understand by all this, onely that God would have one day of seven, not that day of the seven on which himself rested. Unlesse it be still more strange, that men of common sense should believe, that the Jews were not ty∣ed by Gods Law to keep the day on which God rested, but onely one of se∣ven; so that, the keeping of the seventh was not by Gods Law, but by mans. For if it be once granted, that God commanded them to keep, not onely one day of seven, but in particular, the seventh; how can any common sense understand, that Christians, by the same command, should be tied to keep the first day of the week? If prejudice and faction went not under the colour of zeal to the Scriptures, it would appear to be zeal towards our selves and ours, that offers such violence to our own sense, in seeking to impose this sense up∣on the Scriptures. In plain terms, there can be nothing more manifest to Chri∣stians in the Law of Moses; then it is manifest that the precept of the Sabbath is a ceremonial Precept, figuring the rest of Christians from the bondage of sin, by doing, for the future, God works here in the Church militant; and from the bondage of pain, when that rest is become perfect in the triumphant Church of the World to come: And all this by the work of this precept; that is, by resting from bodily labour in the Land of promise, in remembrance of the bon∣dage of Aegypt, which the Israelites had escaped. For in Deutronomy V. 15. this is the reason alleged why they where to rest, Ezek. XX. 12. Ex. XXXI. 31. I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they might know, that it is I the Lord their God that sanctifieth them. And therefore the Apostle, Heb. IV. 4. 5, 9, 10. showeth, the seventh day to signifie the rest of the Land of poie. For, saith he, in one place it is said; God rested on the seventh day from all his work. And here (Psalm. XCV. 11.) if they shall enter into my rest. For, he that is entred into his rest, hath ceased from his own works, as God from his. Therefore there remaineth another rest to the people of God (as the Apostle argu∣eth) by the same reason, as the carnal rest of the Jewes is a figure of the spiritu∣al rest of Christians, in grace here, in glory in the world to come. And there∣fore, when he is afraid least he should have laboured in vain upon the Galatians, IV. 10. because they observed days, and moneths, years; when he teacheth the Colossians, II. 16. not to be over-ruled in the mater of new Moons or Sabbath; When he sheweth the Romanes XIV. 5. that they who esteemed on one day be∣fore another were weak Christians; He did not mean to remove the obligation of the seventh day upon the first; but to show, that Christians may as well think themselves bound in conscience to be circumcised, as to be under the precept of the Sabbath. And, let me understand, how we can be bound by the precept of the Sab∣bath,
and not be bound to that measure of rest which the precept of the Sab∣bath limiteth. For, the constitution which the Jews go by this day, is so grounded in the Text, that it is not possible to imagine, that ever it was practised other∣wise; the leter of the Law manifestly distinguishing between worke and servile work, and permitting the dressing of meat upon the first and last dayes of the Passovr, Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles, but forbidding servile work, that is to say, such work as slves were imployed about for their Masters advan∣tage; but, upon the Sabbath and day of atonement, forbidding all work; that is, not onely servile work, but the dressing of meat, upon those days, whereupon comes the express prohibition of kindling fire on the Sabbath, not for the time that they lived in the wildernesse, but, as the Law expresseth, in all their habi∣tations, Ex. XII. 16. XXXV. 30. XVI. 23. Levit. XXIII. 3. 7, 8, 21, 25, 28. Numb. XXIX. 1, 7. And therefore, Deut. XVI. 8. where, for brevities sake, he saith of the Passover, No worke shall be done in it; The Greek adds out of Exo∣dus and Leviticus;  Besides what shall be dressed for meat. And therefore, when our Lord goes to dne with a Pharisee, Luc. XIV. 1. it is no marvail that he is invited upon a Festivall, on which they hold themselves still bound to eat the best meat, and drink the best wine, and put on the clothes they have: But he knew his entertainment must be upon meats dret the day before. And therefore, he not onely reproveth the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who, for their own profit, to draw their Oxe or their Ass out of the pit, could bl it; and in a charitable cause, of healing a man, stood upon it: But further, he showes it to be a meer positive precept of the Law, when, by the right of a Pro∣phet, he commandeth the lame man whom he had cured, to cary away his bed upon the Sabbath, Joh. V. 10. the Prophet of the old Law having forbidding to cary any burthen upon the Sabbath, Jer. XVII. 21. 22. And the reason, my Father still worketh, and so do I worke; inerreth, that, as the rest of God was not from bodily labour, so neither is it the rest from bodily labour which he or his Gospel intendeth. I conclude therefore, that which will seem strange to un∣skilful people; That the onely thing commanded by the leter of the fourth Commandement, is to rest from bodily labour upon the seventh day of the week, on which God rested, from whence it is called the Sabbath; But, by the mysticall sense of it under the New Testament, to rest from our own works of sinne here, that we may attain to the rest of God in the world to come. And I cannot see how a more evident argument can be expected for this, then the ex∣tending of the precept, to cattel and strangers, not onely to children, who other∣wise are not under the precept. For, strangers, in the Law, (that is, those that worshipped the true God alone, but were not circumcised, who are therefore alwayes translated Conuerts in the Syriack, to wit, from Idols) were onely tyed to seven precepts, which all the Sons of Noe had received from him; Whereof that of the Sabbath was none. And therefore, it is not they that are command∣ed to rest, but Gods people are commanded that they shall not work, as they are commanded that their Cattel shall not work. I know there is a strong Argument against this, in vulgar esteem, which to me makes no difficulty at all; that they are commanded to sanctifie or keep ho∣ly the Sabbath. But, he that admits the true difference between the Law and the Gospel, must admit a legall as well as a spirituall holinesse. And I would know, what holinesse there is in offering a brute beast to God in sacrifice, that is not, in sitting still on the seventh day: Both being stamped with Gods com∣mand; and the rest of the Body signifying the rest of the soul from sinne, which is very holy, as the sacrifice is holy, because it signifieth the holinesse of our Lord Christ, or of them whom he sanctifieth. The Apostle teacheth us thus to distinguish, when he saith, Heb. IX. 11. If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of a red cow, sprinkling the purified, sanctifieth to the purity of the flesh; For, the holiness it procureth, is but the capacity of free conversation amongst the people of the true God, as to the leter of the Law: And, bodily rest upon the Sabbath, is a full profession of the true God which made heaven and earth, and
brought his people out of Egypt. I do not deny, that the service of God was commanded by the Law upon the Sabbath: But not by this precept. You have an order for publick Assemblies on the Sabbath, as well as on other Festivals, Levit. XXIII. you have an order for what sacrifices should be offered on each of them, Num. XXVIII. But, had the Law gone no further then the fourth Commandment, the Jews had not been tied to those precepts. I acknowledge further, that they were bound to serve God with other offices (such as are com∣mon to them and us both) upon the Sabbath, as upon other Festivals, when they had Synagogues, or means to assemble themselves otherwise, as Abenezra observes out of 2 King. IV. 23. For had it not been the custome to resor to the Prophets at the Festivals, he would not have said; Why wilt thou go to the Prophet? It is neither new Moon nor Sabbath. And the order for this, which we see by the acts of the Apostles, and the Gospels, as well as by the Jews Con∣stitutions, no man will deny to have obliged them by virtue of the Law; But, not by the leter of it: which had it been precisely followed, the objection of Origen, and other of the Fathers must have taken place; and no man must have stirred out of the place where he should be found, at the coming in of the Sab∣bath. But, in regard there was alwayes in that people, a sense of that spiritual service of God, which these carnal precepts tended to; therefore was there pro∣vided a power to limite the extent of the leter, so as not to destroy duties of greater consequence. And it seems, they pitched upon a reasonable ground for a reasonable measure, when they made a Sabbath dayes journey so much as the distance of the utmost camp from the Tabernacle in the wildernesse: But, he that was not within that distance of a Synagogue, by going to a Synagogue must violate the Law, that saith; Thou shalt not stirre out of thy place on the Sab∣bath. It was therefore holinesse to sit still; otherwise, the service of God must not have been omitted for it. Therefore, the service of God by those offices which Christians serve him with, is no otherwise, intimated rather then provided for, by the Law, then, as the Gospel is witnessed rather then inacted by it. And it is truly said, that God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it; in that he appoint∣ed his rest in the world to come, for those who had rested from their own works here; But consequently, in that he appointed the rest of the seventh day in the Land of promise to be a figure of it. For, I take not upon me to say; That God hallowed not the seventh day till he gave the Law, (understanding that which is said at the creation; that he blessed and sanctified it, by a Prolepsis, because he did it when he gave the Law) because I need not: The designing of the thing signified by it, (which is more properly the rest of God, then not working) reflecting the attribute of holinesse upon the day which he designed for the sign of it. For, in that God rested the seventh day from making all his works; he signified, that he appointed rest for them that do his work here, in the world to come. In that, delivering his people out of Egypt, he appointed them to rest from bodily labour upon the seventh day; he signified, that he ap∣pointed them whom he had given the rest of the promised Land, a shadow of resting from their own works to do his, the substance whereof is the conversati∣on of Christians in the Church, which the Land of promise igureth, as well here, as in the world to come. The former appointment is that which the bles∣sing and hallowing of the seventh day, at the creation; the second, that which the hallowing of the same, at giving the Law, signifieth. Nor do I make it my business, that the Fathers before the Law, did ever keep or not keep the seventh day for Gods service; because I neither see evidence for this, nor for that. For, though the remembrance of the seven days of the week is so ancient, and so ge∣neral among all Nations, (as you may see by that very learned Work, de Jure naturae & Gentium secundum Ebraeos) that you may well conclude it to be a mark and impress of the creation in seven days; yet will this argue no obser∣vation of it under the Patriarches: Because, the appropriating of them to the seven Planets (though conrived by the Devill, to divert that truth to superstiti∣on, which is the ground of Religion according to the Scripture) disables us to
argue the creation it selfe from it, to those that know it not otherwise, much more any rule of Gods service grounded upon it. But he that should say, that the Sabbath was kept under the law of Nature, as it was to be kept under the law of Moses, must first answer Tertullian, cont. Jud. cap. IV. (and Justine from whom he hath it, and all Fathers that have used it▪ after them, and understood the interess of Christianity better then we do) Quis legit Abrahamum Sabba∣tizantem? For why should he think to perswade us to such a ridiculous imagi∣nation, if he have no Scripture for it? And therefore, though I agree not with Philo, that the Jews had forgot which was the seventh day, till God recalled the remembrance of it, by sending down Manna, and therefore said; Remem∣ber to keep holy the Sabbath; yet I do not allow this to be said, because they had forgot it by their Apostasy in Egypt; where, it is plain, they forgot their God, as I shewed you afore: But, because they forgot Gods first command, at the giving of Manna, therefore it is reason they should be charged to remem∣ber it for the future. As little do I esteem of that meere voluntary presumption, that, being part of the Decalogue, the precept of the Sabbath, must needs be part of Gods per∣petual Law, whither naturall and morall, or positive. For, is it not the Deca∣logue that saith; That thy dayes may belong in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee? Or, doth the Land of promise in, the leter, belong to any but Is∣raelites? Again, the tenth Commandment forbiddeth to covet another mans wise, adultery being forbidden afore: And therefore, to covet another mans wife in the tenth Commandement, is; to compasse another mans wife; which might be done where the Law alloweth divorces, as Moses his Law doth. If therefore the first and last Commandment of the second Table are, by the terms of them, appropriated to Gods ancient people; is it strange, that the precept of the Sabbath should not be thought perpetual, to oblige all mankind, but Ceremonial, to oblige onely the same? That there should be a Ceremoniall precept in the first Table of the Decalogue? Nay, seeing, to all mankind, it can import no more then a circumstance of time for the publick service of God; what reason can be imagined, why a precept of that consequence should make one in the first Table of the Decalogue? whereas, importing to▪ that people, the creation of all things by the true God, and their deliverance out of Aegypt, and by consequence the obligation of his whole Law; it is worthily reckoned, by the Jews Doctors, among the very principall precepts of it. As for Christi∣ans, the literal sense of it is no lesse unlawful for them to observe, then it is for them to be circumcised, or to undertake the Law of Moses; to the which the Sabbath, next to circumcision, obligeth. And by consequence, the spirituall sense of it importeth no lesse then the whole duty of a Christian, (which all ceremonies do figure) that is to say; resting from our works of sinne, and con∣sequently, busying our selves about the works of Gods service. And therefore I do marvel, that those who so obstinately promote this Doctrine, are not sen∣sible of the scandall they give to them, who have visibly been seduced to keep the Saturday, by grounding themselves upon it; And may, by the same reason, be seduced, to be circumcised and turn Jewes; If yet it be a thing to do, and that divers English, in these unstable times, not distinguishing between that which did, and that which doth oblige, when they find both in the Scriptures, have not hereby been moved to make that change. For, when they are told, that, by the leter of the fourth Commandment, they are obliged to keep the first day of the week; And, by common sense, discovering a great part of the premises, discern, that if the fourth Commandment be in force, they cannot be obliged to keep the Lords day; Is it not an even wager, that, (not doubting the fourth Commandment to be in force, as they are told▪) they shall keep the Saturday, which, if it be in force, they ought to keep, rather then the Lords day, which (finding no reason for it, because they are told none) they will presently imagine to be a Popish custome. I know there is one argument, which is very plausible to induce well meaning Christians, into that zeal which we see they
have, for the strict keeping of the Lords day, which they call the Sabbath; Be∣cause this opinion will oblige the world to exercise more works of godlinesse, and to abstain from more of those debauches which Festivals occasion, in vulgar people, then otherwse. To which, for the present, I will say onely this; That, having showed the truth to be as it is, I can oblige all Christians to believe, that Gods glory, and the advancement of his service, cannot be grounded well, but upon the truth. And therefore, I may well demand their patience, till I come by and by, to show the ground of the mistake which they are carried away with, to think, that Gods glory and service is not more plentifully provided for, by the Laws and customes of the Catholick Church, then by strict keeping the Sabbath upon a false ground; which, hindring the effect of those Laws, by con∣sequence, hinders Gods service. But now, all this being setled, what is there remaining to alledge, why Chri∣stians should be bound to keep the Lords day, but the act of the Apostles, by virtue whereof it came into force among all Christians, in all Churches? For, it would be too ridiculous to allege, that it is grounded upon those Scriptures, whereby it appeareth that it was kept under the Apostles, either as a reason suf∣ficient, or as distinct from the authority of the Apostles. For, these Scriptures being the Scriptures of the Apostles, we can derive no authority from them, but that which we first suppose in the Apostles? I suppose, here that no man will, say that our Lords appearing to his Disciples after his resurrection upon that day, was enough to make it a Law, or evidence that it was so made; unlesse his Apostles could testifie that he appeared to that purpose. As for the rest, if it may by circumstance appear, that, under the Apostles, they did assemble to the service of God upon the Lords day; will it therefore follow, that all Chistians are bound to do the same? Or, can any more then this appear, by that which I alledged out of the Apostles writings? If there could, the writings of the A∣postles being their act, as much as any act whereby they could declare an in∣tent to oblige the Church; there will be nothing to bind it to keep the Lords day, but the authority of the Apostles. But, he that will give his own com∣mon reason leave to speak, shall hear it say; that it is not their words that ob∣lige us to it, but the originall and universall custome of the Church, evidencing, that they used to celebrate that day, with an intent to introduce the obligation of it into the Church. For, of this original and universal custome, having as yet found no question made on any side; I hold it superfluous to take pains, to make evidence of that which no man questions. When Justine the Martyr, pre∣senting to the Empire an Apology for all Christans, declareth, that their cu∣stome was to assemble on the Lords day, to serve God with the offices of Christianity, which there he describeth; had it not been to abuse himself and the Empire, to declare that for the custome of all Christians, which was indeed the custom of some, but of others not? Whither Easter was to be kept upon the fifteenth day of the first Moon, upon which our Lord suffered, or upon the next Lords day, upon which he rose again, was a dispute in the Church, as an∣cient as the Apostles; The former custome having been delivered to the Chur∣ches of Asia by S. John, the later to the West, by S. Peter and S. Paul. But, what ground could there be for this dispute, had not the first day of the week been honoured and observed above the rest, in regard of our Lords rising again? Certainly the Eionites were one of the ancientest sects thar rose up against the Church; and they, as Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. III. 27. keeping the Sabbath as the Jews, and because the Jews kept it, observing also the Lords day, because the Christians kept it. It is true, that, among the Eastern Christians, the Saturday was observed for the service of God, many ages after condescension to the Jews (in regard whereof the observation of Moses law was in use after Christ, in some parts of the Church more, in some lesse) was quite out of date. But that is no argument, that the Lords day was not kept, when the Sabbath was kept, to them who see S. Paul keep the Lords day, Act. XX. 7. within the time of compliance with the Jewes. For, the offices which God is served with by the
Church, are pleasing to him at all times, as well as in▪ all places; where∣as the keeping of the Sabbath, upon any day but a Saturday, would have been a breach of his Law. For, when the other Festivals of the Jews are called Sab∣baths in the Law; that is not to say, that the Sabbath was kept upon them (for I have showed you two severall measures of rest due upon them by the Law) but, that they participated much of the nature of the Sabbath, and therefore may be called with an addition such or such Sabbaths, but not absolutely the Sabbath. Therefore, when Christians afterwards continued the custome of serving God upon the Sabbath, that is the Saturday; it is to be understood, that they served God with the offices of Christianity, not with the rest of the Jews▪ Sabbath. If it be further demanded, whither the obligation of the Lords day do not de∣pend upon the precep of the Sabbath, so that it may be called, with an addi∣tion, the Sabbath of Christians, though not absolutely the Sabbath; (because that nme is possessed already by the Saturday, in the language of all Christians as well as Jews, till men affected an abuse in the name, to bring their mistake in∣to mens minds) To this I answer; that, if the Lords day had no dependance upon the precept of the Sabbath, we could not give a reason why one day of seven is observed: For, the choice of the number could not come by chance. And I cautioned afore, that the Resurrection of Christ was as sufficient a reason why the Church should serve God on the Sunday, as the creation of the world was, why the Synagogue should serve God on the Saturday. But this dependance was not immediate, because I showed also, that this was not enough to introduce the obligation upon us. The act of the Apostles intervening, was the means to make the obligation necessary and legall; whereof, before, the ground onely was reasonable. But, I do not mean this dependance to be the effect of the fourth Commandment onely, which prescribeth onely bodily rest, as I have showed; but of these appendences of it, whereby, the Assemblies of the Jews, and their sacrifices for that day are inacted. For, because they were to serve God upon the Sabbath, it was certainly reasonable, in regard of our Lords resurrection, that Christians should serve God upon the first day of the Week. If any man in this regard will call the Lords day the Christians Sabbath, or the like, I find no fault with it (nay, I find it so called by the Christians of Aethiopia, in Scaliger, VII. de Emend. Temporum.) Provided he conne my opinion that thanks which it deserves, for leaving no further room to unstable spirits, to imagine (as some great Masters have done) that it is in the power of Churches (or of Christian Powers rotecting them) to chuse another day of seven, or of less then seven, for Gods publick service. For, not being out of the reach of such power im∣mediately, by virtue of the fourth Commandment, as I and they both have shew∣ed, it is beyond the reah of it by virtue of the Apostles authority, and the act of it. And now it is time to declare, the sense of the Catholick Church derived from the doctrine and writings of the Apostles to be this, concerning the times of Gods service; That, the offices thereof being alwayes acceptable to God, and seasonable, so that they be orderly done, it is the duty of the Church to pro∣vide that they be as frequently celebrated, as the occasions of the world will al∣low; not by particular Christians alone, but, at the common assemblies of the Church. Whereby it may appear, how injurious, and prejudicial to the service of God the zele of those is, who, challenging the whole Sunday for the service of God, by virtue of the fourth Commandement, seem, thereupon, to take it for granted, that there ought to be no order for the publick service of God, up∣on other Festivals, and times of Fasting appointed by the Church; nor, which is more, for the dayly celebration of divine service in the Church. There hath been a pretense indeed, that, when the fourth Commandement saith; Six dayes thou shalt labor, and do all that thou hast to do; It forbiddeth the Church to give any Rule of forbearing bodily labor, for the exercise of Gods service. But so ridiculous, that, even these who have the conscience to hold the conclusion, have not the face to maintain the premises. That form of speech manifestly import∣ing
no more than this; That the present Law requires no more than keeping the first day of the week; seeing it is manifest, that, by other Laws, God intend∣ed to proceed further, and to except other dayes from the bodily labor of his then people, for his service. Thereupon it is manifest, that the Synagogue pro∣ceeded likewise to except other dayes, for which there rose occasions, for the like purpose. And truly, those who think it a burthen to the duty of working for mens living, that there should be an Order for the dayly serving of God in the Church, having all them to attend it, that are not prevented of it by necessary occasions; may look upon the Jews, and blush to consider, that they, as S. Je∣rome, Epiphanius, and Justine the Martyr assure us, should assemble themselves thrice a day in their Synagogues to curse our Lord Christ; (which, their own Con∣stitutions, not mentioning, do provide for the service of God nevertheless) but, that it should be counted superstitious for Christians to meet for Gods service in publick, unless it be on the Lords day. Certainly, the practice of the primi∣tive Christians at Jerusalem signifies no such thing; all the contribution there raised tending to no other purpose, but, that the Church might hold together in the doctrine of the Apostles, and the service of God▪ and celebration of the Eucharist; Though they went also into the Temple, and served God with the Jews, whom they then hoped, and intended to reduce unto Christianity. But I will referr my self in this point, as in that which follows, to that which I have said, in my Book of the service of God at the Assemblies of the Church, Chap. VIII. having received, from no hand, any maner of satisfaction, in the least of it. Whereby it will appear, that the Church hath power to limit the times of Gods service upon this ground; Because the occasions of the world suffer not Christians alwayes to attend it, which, so oft as the Church shall finde it possible, they are bound to do: And, that the use of this power, as it is justified by the practice of the whole Church, so it is necessary to the advancement of godli∣nesse according to Christianity: Nor can the effect thereof be superseded, with∣out hindring the service of God, whatsoever the strict keeping of the Lords day may contribute to the same. Those times of persecution succeeded, to the pri∣mitive Church, wherein, it is altogether admirable to consider, how it was possi∣ble to reduce the whole body of Christians to an orderly course, of so frequent service of God, as appeareth; The difficulties of assembling themselves being so great, as under persecution must needs be. Therefore, when the exercise of Christianity was free and peaceable, when all Nations and Languages, upon their conversion to Christianity, had made it their business, and set aside means, by which the service of God might be daily celebrated, and all men have opportu∣nity to frequent the same, so farr, either as their occasions would give leave, or their hearts to God minde them to frame their occasions; to take away this or∣der, and to destroy the means of executing it, as either superstitious or super∣fluous, what is it else but that curse, which the Jews, in their Synagogues, would have wished Christianity, when they met to curse Christ? And, if all difference of dayes for the service of God being taken away by Christianity, so that no office of it is at any time unacceptable; (as the offices of Judaism were abominable, not upon their legal days) And the Apostles have notwithstanding, for orders sake, that there might be a certain time, inviolably dedicated to that purpose, set aside the first day of the week for it shall; wee question whether it was they that instituted the solemnity of Easter Holy-days, and consequently of Whitsuntide, in remembrance of the resurrection of our Lord, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, or not? For, all the Lords dayes in the year have the mark that stands on them, from that one, on which our Lord rose again. And, since wee know, that the difference about keeping Easter is as ancient as the Apostles, and, that there could have been no ground for it, had not the Lords day born that mark at that time; (the question being onely when the Fast should end, and the celebration of Easter come on) can any doubt re∣main, that the solemnity of Easter was then in use? And, if it can be said, that the keeping of Easter for seven dayes, from whence, in stead of the Heathen names, the Christians called the dayes of the week, feriam primam, secundam—
& septimam; and the use, to pray standing from Easter to Whitsuntide, were not original nor universal customs of the Church, but accessory and local; yet can it never be said, that there was any time, or any part of the Church that did not fast before Easter, that Fast which they called  in Greek, and quadragefimam in Latine; Though I cannot say for forty days, as the name seems to import,  signifying a summ of fifty days in the language of all Jews or Christians that write in Greek. For, I have not on any hand any satisfaction in the words of Irenaeus, the true reading whereof, there maintained, seemeth to import; that, in some places, they fasted but forty hours, before the Feast of the Resurrection. Tertullian de Jejuniis cap. XIII. objecteth to the Catholicks, that they Fasted the Easter Fast, citra dies quibus ablatus est sponsus. On this side the dayes on which the Bridegroom was taken away. More dayes than our Lord was in the grave. But that is farr from forty. That which is alleged for the forty dayes Fast out of Ignatius is not found in the true Copy. Thus farr the solem∣nity of Easter, and the Fast before it appear original: But not forty days. This will scarce allow that to be true, which the learned Selden in his book de Anno Jud. c. XXI. produceth, of his Eutychius, which saith; that the Christians, after the Ascension of our Lord, though they kept Easter when our Lord suffred and rose again, yet, kept the Fast of forty days immediately after the Epiphany, as our Lord after his Baptism; (which, they supposed, fell on the day of his birth) and that, when Demetrius was Bishop of Alexandria, by many leters and mes∣sages that passed between him, and Victor of Rome, and the then Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Antiochia, it was agreed, that, the order which hath since prevai∣led should take place. Much less will the said passages of Irenaeus and Tertullian allow, that which the book of the Popes lives, compiled by Anastasius, but, out of the records of that Church, reports of Telesphorus, that hee ordered the Lent Fast for VII weeks afore Easter; rather signifying, that hee ordered some∣thing about it, which later authors report, according to that which was later in debate: For, that there was dispute, in the time of Pius, about keeping Easter, (that is, ending the Fast) on the Lords day, or according to the Jews, may ap∣pear by the revelation which Hermes his Pastor pretendeth to that purpose; Which Anastasius allegeth to that purpose. Therefore, though I can allow Eu∣tychius no credit of historical truth, when hee agreeth not with authors which have that credit, yet, in a case where intelligence is wanting, I must needs think his relation considerable. It is well enough known, what Socrates hath discour∣sed for his opinion, that the Lent Fast came in by meer custom, not by any Or∣der of the Apostles; what hee hath alleged of the visible practice of the Church in his time, to that purpose Eccles. ist. V. 21. Sozomenus VII. 19. more parti∣cularly, that the Montanists fasted two weeks, some three continual weeks, o∣thers, as much or more weeks as came to three weeks; (which perhaps may save Socrates his credit, reporting, that at Rome, three weeks; if it be true which Pe∣itus hath observed, that Leo and S. Austine say, that they fasted not the the Tues∣dayes and Thursdayes of Lent in their time) others, in five, six, or seven. More, he might have said, For, the Christians of Syria & Aethiopia, and the Coptites begin their Ninive a week before Septuagesima: That is their forty days fast, because Jonas prophesied; Yet forty dayes and Ninive shall be destroyed; The variety seemes to argue that it came by degrees to this certain num∣ber of dayes, by the example of the Clergy, the freedom of the people, and the authority of the Church. Which, though I shall be glad to be informed further in, whether so or otherwise; yet, having setled from the beginning, that the chief difference between the Apostles Orders, and those of the Whole Church, is the mater of them, determinable by common sense and the state of times, to conduce or not to conduce to the end of Gods service, for which it stands; To mee, it makes not much difference, whether instituted by the Apostles, or received by the whole Church, the power of the Church; manifestly extending to it: And the solemnizing thereof being of such inestimable use, though not for the instructing of them that stood to be Christians, as in the pri∣mitive times, yet alwayes for the profession and practice of Penance, and, for the reconciling of sinners to the Communion of the Eucharist at Easter. And there∣fore,
if I do not apply unto the Forty days Fast, as, to the Fast before Easter, I do apply the rule of S. Austine, that those things which the whole Church ob∣serveth, having no remembrance of the beginning of them, must be ascribed to the Tradition of the Apostles; yet I do apply unto them that other saying of S. Austine, which importeth; That to dispute against those things, which the whole Church observeth, is the height of madnesse. Nor is there any thing in that Law unsurable to Christianity, but that which the coming of the world into the Church necessarily inforceth; That all are constrained to keep it; and so, good Christians, notwithstanding the exception of the sick and impotent, may suffer for the refractory and prophane, among whom they live; Who, when it came first in use, no doubt, were left to themselves; and to that, which, the good example of the Clergy moved them in consciece to undergo. The Church of England, I see, for the prejudices which that time was pos∣sest with, could not undertake to restore the ancient custome of publick Pe∣nance, at the beginning of Lent. But when the Church professeth withall, how much it were for the souls health of all, that Penance were restored; when it prescribeth a Commination against sinners, to charge upon particular Consci∣ences, to exercise that themselves, which, for preserving of Unity, it underta∣keth not to impose upon all; when it ordereth those Prayers for the service of that season, which cannot be said with a good conscience, but by those, who, in some measure apply themselvs to these exercises; well may we grant, that the tares of false doctrine springing up with the Reformation, have made these wholsome orders of litle effect; but it must never be granted, that the Church of England maketh either the Lent Fast, or other times of fasting superstitiosu. As for the difference of meats, true it is, that S. Paul hath marked those that sorbid mariage, that injoyn abistnence from meats, which God hath made to be received with thanksgiving by those that believe and know the truth, as men of ly∣ing spirits, and teaching the doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, with seared consciences, 1 Tim. IV. 1-4. But, always understanding those followers of Simon Magus, and Cerinthus, from whom, the Hereticks that succeeded, learned, that this world was not made by God; and, that the bond of mariage came in by the spirits that made the world, whom we must escape, by abstain∣ing from some kinds of creatures. What Christian can dare to say, with a good conscience, that the rule or custome of the Church, to forbear those meats and drinks that inflame the blood most, for the mortification of the flesh, hath any dependence upon those wicked blasphemies? Nay, who can read, that Daniel, in his fastings, eat no pleasant meat; but he must inferr, that there is no fasting observed, where men observe no difference of meats? Look into the Jews Con∣stitutions, and see how they observed their Fasts, and their Festivalls; you shall find it more ancient then Christianity, to solemnize Sabbaths, (and proportion∣ably other Festivalls) with the best meats, the best drinks, the best apparel, all things of the best: And on the other side, as much care, that there be nothing to signifie, or ground any such construction upon their Fasts and Humiliations. So that, we may well ask those that appoint their solemn Humiliations upon the Sabbath, (for so they will needs call the Sunday, right or wrong) what Religion they intend to be of; neither Judaism nor Christianity having produced any such sect, till our time. And therefore we must say, that, those who make a dis∣ference of meats for conscience sake, as if all meats were not Gods creatures a∣like; or, as if we held choice of meats to be still the service of God, because once it intitled the Jews to the Land of promise; are justly reproved by S. Paul, ad∣ding, in the place afore-named, as a reason of the premises; For, every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, being sanctified by the word of God, (assuring us hereof) and by prayer. But, if the meaning be further to say, that it is superstitious to observe fasting with meats of less nourishment, that signifie mourning, that effect the mortification of the flesh, and the concupisences thereof, and that for conscience sake, not onely in that regard, but in regard the Church hath appointed it for that purpose; then must I say plainly, that this Doctrine, in stead of reforming or maintaining the
service of God, is the author of that licentiousness which we see come to pass. I will not here dispute, that there may not be as much riot, as much contradicti∣on to the end and purpose of fasting, in eating of fish, as in flesh; especially allowing Wine and Sweet-meats, as the Church of Rome doth, to those that are content to submit to other Laws of it. For, he who maintains, that there is no fasting properly so called, where there is no difference made between meats; and, those that provoke the appetite, and inflame the blood, are not laid aside; those that signifie mourning best, are not used; maintain sthat is it not properly fasting, where onely fish is served, if the quality or the quantity of that which is served may serve for feasting. And, such customes as those are mere irregularities, which the rule and practice of the primitive Church no way alloweth, all the dyet which it granted, being onely exceptions from total absinen, to sustain nature, and to maintain health, which no Religion destroy∣eth, and therefore excepteth weak ages and constitutions from this strictness. The granting of fish, above bread and water, and salt and herbs, is an abatement of the primitive strictness, which Clemens Alexandrinus reports, S. Mathew, Poe∣dagg. II. 1. Hegesippus in Eusebius, of S. James of Jerusalem, Hist. Eccles. II. 23. and S. Austine, adversus Faustum libro XX. cnapura in Ireneus, that is to say, a supper without any thing of a living creature at it, being the same that parasceve, or Friday. And, if we may reasonably imagine, that the cold climate wherein we live, and the spending of our bodies by the aire, requireth more effectuall restauratives, then the Eastern Countries, from whence these pra∣ctices first came; yet to make fasting, and forbid difference of meats, will al∣ways be things contradictory: To abate of that difference by litle and litle, ac∣knowledging the general ground of it, will be but the same, that may be obser∣ved in all exercises of Christianity; that the strictness thereof decayed by de∣grees, in succeeding times, from that which was practiced from the beginning, under the Apostles. For, the measure of Fasting in the ancient Church, was also till three in the afternoon, which the more devout extended, with the Jews, until the appearing of the Starres; and that the Montanists would have imposed upon the Church, for a Law declared by their Prophets. Now, in all these Western parts, (at least, according to practice, whatsoever be the Rule) it is granted, that fasting is but eating one meal a day, though it be at noone, not denying the collation at night, nor every where, no not at Rome it self, a draught of drink in the morning, and a bit of bread, least that draught do harm. And this is called the Fast of the Church, in opposition to the fast of na∣ture, prescribed to those that celebrate and receive the Eucharist, even from Physick, and any thing that may be received afore. But these are abatements, which no rule or custome of the ancient Church justifieth; onely, when more cannot be obtained, it is requisite, rather to cherish such a measure, as can be maintained, then to let all order go, under pretense of Christian liberty, which is indeed, abandoning our selves to sensuality, by casting off the rules which oblige us to mortifie natural concupisence. In the next place, it is a marvail to see, how ready men are to imbrace a slight plea, why the solemnity of our Lords birth should not be observed; though in the end, they forfeit the credit of their skill, in reforming, by discove∣ring their ignorance. Joseph Scaliger, a very learned man, and much studied in Chronology, thinking that he had found the true year of Christs birth, which had not been preserved past question in any record of the Church; (for the world, when it was not Christian, counted not by the time of Christs coming, as now it doth) bethought himself, that, by counting the courses of the Priests in the Temple, from the cleansing thereof by Judas Maccabus, (the year, and the moneth, and day whereof is certain) he might attain to the day that the course of Abia, whereof Zachary was, being the first course, Luke I. 5. came on to Minister in the Temple, (the XXIV divisions spending XXIV times seven days, in one course, certain) and by consequence the day of the Annunci∣ation V moneths after, and the day of our Lords birth, nine moneths after that, at least for the moneth and season of the year, though not to a day. And
accordingly found, that our Lord was born about the feast of Tabernacles with the Jews, in September, being a figure of the Tabernacle of his flesh. Though this was ingeniously argued, yet, had it proved true, it had been an unsufferable levit in any man, to inferre the dissolution of order in the service of God, and the peace of his Church, upon the supposition of it. For, who ever heard the Church declare, that the celebration of our Lords birth on the XXV of Decem∣ber, proceeds upon supposition, that he was indeed born that day; So that, supposing it uncertain on what day he was born, it was to be celebrated on no day? What reason, what sense can justisie such a consequence, when the cir∣cumstance of time is not considerable towards the end of Festivals, which is, the service of God; but onely as an occasion for the Church to take, of assem∣bling Christians? Not as among the Jews, whose solemnities, having depen∣dence upon the Land of promise, and the temporal promises thereof, if they kept not the due season of the year, were indeed abominable. Those therefore, that would perswade us, that there is any fault in solemnizing the remembrance of Christs birth, ought first to shew us, if they mean any good to our common Christianity, that the birth of Christ is not a it occasion of assembling Christi∣an people, to serve God with the offices of Christianity: Which if they should go about, they might well blush to remember; that, having been so zealous to cry up Market days for fit occasions of Gods service, wherein there is so much appearance of worldly profit, by increase of Trade, and commerce of people; they should have so litle regard to that consideration, upon which all mater of all Christian assemblies depends, as not to think it a just occasion of assem∣bling Gods people. It is true indeed, there hath been some difference in the observation of the Church about the day; the VI of January having heretofore been observed in some parts of the Church, for the day of Christs birth, as well as of his baptism; Which probably came from the Gospel, saying, that our Lord was baptized at thirty years of age, Luk. III. 23. and giving thereby occasion to place both upon one and the same day. This you shall find in Cassiane Collat. X. 1. And where Ammianus XXI relateth of Juliane, that, not willing as yet to declare himself Apostate, he came forth to Church, die Epiphaniorum, upon the Epiphany; Zonaras reporting the same, saith, upon the Nativity. Not because it was so held and observed in the West; but because Zonaras, a Greek, relates it as the East accounted it. And this was the ground for the XII days, when the XXV of December prevailed over the East; which was lately come to pass in S. Chrysostomes time, as, it is well known that Scaliger hath observed. But what will half-sighted ignorance plead, for the great boldnesse which it taketh, of innovating in the orders of the Church, upon a supposition always conjectu∣ral, and we acknowledged false by all Chronologers? For, could ever any man assure, but upon probable conjecture, that Judas Maccabaeus did begin the ser∣vice of the Temple rather with the first order, then with that at which it left off three years afore, which every man remembred? But, time having since dis∣covered, that it was not the true year of Christs birth, upon which Scaliger thought he was born; so farr is this ignorance from any plea for it self, that it may well be a warning to the like boldness, to be beter informed, before they undertake to reform. For, now they are to advise how to answer Bucherius the Jesuit, who, by counting the courses of the Priests, from the dedication under fudas, to the true year of Christs birth, hath found the time of it to fall near the XXV of December, from the annunciation of Zachary, being of the course of Abia. And the L. Primates late Annals, maintain the XXV of December for the true day of our Lords birth, delivered by S. Peter to the Church of Rome, upon the credit of the records of the Taxes then extant at Rome, and alleged by Tertullian. Though the same Tradition was not preserved in the Eastern Chur∣ches;) in so much, that, till S. Chrysostomes time, all the Churches agreed not in the day upon which they solemnized it. Now, if there be so great reason, why the Lent Fast should go before the Feast of Easter, to prepare all the world to renew the purpose and profession of their Christianity, by the exercise of devotion and Penance, as well as to pre∣pare
those that stood for their Christianity, to their Baptism at Easter, which was, ror many ages, the custome of the Church; how can it be denied, that the so∣lemnity of Advent, before the celebration of▪ Christs birth, is an order fit to provide the like means and opportunities, and advantages, for the advancement and improvement of Christianity, by the like exercises? Nor shall I need fur∣ther to dispute for the observing of Wednesdays and Fridayes, or Saturdays, with those that have admitted the premises; that the Church may and ought to set asde certain days for the service of God, in fasting and Penance for our own unworthinesse, as well as in feasing and rejoycing for Gods goodnesse. For, nce our transgressions have their recourse, as sure as the remembrance of our Lords rising again; is it, for the advantage, or for the disadvantage of Christia∣nity, that the Friday should be observed for the service of God, by humbling out selves in the sight of our nnes, as the Lords day, for his service, by setting forth his praises, in the sight of his mercies? And, seeing the Jews, from before our Lords time, observed Mundays and Thursdays for their private and publick hu∣liations, and the mo solemn days of assembling in their Synagogues, as I have showed there; And, that the Christians have always observed Wednesdays and Frydays to the like purposes; It seems to remain certain thereby, that the translation of the days is the act of the Apostles, seeking those days which were alike distant from the Lords day, as those which the Jews observed were from the Sabbath: Because no reason will allow, that after the time of the Apostles, the breach between the Church and the Synagogue being completed, Christi∣ans should imitate the orders of the Jews, and all agree in it. It must there∣fore be concluded, that the observation of Wednesdays and Thursdays is from the Apostles; Though the fasting upon Saturday, which the West observeth, come from the custome of the Church of Rome, which the rest of the West hath conformed it self to, in succeeding ages. Of the observation of the Saints memories, and the days on which the Martyrs suffered, which the ancient Church called their birth-days, to wit, into a beter world; I shall not say much, for the reason alleged before. Onely this, that those who think not so eminent acci∣dents sufficient occasions for the Church to meet upon, for the service of God, in the offices of that Christianity, which they either died in, or for; whatsoever they may pretend of their zeal for Christianity, cannot pretend towards that Christianity, in and for which they either lived or died. For, to what purpose rendeth that Christianity, the seeds whereof were sown in their lives, and ex∣amples, or in their deaths and sufferings; but, that God may be glorified in the service of his name, by those that do study to imitate those paterns thereof, which they have set us? I deny not, that there may come a burthen upon the Church, by multiplying the number of Festivall days, and that there might be and was reason, why it should be abated; But never, that there is superstition, either in the service of God, or in the circumstance of it, and occasion of cele∣brating it, upon the remembrance of Gods Saints. Neither will I say any more for the Fasts of Ember weeks, and of the Rogations, since I understand not, what quarel there can be to the occasions of them in particular, if it were agreed, that there is due ground for the setting apart of certain times for the service of God, whither as Fasts or Festivalls. Nor of the Hours of the day, or the deputing of them to the service of God, whither in publick or in privivate. For, what wil those that pretend so much to the Scriptures, answer to those testimonies of the Old and New Testament, where∣by I have proved, that the people of God did set aside the third, sixth, and ninth hour of the day for that purpose? That the Apostles of our Lord followed the same custome? That the Church hath alwayes done the same? All this while, supposing morning and evening Prayer over and above, as brought in by Ad∣am, or by Abraham, as the Jews will have it; whereupon the Christians in S. Cyprianes time, as appears by his Book de Oratione, had recourse to God five times a day; Till afterwards, as it is fit that Christianity go beyond Judaism in the service of God, the custome being taken up by the more devout, (whereof S. Cypriane makes mention in the same place) of rising by night to praise God,
(according to the Prophet David, Psalm, CXIX. 64. At midnight I will rise to praise thee, because of thy righteous Judgements;) And the evening service re∣quiring some exercise as well at going to bed, as in closing the evening, (which was called the Compline, as the complement of the days service) the service of God, whither publick or private, became divided into seven Houres; which, up∣on these grounds, were very reasonably counted Canonical, according to the same Pophet David, Psalm. CXIX. 164. Seven times a day will I praise thee, because of thy righteous Judgements. In fine, there can no question be made, that the Law o regular Hours of the day for Prayer, is evidently grounded up∣on the Scriptures, evidently authorized by the practice, not onely of the Church, but of Gods ancient people. And therefore, to make the Reformation to con∣sist in abolishing that Law, is, to make the Reformation to consist in abolish∣ing Gods service. And this I think enough to be said in this abridgment, seeing I am no further to ent into debate of the particulars, then the justifying of the generall ground requires; onely remembring that which I have said alrea∣dy, that the obligation is the same, whither the particulars may appear to have been established by the Apostles, or received into the generall practice of the Church; The power of the Apostles, supposing the being of Christianity, which their work was to preach, and extending no further, then the setling of it in the community of the Church, by the order of Gods service; which, the alteration of the sate and condition of the Church must need make changeable, as well as that which the whole Church should introduce: So that, whither the Apo∣stles, or the Church authorized by the Apostles, have introduced an order, with∣in the compass of Gods Law, (that is, the substance of Christianity) in the ob∣servation whereof, the unity of the Church in the service of God, which is the end of all order in the Churh, consisteth; it shall equally oblige every Christi∣an to maintain and cherish it, upon the crie of Schis to be incurred, in case any breach fall out by violating the same. CHAP. XXII. The people of God ied to build Synagogues, though not by the leter of the Law. The Church to provide Churches, though the Scripture command it not. Prescribing the form of Gods publick service, is not quenching the Spirit. The Psalter is prescribed the Church for Gods Praises. The Scriptures prescribed to be read in the Church; The Order of reading them to be prescribed by the Church. NOw, as for the determination of certain places for the service of God, I cannot see how there is or can be generally and absolutely any dispute, whether or no there ought to be places set apart for that purpose? so that all Christians may know where to resort to serve God; The mater being so evi∣dent to the common reason of all men, that, to make any scruple about it, in regard that there is no precept of God; Law for it written, either to the Jews in the Old Testament, or the Christians in the New; were to make a doubt whether God gave his Law to reasonable creatures or not▪ Indeed, in the Old Testament, there is a Precept for all Gods people, to resort to the place where he should chuse to place his name, for the offering of their burnt sacrifices and oblations, which he, thereby, makes abominable, any where else to be offered. But this might have been a colour to have pretended, that God had forbidden, (so fart from requiring) all other religious Assemblies of his people, or any places to be set apart for that purpose; had not his Prophets, and the Gover∣nors of his people understood from the the beginning, the difference between his spiritual and carnall Law, answerable to the difference between the King∣dom of Heaven, and the Land of promise. And that, though the ceremoni∣all service of God in the Temple, could not be so parted from his spiritual ser∣vice, that the place to which the one was confined, should exclude the other; yet, the spiritual service of God was to extend to those places, from whence his figu∣rative and ceremoniall service stood excluded by the Law. It is no marvail then,
if, for a time, (the acts where of we read in the Books of Josua, Judges, Ruth, and Samuel) Sacrifices were offered in the High Places; that is, in other pla∣ces deputed to the service of God, besides that where the Ark of the Covenant stood; Whither we suppose, that the choice, which, God by the Law had inti∣mated, that he would make, of a place where he intended to settle his service, were not executed all the while before the bringing of the Ark to Jeru∣salem, and the building of the Temple there; Or, whither there was a condi∣tionall purpose of God, of setling his service in the Tribe of Ephraim, at Shiloh, declared unto his people, which obliged them to resort thither, as we see they did, by the beginning of Samuel; but, that, this purpose being declared void by the captivity of the Ark, the high places came to be permitted again, as be∣fore the Ark had begunne to settle in Shiloh. In the mean time, I hold the o∣pinion neither blameable nor improbable, which the best learned do advance, for the beginning of Synagogues in the Land of promise; (that is to say, of pla∣ces where the people might and were to assemble, for the service of God, which was not confined to the Ark) To wit, that these high places were after∣wards deputed to the residence of Prophets, and their Disciples, and to that ser∣vice of God, which all Israel could not be present at in the Temple. Though, those that submitted not to the Law, as the determinaion of Gods choice to Jerusalem, did not cease to offer sacrifices and burn incense in the High pla∣ces, especially in such times, when Idolatry was grown so strong, that it could not be punished by exterminating those Cities that were found to have a hand in it, according to the Law, Deut. XV. For it is evident, that, offering sacrifice in the High places, was a great mean to palliate Idolatry; and, for that reason, had been forbidden by the Law. But, what reason hath any man to reject this opinion, having no beter evidence for any other place, or opportunity for any religious assembly of Gods people, but onely that before the Ark, for so long time? Indeed, in those Psalms that are intitled to Asaph, from LXXIII. to LXXXIII. there is mention more then once of other Houses of God, besides the Temple. But, of those Psalms, and the author and time of them, there is difficulty made, whither written by Asaph, or afterwards given to his posteri∣ty to sing in the Temple. For, seeing they not onely seem to point out Nebu∣chadnezzar, by the wilde bore out of the wood, LXXX. 13. but also the time when they had no Prophets, LXXXIV. 9. either we must grant, that these things are said by the spirit of Prophesy, or, that they were written in after times. I do indeed continue rather of the former judgement. But I spare not to allege the uncertainty, for an evidence, how farr they were from having any written Law for the building of Synagogues; which nevertheless, was a thing so neces∣sary for maintenance of their Religion, and the service of God according to it, that no man in his right senses can question, whither they were tied to it or not. Be it therefore uncertain, how farr Synagogues were propagated in the Land of promise, before the Babylonian Captivity; For, after the return, which is the oot of account, for the time, from whence all Idolatry was detested by them; from this time, when their dispersions among the Nations began, together with their detestation of their Idolatries, be it resolved, both that they did take upon them the building of Synagoues, for that service not confined to the Temple, which they found themselves tied to frequent; And, that they ought so to doe. Now, when Christianity first came in, not severed from Judaism, but distinguish∣ed by some offices (namely of Baptism and the Eucharist) tha is to say, by such Prayers, as were made at both; it is no marvail that the Christians frequenting the service of God, together with the Jews either the in Temple or in the Syna∣gogue, did content themselves, to celebrate the offices proper to Christiani∣ty in private Houses. For, I confess, when S. Luke says, that they broke bread, that is, celebrated the Eucharist, as the Syriack translates it, , that is, at home, or, from house to house, Act. II. 46. I rather think this was done in private houses, though Beza might be my author, that they had houses set apart for that purpose, if I meant to strain mine opinion beyond the evidence of it. But, of
the Church of Corinth, I say not the same, where, I find no appearance by S. Pauls Epistles, that there was any correspondence between the Jews and the Christians, or any expectation, that the service of God according to Christiani∣ty, eeding Judai, might convert Synagogues into Churches. And when S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XI. 22. Have yee not houses to eat and to drink in? or, de∣spise yee the Church of God, and shame those that have not? not onely the antithe∣s between houses to eat and drink in, and the Church of God, but also the diffe∣rence between shaming the poor, and despising the Church of God, seems to re∣quire, that a Church there signifie a Church; that is, the place, not the people; Though not doubting, that the assemblies of the Christians were there held ma∣ny times in ordinary houses, and upper rooms, Acts I. 13. XX. 8. but finding the Church at Corinth so well setled, that if those of Jerusalem contributed their estates to the maintenance of the people of the Church, no man can marvail that they should disbur for a Church. How arr, then, the Church began to be possed of places set apart for the offices of Christianity, seems to depend upon two points, severally in severall places: The probability of persecution, and the compliance with Judaism. Unless those two be reducible to one, in re∣gard of the great appearance; that, at the beginning, all probability of perse∣cution depended upon the interruption of complince and correspondence with the Jews. This all reason justifieth, that the Christians, so far as there was appear∣ane of probability, that they might injoy the liberty of meeting at certain known places, did, from the beginning, set apart certain places for that purpose, either uon contribution of the Churches, or, upon the liberal devotion of particular persons. And, for the proof of this, I think I need no more then the visible ex∣ample of the Jews, and the advantage which their Religion, and the truth of God had found, by by having set places, to which, not onely their own might resort to serve God out of a profession of his truth; but, even the Gentiles be wonne from the worship of Idols, by becoming acquained with the profession which they celebrated at such certain places. The effect of this advantage is e∣vident to us by the Acts of the Apostles, and the mention which there we find of their preaching in the Jews Synagogues; For, commonly, there is also mention of devout men, and devout women, and such as worshipped God of the Gentiles: Being indeed those, that were converted from the worship of Idols, to the true God, whom the Jews worshipped. And therefore, S. Paul, when he sheweth that Christianity had the like advantage, by the resort of Gentiles unto their assemblies, 1 Cor. XVI. 23. makes me think it still more probable, that they had then at Corinth, certain known places, set apart for their Assem∣blies. Onely I will adde the evidence of common sense, how much more op∣portunity there must needs be, for companies that are grown numerous, to assemble in certain known places set apart for that use, then in ordinary houses, serving for other purposes. And therefore, though I believe, that there is still mention, in such records as the Church hath left, of Assemblies held in ordinary houses, (that is to say, that there is many times mention of the Assemblies of Christians, (in the lives of the Saints, and the Acts of Martyrs) in private Houses, and not in Churches) yet, of the Titles, and Coemiteries of the Church of Rome, I do not believe the like. For, this word Title, necessarily importeth a Marke set upon a place, set aside for Church goods, to Church uses; it being then a visible custome in the world, or those things that became the Exchequers, by some title of Right, to have markes set upon them, challenging them upon that Title; and this be∣ing the reason of the name. Neither is it necessary, that this Marke should be a Cross without, as the Cardinall Baronis imagines, which might discover them to Persecutors; seeing the Marke might be visible, though onely to Christians, witnessing the consecrating of the place, to that distinct use. There is no cause, then, to discredit that which we have immediately from Anastasius, because he had the best and the ancientest Records of the Church for his materials; That, Pope Evaristus, so near our Lord, divided the Titles, that is, the Churches then extant, among his Presbyters. For, whereas Cornelis, in his leter to Fa∣bis,
Bishop of Antiochia in Eusebius, which I speak of elsewhere, tells him, that the Church of Rome had then six and forty Priests; Optatus, in his second Book, affirms, that the Christians had in Rome, when the Donatists first came thi∣ther, Quadraginta Basilicas & quod excurrit. Forty fair Churches and upwards. For, those houses, which, Christians having consecrated to the use of the Church, a room was reserved in for divine service, were afterwards turned into better buildings, meerly for the service of God, and not, for the retyring of Christians in time of persecutions. Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. VIII. 2. shows us, that, afore the persecution of Diocletiane, the Christians, in all Cities, had raised new buildings from the very foundations, because the old received not their assemblies. So neer then, comes the number of Churches, at the Donasts coming to Rome, to the number of Priests in Cornelius his time. So neer comes this agreement to justifie the distribution of Titles under Evaristus. As for the burying places of Christians, (which their saith must need require them so keep distinct from the sepulchers of them who had it not; whether within or with∣out their Cities) who can deny, that it was a great opportunity for the celebra∣ting of their Assemblies? Especially the remains of them near Rome, that are yet extant, witnessing, what means theere was both, for their refuge there in the time of persecutio, and also for the solemnizing of the offices of Christanity, as you may see by those things which Cardinal Baronius relateth. I alledged a∣fore, the sentence of the Emperour Alexander Severus, about a place question∣able between the Christians and the Taverners, being very confident, that no reason will allow, that this place could be otherwise adjudged to the Christians, then, as, belonging to the Church of the place. I know we have many places alleged out of Origen, Arnobius, Lactantius, and others that de∣fend Christianity against the Gentiles, to show, that Christians then had no Temples. But the effect of them lies in the word Templum,  sig∣nifying stately Fabricks, built for the magnifying of the professed Religion, by those that built them; which the Christians could not then do, when their re∣ligion was not allowed. In the mean time, places for the opportunity of assem∣bling themselves which Arnobius and Ammianus, call conventicula, they can no more then be supposed to have wanted, then to have been no Christians. And that, before Constantine, they had those Fabricks which might bear the same of Templa or Basilicae, because, for the bulk and beauty of them, answerable to the Temples of the Heathen Gods, or, the great mens Palaces among the Romans. some whereof perhaps were, by that time dedicated to be Churches; The same Lactantius may be my witnesse, where he mentioneth such a one at Nicomedia; Ego, cum in Bithynia or atorias liter as▪ accitus docerem, contigisset{que}, ut, eodem tempore, dei Templum everteretur. I, saith he, being sent for into Bithynia, and teaching eloquence, when it fell out that the Temple of God was pulled down. This was one of those fair buildings which Eusebius spoke of, set up before the per∣secution of Diocleiane, and pulled down by it. And besides the place quoted afore, Optatius, lib. I. where, speaking of the Bishops that made the best of the Donatists, after the persecution of Diocletiane, he saith; that they met in Council at Carthage, in domo Urbanii Carosii, giving for a reason, nondum e∣nim erant Basilicae restitutae; because the Palaces were not restored to the Church, therefore they met in a private house. And truly, it were a thing so barbarous, Cycloical, (so becoming those Monsters, of whom the Poet says, , that none of them hearkens to another in any thing) to imagine, that it is not necessary to have certain known places for Christians to meet at for the service of God, that I will not suppose, that the question is about that point amongst us, whatsoever noise may have been made in this confusion amongst us. But rather, that the difference is about having stately Fabricks, for magnifying of the Religion which we profess; about the maner of building them, according to the importance of those offices for which they are built; a∣bout the consecrating of them, and the holinesse to be ascribed to them, about using the same buildings, which have once, either truly, or imaginarily, been polluted with Idolatry. All which being considerations not proper to this
place, I shall content my selfe to have said this to the point proper to this place. I go forwards, to consider the Order, or the mater and form of the publick service of God, which I cannot do without setting aside one scruple, which was never heard of in Gods Church till our time, and in our time, hath been caried on so hot, that it hath been one of the chief pretenses of dissolving the unity of be Church in England, which hath opened the Gap to all the Divi∣sions which we are over-runne with. It is pretended, that God is not to be ser∣ved with soes of Prayer prescribed by the Church; but, with that which his Spirit incite to those who have the Grace of the Spirit, whither appointed by the Church, to the Ministery of Gods service in publick, (which are those, & only those, as I have showed, that are designed to bear a share in the Government of the Church) or not. What the Presbyterians have abated hereof, by their Directory, I will not be troubled to inquire. Every man may remem∣ber, that, so long as the businesse was to dissolve the unity of the Church, and to make vo the Laws which settled it; they cryed up this position as much as the rest. But, when it came to order that confusion which they had made them∣selves, they then found it necessary to limit both the mater and form, though not the words, which, the offices of divine service should be celebrated with. Which, what was it but Plowdens case; that, for the form of Gods service to be prescribed by themselves, it is not only lawful, but requisite; by the Church, al∣together abinable? And indeed, those who must needs take upon them to appoint the persons who are to minister to the People, must needs take upon them to appoint the form in which it was to be done; They who make the one to depend upon the moion of Gods Spirit, must make the other do the like; though never able to make evidence of any such motion, in any person that e∣ver pretended it. And yet is that all that ever hath been alledged, so farre as I know, for all opinions so new to Gods Church; That S. Paul forbiddeth to quench the spirit, 1 Thes. V. 19. I do not deny, that other texts of S. Paul have been alleged, who in 1 Cor. XXI. XIV. discourseth so largely, of the use of spiritual graces; ordering also, how they should be exercised and imploy∣ed in the said Church: Nor, that writting to the Romans, VIII. 23. 26. 27. he saith; That the Spirit, which groaneth for the resurrection, in those that have the first fruits of it, helpeth the infirmities of the Saints (not knowing what to pray for as they ought) interceding for them with grones unutterable; which, the searcher of hearts, knowing the mind of the Spirit, findeth to be made af∣ter the will of God. But in these sayings, there is nothing like a precept, much lesse such a one as may seem to oblige the whole Church. On the contrary, the evidences are so frequent, and so palpable, in the discourse of S. Paul to the Co∣rinthians, that the Graces whereof he speaketh are miraculous Graces, (such as God then furnished the Church with, to evidence the presence of his Spirit in it, as well as  their edification in Christianity, & assistance in Gods service) that it were madnesse to require the Church to sollow the rules which suppose them, which now appear no more in the Church. And truly, with what con∣science can he alledge against the Church of Rome, that miracles are ceased; (the grace whereof is ranked by S. Pal, with those which tend to the edifica∣tion of the Church, 1 Cor. XII. 8. 9, 10, 28, 29, 30.) who challengeth for him∣selfe, or his fellows, the priviledge of those Graces in Gods Church? With what conscience can they hear S. Paul say, 1 Cor. X. 17. That the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit with; And challenge themselves the priviledge of profiting the Church, by Teaching or by Praying, without any ma∣nifestation of the Spirit? For, are they not challenged every day, to make mani∣fest, that ever any of them did speak by Gods Spirit, and not by the Spirit of this World, inspiring the fruits of the flesh, by carnal, or rather diabolical pride, innovating in matters of Faith, and destroying the uniformity of Gods ser∣vice? And therefore when S. Paul, having said, Quench not the Spirit, addeth, De∣ipise not Prophesies; what hath been alleged, what can be alleged, why it should
not be thought, that he repeateth in brief that order, which he had declared so largely to the Corinthians, that the grace of speaking in unknown languages, should not be discountenanced in the Church, and so the Spirit extinguished; But that Prophesies, the grace whereof he there preferreth so farr before it, should no way be neglected for it? Truly, he that saith, The manifestation of the spirit is given to all to profit with; doth say in effect, that, the Spirit which gron∣eth for the resurrection in them, which have the first fruits; (that is, the prime graces) of it, makes intercession for the Saints according to God, by helping that infirmity of theirs, whereby, they know not what to pray for of themselves. For, those who had not alwayes had the Apostles Doctrine sounding in their ears, but onely, were instructed by them, and their fellows, so farr as to be fit for Baptism, remaining neverthelesse novices in Christianity; why should we think them fit to know what to pray for in all occasions? Why should we think it strange, that God should give the first fruits of his Spirit, to profit them with, in this case? But, the faith of Christ, with the reasons and consequences there∣of being setled, and the order of the Church being established, as the gift of miracles ceased, as well to the bodily health and support of Christians, and the Church, as to the demonstration of Gods presence, and witnesse to the truth of Christianity; As the delivering of incorrigible sinners to Satan, to the destructi∣on of the flesh, by bodily diseases, and death ceased, when obedience to Gods Church was established; so is it no marvail, if the Graces of Gods Spirit, which profited the Church in teaching them what to pray for, should no more be gran∣ted, when the Church had not onely knowledge, but good order established, by which, those offices might be preformed to the profit and edification of Chri∣stians. Let them then, who find, that they can cure the sick by their prayers, a∣noint them with oyl upon that ground, and to that purpose: Let them who can sing Psalms extempore, so as to become the praises of God; (because S. Paul saith; When ye come together, every one of you hath a Psalm, hath a do∣ctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation: And that may be, as well suggested upon the place as afore hand) S. Paul saith, that if a stranger, coming into the Church, should hear divers speak in strange languages, that which they made not their hearers understand, he would say were madd; 1 Cor. XIV. 23. dotwithstanding that it might appear, that they would not speak those languages, but by Gods Spirit: I will onely demand of them, not to abuse and dishonour Gods Spirit, by imputing nto it those operations, which, it is not for the honour of God to acknowledge; And then tell them, that they must be tried by our common Christianity, whether, that they pretend to say, or to do, by the same, agree with it. But further order of Gods service in the Church, let us proceed according to the principles premised, comparing that which we find extant in the Scriptures, with the original and general practice of Gods Church, to say; That, the ser∣vice of God consisting of his praises, the doctrine of the Scriptures read and ex∣pounded, and the prayers of the Church; (especially those which the commu∣nion of the Eucharist is celebrated with) In the first place, the Psalms of David, (that is the Book of Psalms) is necessarily, by the practice of the whole Church, a form of Gods praises, determined to the Church. Which conclusi∣on, as it is easily seen, extendeth further then those Psalms, which, by the Ti∣tles of them, or, by other circumstance of Scriptures, may appear to have been composed to be sung in the Temple; though this contain a peremptory in∣stance against this strange demand, that it should be unlawful to serve God with set forms. For, what difference can be imagined between Psalms and Pray∣ers, as to that purpose? But, the conclusion is directed against that new light which pretendeth to cast the Psalms out of the Church, because it appeareth, that they were composed upon the particular occasions of the Prophet David, or other servants of God, by whom they were penned, and therefore not con∣cerning the state of Christs Church, so as to be frequented by Christians, upon publick as well as private occasions, for the praises of God. This conceit is suf∣ficient
to show, how litle these new lights do understand of our common Chri∣stianity, over-looking that, which the Church hath alwayes supposed against the Jews, as the onely ground, whereupon she wresteth the Scriptures of the Old Testament out of their hands, and turneth them to the interest of the Church against themselves; To wit, that the Prophets, being inspired by the same spi∣rit which our Lord sent his Apostles, did preach the same Christianity with them; though, according to the dispensation of that time, figuring the spiritual estate of Christians, by the temporall estate of Gods then people, and, injoyning the duties of Gods spiritual obedience, in a measure correspondent to the light of the time. For upon this ground hath it been received, by the whole Church, that, the case of David, and, of other the servants of God, who penned the Psalms, is the case, first of our Lord Christ, then of Christs Church, whithe in the whole thereof, or in the state of particular Christians; David and the rest bearing first the person of Christ, then, of his Church, according to the principles premised in the first Book. I might here allege that ingenious saying of S. Hilary, that Christ hath the Key of David, because, the spiritual sense of the Plter is opened by the discovery of Christ and his Church. I might allege S. Austine, accepting of Tychonius the Donatist his rules, for the exposition of the Psalmes; that those things which are literally understood of the temporall state of David, and Gods then people, are to be spiritually understood of the state of our Lord Christ, here on earth first; then, of the spiritual estate of his whole Church, and of each Christian. But, I had rather allege the practice of of Gods whole Church, of which, there is no age, no part to be named and produced, in which it may appear, that God was not served by singing the Psalms of David, to his praise. Not that I would confine this office to that form which the Psalter yeelds; or think, that the Apostles exhortations, Col. III. 16. James V. 13. Ephes. 19. can be confined unto them: Be∣ing well assured, by comparing that which I read in the Apostles, whith that which I read in Tertullians Apologetick, (where he saith, that the Christians, at their feasts of love, were wont to provoke one another to sing something of Gods praises) that they did in a simple stile, but, from a deep and losty sense, compose the praises of God in Psalms of their own, fitted to that light, which the coming of Christ hath brought into the Church; But, that I would have this lothing of the Book of Psalms, recommended, not by the Church of Eng∣land, but by the whole Church, to be taken for an evident mark, that we are weary of the common Christianity of Gods people, and do lust for new meat of our own asking, if not, for the fleshpots and Onyons, and Garlicke of Egypt. As for the reading of the Scriptures in the Church, which the whole Church hath used as generally as it hath had the Scriptures; (for we understand by Ire∣naeus, and may see by our ancestors the Saxons, that Christianity hath subsisted among people that had not not the use of leters; Though, our anceflors the Sax∣ons had the Scriptures before they had the use of leters, by the means of them who brought them Christianity: But Irenaeus speaks of barbarous Nations that were Christians, before they knew of any Scriptures) I see it rather neglected then disputed against by the sects of this time. Why neglected, divers reasons may be conceived, though they, (perhaps, as a disparagement to the Spirit, whence they may pretend to have their Orders the carnall man onely chusing in Re∣ligion, that which, by the use of reason, he is convinced to come from God, contrary to the principles setled at the beginning) think fit to allege none. Their illuminati, perhaps, are already so perfit in the Text, that it were loss of time for them to assemble to hear the Scriptures read. To whom I must say; That those who are inlightned by God are alwayes humble, and ready to continue in the unity of the Church, as I have showed by the premises, that all Christi∣ans ought to do. That, if they do so, the greater part of the Church by much, will have need to learn the Scriptures, (that is, instruction out of them) by hearing them read in the Church. That, all that are inlightned by God, are taught to condescend to the necessities of the weak and simple. And that, those
who break from the Church rather then do so, may think themselves strong, but their strength is the strenth of Madmen, that see not what they do. In fine, that, they who have received light by the knowledge of the Scriptures, must needs add to their light by hearing them read, and that there is no beter way for them to add to it; being the way which the primitive Fathers took for that purpose. It may perhaps be imagined, that, the reading of the Scriptures takes up the time of assemblies, and excludes the preaching of the Word. To which I must say for the present; that it is a strange piece of providence, to ex∣clude the reading of the Scripture, which we know to be the word of God, and, to have in it no cause of offence, but that which the want of understanding in the hearers thereof ministreth, out of a desire to make way for that, which, pre∣tendeth indeed always to be the word of God; but, no understanding so sim∣ple, no conscience so seared, that must not needs know, that it is not, that it cannot always be the word of God, because of the contradictions that pass un∣der that Title; And that, in maters of so high nature, at this time, that, if the one be the word of God, the other must not be counted the word of hu∣mane weakness, but of diabolical malice. There are indeed certain bounds, with∣in which, that which is preached out of the Pulpit, may be presumed and taken for the word of God; as it might be, if it were said in another place. But, if ignorant people, that cannot take upon them to judge, shall presume it, of that which they hear from those that do not profess to Preach within those bounds; who can deny, that they are guilty to their own death? What those bounds are, I shall say by and by; In the mean time, let them take heed, whose neglect of the written word, or whose zeal to preaching, shuts the Scrip∣tures out the Church, that they contribute not to the bringing in of the secret and invisible Word of the Enthusiasts. It is now no dainty to hear, that the word which we have written in our Bibles, is not the Word that saveth, but that which is secretly and invisibly spoken to us within by Gods Spirit. And, whoso∣ever attributeth the reverence due to Gods word, to any such dictate, without dependence upon the Scriptures, (that is, deriving the same from the Scripture, by those means which God hath allowed us for the understanding of them, according to the premises) what shall hinder him to preferre the dictate of his own Spirit, under pretense of Gods, before that which he admitteth to come from Gods Spirit? For, he who admitteth the greater contradiction, of two pa∣rallel Soveraigns; why should he not admit a less, (that the written word is not Gods word, in competition with the dictate of his own Spirit) when there is so easie a cloke, of expounding the written word, though against all reason and rule of expounding it, yet so, as to submit, even the substance of Christianty, to the dictate of a private spirit? We have an example for it in the impostures of Mahomet. For, doth not the Alcoran acknowledge both our Lord Christ, and Moses, true Prophets of God, besides all other attributes? yet, in as much as it pretendeth the Spirit given to Mahomet in such a degree, as to controle them both, it smoothes the way to the renouncing of Christianity, when the power of the sword fell out on the side of it. Simon Magus, and his followers the Gnosticks, might have done the like, had the like power been on their side, (as the Manichees did in part, if those things be true that we read in Cedronus, of a party of them, possessed of the Power of the Sword, about the parts of Arme∣nia) all, upon pretense of higher revelations then were granted to the Apo∣stles. The same is alleged against the Paraclete of Montanus, (and perhaps his followers, being disowned by the Church, might fall to such extremities) but at the beginning, it doth not appear that he pretended any more, then to introduce certain strict orders into the Church, as injoyned by his Spirit, and those of his fellow Prophets; which, it was not expedient for the Church to undertake; (and being so, it was requisite for him to conform unto the Church, any pretense of the Spirit notwithstanding) but otherwise, were no way de∣structive to Christianity. Suppose then, the reading of the Scriptures to be one of those offices, for the which the Church is to assemble; the order of reading them (which is that
which remains) is a thing to subject so common reason, that there need not much dispute about it. If we look upon Tertullianes, or before him, Justin Mar∣tyrs Apologies for the Christians, there will appear no more then this; that every Church, (that is, every Body of Christians under one Bishop) did pre∣scribe themselves that order for reading the Scriptures in the Church, which they found requisite. And if that primitive simplicity, which the Christianity under persecution was managed with, had continued, what fault could have been found with it? But, when the World was come into the Church (which, he that injoyes his right senses will not believe, did come into it all with the like affections, to the professions which they undertook) it was in vain to hope, that differences would not rise, or might not rise, about this as well as other points, in which the exercise of Christianity consisted. Differences arising, the greater authority is that, to which, the ending of them obliges all men to have recourse. The greater authority, you have seen, is that of the greatest Chur∣ches, whither in Synods, or, not requiring Synods to oblige the less, by reason of the exigence, or reasonableness of the case. The order of reading the Scri∣ptures, and of singing or saying the Psalms and Hymns of Gods praises, being grounded upon no other reason, nor tending to any other end, then that of exercising and improving the Christianity of Gods people. I need no dispute, that the Order, which the power of the Church of Rome hd introduced here, as well in the rest of the West, was such as made the Assemblies of the Church fruitlesse to that purpose; For, what could those shreds▪ of Psalms and Les∣son, which that order prescribeth, contribute, that might be considerable to that purpose? Nor need I argue how considerable the order of the Church of England is to the same. For, to finish the Psalter once a year, the New Testa∣ment thrice a year, the Old once; besides (for reverence to the ancient Or∣dinance of the Church) another Order for beginning the Prophet Esay at Ad∣vent, and Genesis at Septuagesima, to be prosecuted on Festival days, is an Or∣der from which the Church hath reason to expect a good effect in the instructi∣on of Gods people. And, the interweaving of the Lessons with Hymns, as it is agreeable to the rules and the practice of the ancient Church; so it is, in rea∣son, a fit mean to preserve attention, and quicken devotion, in them who use it. In the mean time, supposing there were considerable objections to be made, against this or that order; yet, Order in generall being a thing so re∣quisite to the preservation of Unity in the Body of the Church, there is no reason to be given, why any body should be admitted to dispute any Order re∣ceived, that cannot advance another Order, which he can pretend to be more effectual to the purpose, in which the parties must needs agree. I am here to answer that part of the question, concerning the Canon of Scri∣pture, which, I said in the first book, concerneth the Law, not the faith of the Church; whither the reading of those Scriptures which S. Jerome calls Apocry∣phall, Ruffinus upon the Creed Ecclesiasticall, for part of the Church office, be for the ediication of the Church, or not; And a few words shall serve me to answer it with. The very name of Ecclesiastical serves him that admits the Church to be one Body, the unity whereof requires some uniformity in the or∣der of those offices, the communion whereof, is one part of the end for which it subsisteth. For, it is manifest, that the whole Church hath frequented the reading of them; and that they are called Ecclesiastical for no other reason, but, because the reading of them hath been frequented by the Church, in the Church. And whosoever makes this any title of separation from the Church of Rome, will make his Title Schismatical, separating for that which is common to the present Church of Rome, with the whole Church. But because the repute of the Church is so slight in the judgement of many, that think themselves the most refined Christians, that they allow it not that common sense in managing the businesse of Christianity, which they must needs allow Jews, Pagans, Ma∣hometans, in faithfully serving their own faithlesse suppositions; and which, all experience shows us, that it serves all mankind, to what purpose soever it is im∣ployed; (and that, notwithstanding so great a triall of it, as the governing of
so great a Body as the Church is, in unity, so farre, and so long as this Unity hath prevailed) it is therefore necessary to give a reason, why the Church so used them; Which, supposing the premises, it will be as easie, as it is neces∣sary for me to give, and that more sufficient, if I mistake not, then can pos∣sibly be given, not supposing the same, For, if the secret of the resurrection, the general judgement, and the World to come, if, the mystery of the Holy Triniy, consisting in the Word or Wisdome and Spirit of God, if the in∣ward and spiritual service of God, in truth of heart, be more clearly opened in them, by the work of Providence, dispensing the effect of Canonicall Scrip∣ture by the occurrences of time, then in the Law and the Prophets themselves; (which, I have showed, both that so it is, and why so it is, from the ground of the difference between the Old and the New Testament) then, I suppose, there is sufficient reason, why, those who admit the Old Testament, to be made for common edification in the Church, should not put any question concern∣ing those Scriptures. Those new lights among us, who do not allow the Psalter to be pertinently and reasonably imployed for the publick service of God, up∣on all occasions, as the Church hath alwaies imployed it, may assure us, that they understand not why the Scriptures of the Old Testament are read in the Church, because they understand not the correspondence between the Old and the New Testament; in the understanding whereof, the edification of the Church, by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, consisteth. There may be offence taken at divers things in these Scriptures, I deny not. But there may be offence taken, in like maner, at divers things in the Canonicall Scriptures of the Old Testament. The humility of Christians requires them, edifying them∣selves in that which they understand in the Scriptures, according to our common Christianity, in the rest, which they understand not, to refer themselves to their Superiours. The Church understood well enough, this difference, and this cor∣respondence to be discovered by these writings, as the time required, when it appointed Learners to read them. And, though I stand not upon terms, yet, I conceive, they are more properly called Ecclesiastical, because the Church hath imployed them to be read in the Church, then Apocryphal, according to the use of that word in the Church, to signifie such writings as the Church suspect∣eth, and therefore alloweth not to be read, whither in publick or in private. Whereupon, I conceive also, that the term of Canonical Scripture hath, and ought to have two senses; one, when we speak of the Jews Canon, in the Old Testament; another, when we speak of the Canon of the Church. For, see∣ing the Tradition of the Synagogue is perfect evidence what Scriptures of the old Testament are to be received, as inspired by God; the word Canon, in that case, may well signifie the Rule of our Faith or maners. But, because the Church cannot pretend to create that evidence originally, but onely to transmit what she receiveth from the Synagogue; Pretending neverthelesse, to give a Rule, what shall be read for the edification of the Church; the word Canon there∣fore, in that case, will signifie, onely the list or Catalogue of Scriptures, which the Church appoints to be read in the Church; which seems to reconcile the diverse accounts extant in severall Records of the Church.
CHAP. XXIII. The consideration of the Eucharist prescribed by Tradition, for the mater of it. Lords Prayer prescribed in all services. The mater of Prayers for all estates prescribed. The form of Baptism necessary to be prescribed. The same reason holdeth in the forms of other Offices. IN the next place, I do maintain, that the Order of celebrating the Eucharist, and the Prayer which it was, was from the beginning, solemnized with, were, from the beginning prescribed the Church by unwritten custome, that is, by Tradition from the Apoles, containing, though not so many words, that it was not lawful to use more or lesse▪ (for, these were always occasions for celebrating the Eucharist emergent, which must be intimated, in fewer or more words, in the celebrating of it) yet, the mater and substance of the Con∣secration of it, together with the mater and substance of the necessities of the Church, for which it was offered (that is to say, for which the Church was and is to pray at the celebration of it, as hoping to obtain them by the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross which it representeth) as received from the beginning, was every were known to be the same. This I inferr from that which I have said in the Book afore quoted, of those Texts of S. Paul, where, those Prayers of the Church which the Eucharist is consecrated with, are called Eucharistia, or Thanksgiving, (if not rather the thanksgiving, because, it was a certain form of Thanksgiving, well known to all Christians by that name; from whence, the Sacrament o consecrated, was also so called from the time that our Lord, h∣ing blessed, or given thanks to the Father, over the Elements, had said; This is my body, this is my blood) and, order is given, that, at the celebration thereof, Prayers be made for the necessities of the Church, and of all people, 1 Cor. XIV. 25. 26. 1 Ti. II. 1-8. Together with those passages of primitive anti∣quity, from whence it appeareth there, that the form of consecrating the Eu∣charist, used and known generally in the Church, is called Eucharistia; and, that the custome of interceding for all the necessities of the Church, and for the reducing of unbelievers to the same, is and hath been taken up; and ever fre∣quented by the Church, in obedience to, and prosecution of the said precept of the Apostles. This observation might perhaps be thought too obscure evi∣dence, o bring to light a point of this consequence, were it not justified by all that I produced afore to show, that the Eucharist is consecrated by the Prayers of the Church, which celebrateth it, upon the faith of our Lords insti∣tution and promise. For, the mater of these Prayers tending to a certain pur∣pose, that the Elements may become the Body and Blood of Christ, and con∣vay his Spirit to those who receive them with living faith; the Consecration, which is the effect of them, requires, that the form of them be prescript and certain, though not in number of words, yet, in sense, in tent, and substance. And this, by the evidence there produced, may appear to have been maintain∣ed from the beginning, by Tradition in the Church, according to the affir∣mation of S. Basil, that this Prayer is a Tradition of the whole Church. Many are the Lurgies, (that is, the formes of celebrating the Eucharist) in the Eastern Churches under Constantinople, Alexandria and Antiochia, yet ex∣tant, which show the substance of it, (after the Deacon had said; Lift up your hearts, the People answering; Wee life them up to the Lord; which evidently pointeth ou that which S. Paul calls the Thanksgiving or Blessing, wherein the Consecration of the Sacrament consisteth, beginning there, and ending with the Lords Prayer, in all of them) to be this; Repeating the creation of all things, and the fall of man; to praise God, that hee left him not helpless, but called first the Fathers, then gave the Law, and, when it appeared that all this would not serve to reclaim him to God, sent his onely Son to redeem him by his Cross, who instituted this remembrance of it; Praising God therefore, for all this, but e∣specially
for the death and resurrection of Christ; and praying, that the Spirit promised may come upon the elements presently set forth, and make them the Body and Bloud of Christ; that they who receive them with living Faith may be filled with the Grace of it. I acknowledg, that the repetition of the crea∣tion and fall of man, the calling of the Patriarchs and giving the Law, is all si∣lenced or left out in the Latine Canon, (that is, that Canonical Prayer, which this Sacrament is consecrated and communicated with) neither can I say that it is extant in the Ambrosian or any form besides, that may appear to have been anciently in use, in any part of the Western Church; Though, I have reason enough to conceive, that it was used from the beginning, and afterwards cut off, for the shortning of the service, because of the great consent that is found a∣mong forms used in the Eastern parts, and because wee see, how the Psalms and Lessons retained in them, are abridged of that length, which, by the Constitu∣tions of the Apostles and other ancienter records of the Church, may appear to have been used in former ages. But, there can be no reason to say, that the lea∣ving out of all this, being so remote a ground of the present action, makes any difference in the substance and effect of that prayer which it is done and perfor∣med with. And the rest, being the same in all forms that remain extant, inables mee to conclude, that the Prayers of the Church, which the Eucharist is to be consecrated with, were from the beginning prescribed, not for so many words, but for the substance of them; not in writing, but by silent custom, and Traditi∣on received by the Church from the Apostles; and ought to continue the same to the end of the world in all Churches. There is a little objection to be made against this, from that which Walafridus Strabo, and other Latine Writers concer∣ning the Offices of the Church have reported from some passages of S. Jerome and S. Gregory the Great; That S. Peter, at the first, did consecrate the Eucharist with the Lords Prayer onely; Which if it all this falls to the ground, and the form of consecrating the Eucharist hath proved so uniform meerly by the con∣sent of after ages, and will remain subject to be changed again, seeing that the Lords Prayer may, for the substance of it, be rendred into other terms and con∣ceptions as many wayes as a man pleases. But there is, I have showed you, a mistake in the meaning of these passages, intended onely in opposition to that variety of Psalms and Lessons and Hymns, and Prayers, which afterwards were brought in, to make the celebration of the Sacrament more solemn; in regard whereof they say, that S. Peter consecrated, onely with the Lords Prayer, not with any of those additions for solemnities sake, when hee consecrated by that Thanksgiving or Blessing, which our Lord consecrated the Sacrament at his last Supper with, adding onely, in stead of all other solemnities, the Lords Prayer, which the Consecration is still concluded with in all ancient forms. For, when the Order and occasions of Assemblies were not setled, but the Offices of Chri∣stianity were to be ministred, upon such opportunities as they could finde out for themselves, it is no mervail, if S. Peter himself might be obliged to abare all, but meerly what was requisite. And truly, I may here seasonably say, that I conceive the Lords Prayer is just∣ly called by Tertullian Oratio legitima, or, the Prayer which the Law, (that is, the precept of our Lord in the Gospel; When yee pray say thus) prescribeth, not as if hee would have them serve him with no other prayer but this; But, that they should alwayes use this as a set prayer, whatever other occasions they might have, of addressing themselves to God with other prayers. For, accordingly, I do observe, that in all prescribed forms, upon what occasion soever, not onely of celebrating the Eucharist, (which assemblies have therefore been called  Missae in Latine, from the dismission of them, as in Greek  from the gathering of them, whereas the Latine word Collectae, which answers it, is ex∣tended to other assemblies) but other more dayly and hourly occasions, (accor∣ding to the premises, concerning Five hours of Prayer in the day, in S. Cyprians time, which since have come to seven, that there is alwayes a room for the Lords Prayer, as if the service of God were not lawfull according to the precept; When yee pray, say thus; unless it be used. Which is that which I shall advise
them of, who either exclude it as unlawfull, or forbear it as offensive, that they may consider, how they count themselves members of Christs Church, waiving that which the whole Church hath practiced in obedience to his precept, for con∣formity with the enemies of his Church. There is yet another sort of Prayers, which are offered to God at the cele∣bration of the Eucharist, according to S. Pauls command, for all estates and or∣ders of men, whether in the world or in the Church, and for all their necessi∣ties; in regard whereof, I showed you afore, that the Eucharist is counted a Sacrifice for the Church, or rather for all mankinde; (As the High Priest, when hee went into the Holy of Holies, according to Philo, prayed for the whole world) representing the intercession of Christ for the same, now at the right hand of God, which the Church, in his name, by celebrating this Sacrament, ex∣ecuteth and commemorateth upon earth. And the form hereof, I can easily say by the same reason, is, for mater and substance, though not for so many words, and for the conceptions it is expressed with, prescribed according to S. Pauls command, by the custom of the Church, received by Tradition from the Apo∣stles. For, when I have once named the necessities of all Orders and Estates, without or within the Church in general, supposing what Christianity requires Christians to pray for, as well in behalf of the enemies of Gods Church, as of the members of it; I conceive I have named the substance of these prayers, the particulars whereof, you may see in our English Litanies to be the same, that the most ancient Writers of the Church witness to have been used, after the ex∣position of the Scriptures; whether they describe the celebration of the Eucha∣rist, as doth Justine Martyr, or not, as Tertullian. And from hence I hope to resolve that question which I have proposed in another place, and no man yet hath taken in hand to answer; Why, as well in the Ancient Latine as well as Eastern Liturgies, (as also by the testimonies of S. Austine and others it appea∣reth, that) these Prayers are twice repeated at the Eucharist. The reason being this, that first, those who offered the creatures of which the Eucharist is conse∣crated, and, by which offering, the assembly of the Church was maintained, might testifie, that they do it out of devotion to God, hoping, by so doing, to obtain at his mercy, not onely their own, but the necessities of all other orders and e∣states, by virtue of the Sacrifice of the Cross, which, at present, they intend to commemorate and repete. Which notwithstanding, the elements being con∣secrated, and, the Body and Bloud of Christ, once sacrificed on the Cross, here and now represented; they offer to him the same Prayers again, presenting him, as it were, the same sacrifice here and now represented, for the motive inducing him to grant the said necessities. And therefore, have reason to account this ser∣vice the most eminent service that Christians can offer to God, and those prayers the most effectual that they can address unto him; as being proper to that Chri∣stianity, in virtue whereof they hope to obtain their prayers, and of nothing be∣sides. That which remains of this point, is onely the consideration of those prayers which are made at those assemblies of the Church, which pretend not to celebrate the Eucharist, how they may appear to be prescribed by Christianity. Where, I shall need to say nothing of such Prayers as are to be made by Chri∣stian assemblies, for the necessities of all Orders and Estates, whether within or without the Church; because I have already spoken of them, when they are made upon occasion of celebrating the Eucharist. The difference between that occasion and other occasions which the Church may have to frequent the same Prayers, when the Eucharist is not celebrated, inferring no difference in that which is prescribed to the Church, or by the Church, either in the mater or form of the same. As for the Prayers which every assembly maketh for it self, concerning the common necessities of all Christians as such, (which, I conceive, were first called Collecta, because the assembly ended in them, and was dismissed with them, from gathering the same; as the Mass hath the name in Latine Missa, from dismis∣sing it, as I observed afore) I shall need to say as little, having showed, by what authority all Christians are to be limited, in such things as have been left unli∣mited
by our Lord and his Apostles. For the necessities of Christians as Christi∣ans become determinable, (if any thing cōcerning them become questionable) by the same authority that governeth every Church, upon such terms, as it ought to govern the same. But, if any cause appear, (as many ages since there hath appea∣red necessity enough) why particular Churches should be ruled, in those forms, by Synods, that is, by the common authority of more and greater Churches, for maintaining unity in the whole, (which the form of Church Service may be a great means to violate, as wee know by lamentable experience) it remains, that the same means be imployed for maintaining unity in this point, which God hath provided for maintaining the same in all cases. So that, supposing, that in pro∣cess of time, whether by direct or by indirect means, the Church of Rome hath gained so much ground of the whole Western Church, as to conform their Prayers, and, in a maner, the whole Order of divine Service, to the patern pre∣scribed by it; (which I take to have been the case at the Reformation, with all the Western Church) it cannot be alleged for a sufficient cause of changing, that the Church of Rome hath no right to require this conformity by Gods Law▪ But the question must be, whether the uniformity introduced by the same, be so well, or so ill, for the prejudice or advancement of Christianity, that it shall be requisite, for the interest thereof, to proceed to a change without the consent of the Church. Which if it be true, then, whatsoever hath been objected to the Church of England upon this Title, as agreeable to the form used by the Church of Rome, (not as disagreeable to Christianity) is to be damned, as ignorantly and maliciously objected, for to make division in the Church without cause. These same reasons will serve to resolve, how necessary it is, that those Pray∣ers, wherewith the rest of Ecclesiastical Offices, Baptism, Confirmation, Penance, the Visitation of the Sick, and Mariages are celebrated, be of a certain form, and prescribed by the authority of the Church. It were a thing strangely un∣reasonable, for him that hath considered that which I have said in the second book, how our Christianity and salvation is concerned in the Sacrament of Ba∣ptism, and, how much the disputes of Religion that divide the Western Church depend upon the knowledg of it; to imagine, that all those, who must be ad∣mitted by the Church to the ministring of it, can be able to express the true in∣tent of it, in such form of words, as may be without offense, and tend to the edification of Gods people, in a thing so nearly concerning their Christianity. Rather it may justly be questioned, whether they that take upon them to baptize and consecrate the Eucharist, not grounding themselves upon the authority of the Church, supposing the Faith of the Church, expressed in such a form as the Church prescribeth, but their own sense, concerning the ground and intent of those Sacraments; Do any thing or nothing; That is, whether they do indeed minister the Sacrament of Baptism, necessary to the salvation of all Christians, or onely profane the Ordinance of God, by professing an intention of doing that which is not indeed that Sacrament, under pretense of celebrating it. Whether they do indeed consecrate the elements, to become, sacramentally, the Body and Bloud of Christ, and so communicate the same to those which receive; or one∣ly profane those holy mysteries of Christianity, and involve his people in the same guilt, by pretending to celebrate so holy an Office, and in effect doing no∣thing, as not knowing what ought to be done, nor submitting to those that do. A consideration very necessary, in regard of those who forsake the Baptism which they received in their infancy in the Church of England, to be baptized again by new Dippers. For it is true, the Church hath admitted the Baptism of Hereticks for good, but not of all Hereticks; Of those, whose Baptism S. Cy∣prian excepts against Epist. ad Jubaianum, it is manifest, that, the Church, void∣ing the baptism of the Samosatenians by the Canon of Nicaea, the baptism of o∣ther Hereticks, by the Canons of Arles and Laodicea, must needs make void the baptisms of the greatest; part being evidently further removed from the truth which Christianity professeth, than those whose baptism the said Canons disallow. And, though it is admitted, according to the dictates of the School, that these words; I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
contain a sufficient form of this Sacrament; Yet that holdeth, upon supposition, that they who use it do admit the true sense of this word I baptize; intending thereby to make him a Christian, that is, to oblige him to the profession of Chri∣stianity, whom they baptize. Which, what reason can any man have to presume of, in behalf of those, who renounce their baptism once received in the Church of England, to be baptized again? For, all reason of charitable presumptions ceaseth, in respect of those, who root up the ground thereof by Schism, and by departing from the Unity of the Church. And, besides that wee do not see them declare any profession at all, according to which they oblige themselves either to believe or live; (which is reason enough to oblige others not to take them for Christians, not demanding to be taken for Christians, by professing themselves Christians) wee see the world over-spread with the vermine of the Enthusiasts, who, accepting of the Scriptures for Gods word, upon a perswasion of the dictate of Gods Spirit, not supposing the reason for which they are Chri∣stians, do consequently, believe as much in the dictates of the same that are not grounded upon the Word of God, as upon those that are; So that, the imbra∣cing of the Scriptures makes them no more Christians, than Mahomets acknow∣ledging Moses and Christ in the Alcoran makes him a Christian. For, whosoever is perswaded, that hee hath the Spirit of God, not supposing, that it is given him in consideration that hee professeth Christianity, (supposing therefore the truth thereof, in order of reason before hee receive the Spirit) may, as well as Maho∣met in the Alcoran, frame both the Old and New Testament to whatsoever sense his imagination, which hee takes for Gods Spirit, shall dictate. This reason, why it is necessary to follow the forms which the Church pre∣scribes, is more constraining, in celebrating the Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist, as more nearly concerning the Christianity and salvation of Christians; But yet it takes place also, in the rest of those Offices, whereby, the Church pre∣tends to conduct particular Christians in the way to life everlasting. Hee that supposes that which I have proved, how necessary it is, that every sheep of the flock should acknowledg the common Pastor of his Church, that the Pastor should acknowledg his flock, upon notice of that Christianity which every one of them in particular professeth; though hee may acknowledg, that originally, there is no cause why every Bishop should not prescribe himself the form of it in his own Church; yet, supposing that experience hath made it appear requisite, for the preservation of Unity, by Uniformity, that the same form should be u∣sed, must needs finde it requisite, that it be prescribed by a Synod greater or less. At such time as publick Penance was practiced in the Church, when the Peni∣tents were dismissed before the Eucharist, with the Blessing and Prayers of the Church, can it seem reasonable to any man, that any Prayers should be used in celebrating an action of that consequence, but those, which the like authority prescribeth? So much the more, if it be found requisite, that the practice of pri∣vate Penance, and of the inner Court of the Conscience, be maintained in the Church. For, how should it be fit, that every Priest, that is trusted with the Power of the Keyes in this Court, should exercice it in that form which his pri∣vate fansy shall dictate? Of Ordinations I say the same as of Confirmations. Of the Visitation of the Sick, and of Mariage, as of Penance. Onely consi∣dering, that it is not likely, that the reason, whereupon the celebration of Ma∣riage is an Office of the Church, (deriving from those limitations which the pre∣cept of our Lord hath fastned upon the Mariage of Christians) should be so well understood by all that are to solemnize Matrimony, as to do their Office, both so, as the validity of the contract, and so, as the performance of that Office which the parties undertake doth require. In fine, having showed, that, the Service of God upon the Regular Hours of the day, is a Custom, both groun∣ded upon the Scripture, and, tending to the maintenance and advancement of Christian Piety; It remains that I say; that, the form and measure of that de∣votion, which all estates are to offer to God, at those hours, cannot otherwise be limited to the edification of all, than by the determination of the Church. They that please themselves with that monstrous imagination, that no Christian is to
be taught what or how to pray, till hee finde himself inabled by the Spirit of God, moving him to pray; will easily finde, that they can never induce the grea∣ter part of Christians, to think themselves capable, of discharging themselves to God, in so high an Office, as the sense of their Christianity requires. They that observe the performance of those who take it upon them, shall finde them sa∣crifice to God that which his Law forbiddeth; the mater of their Prayers not consisting with our common Christianity. For, of a truth, it is utterly unrea∣sonable to imagine, that God should grant inspirations of the Holy Ghost, for such purposes, as our common Christianity furnisheth. And therefore, the con∣sequences of so false a presumption, must be, either ridiculous or pernicious. Now, if any man say, that hee admits not the premises upon which I inferr these consequences, it remaines, that the dispute rest upon those premises, and come not to these consequences; Onely let him take notice, that I have showed him the true consequences of my own premises, which hee must reprove, as inconsi∣stent with Christianity, if hee take upon him to blame the premises, for any fault that hee findeth with their true consequences. And to say truth, as the sub∣stance and mater of Christianity is concerned in all these Offices, (though in some more in some less) and by consequence, in the form of celebrating them; So the Unity of the Church is generally concerned in the form of celebrating them all, in as much as any difference, insisted upon as necessary, and not so ad∣mitted by others, is, in point of fact, a just occasion of division in the Church. And therefore, all little disputes of these particulars necessarily resort to the ge∣neral; Whether God hath commanded the Unity of the Church, in the exter∣nal communion of the members thereof, or not. Which having concluded by the premises, I conceive, I have founded a prejudice, peremptorily over-ruling all the pety exceptions that our time hath produced, to dissolve this Unity, which ought to have been preferred before them, had they been just and true, as none of them proveth.
CHAP. XXIV. The Service of God to be prescribed in a known Language. No pretense that the Latine is now understood. The means to preserve Unity in the Church, notwith∣standing. The true reason of a Sacrifice inforceth Communion in the Eucha∣rist. What occasions may dispense in it. Communion in both kindes commanded the People. Objections answered. Who is chargeable with the abuse. I Would now make one Controversie more, (how much soever I pretend to abate Controversies) than hitherto hath been disputed, between the Refor∣mation and the Church of Rome; because, though wee hear not of it in our books of Controversies, yet in deed, and in practice, it is the most visible diffe∣rence between the exercice of Religion in the two professions, that you can name. For, what is it that men go to Church for, but to hear a Sermon on one side, and, to hear a Mass on the other side? And yet, among so many books of Controversies, who hath disputed, whether a man is rather to go to Church to hear a Sermon, or, (not to hear a Mass, but) to receive the Eucharist? This is the reason indeed, why I dispute not this Controversie, (because the Mass should be the Eucharist, but, by abuses crept in by length of time, is become some∣thing else) untill I can state the question upon such terms, as may make the rea∣son of Reformation visible. Whether the celebration of the Eucharist is to be done in a Language which the people for the most part understand, not in La∣tine, as the Mass, supposing the most part understand it not; is first to be setled before wee inquire, what it is that Christians chiefly assemble themselves for; Though the question concerns not the Eucharist any more than the other offices of Gods publick Service, onely as the Eucharist, if it prove the principal of them, is principally concerned in it. I am then to confesse, in the beginning, that, those of the Church of Rome have a strong and weighty objection against mee, why they ought not to give way, that the Service of the Church, though in a form preseribed by the Church, as I require, should be celebrated in the Vulgar Languages, which every people understand. The objection is drawn from that which wee have seen come to pass; For, the Service of the Church, the form and terms of it, being submitted to the construction of every one, be∣cause in English, hath given occasion to people utterly unable to judg, either how agreeable maters excepted against are to Christianity, or, how necessary the form, to the preservation of unity in the Church, first to desire a change, then to seek it in a way of fact, though by dissolving the Unity of this Church. For, hee that maintains as I do, that, whatsoever defects the form established may have, are not of waight to perswade a change, in case of danger to Unity; And se∣condly, that those who have attempted the change, have not had, either the lot or the skill, to light upon the true defects of it, but to change for the worse in all things considerable; must needs affirm, that otherwise, they could never have had the means to possess mens fansies with those appearances of reason for it, which have made them think themselves wise enough to undertake so great a change. And truly, there is nothing so dangerous to Christianity as a superficial skill in the Scriptures, and maters of the Church; Which may move them, that are puffed up with it, to attempt that for the best, which, it cannot inable them for to see, that so it is indeed. Whereas, they who hold no opinion in maters a∣bove their capacity, (because concerning the state of the whole) are at better leisure to seek their salvation, by making their benefit of the order provided. Seeing then, it cannot be denied, that, the benefit of having the Service of God prescribed by the Church in our Vulgar English, hath occasioned so great a mis∣chief as the destruction of it, it seems, the Church of Rome hath reason to re∣fuse
children edge tools to cut themselves with, in not giving way to the publick Service of God in the Vulgar Languages; Unless it could be maintained, that no form ought to be prescribed, which is all one as to say, that there ought to be no Church, in as much as there can be no Unity in the Faith of Christ, and the Service of God according to the same, otherwise. Now, that you may judg what effect this objection ought to have, wee must remember S. Pauls dispute, upon another occasion indeed, but, from the same grounds and reasons, which are to be alleged for the edification of the Church, in our case. God had stirred up many Prophets in the Church of Corinth, toge∣ther with those who celebrated the mysteries of Christianity in unknown Lan∣guages, and others that could interpret the same in the Vulgar; partly out of an intent to manifest to the Gentiles and Jews his own presence in his Church, (including and presupposing the truth of Christianity) but partly also, for the in∣struction of the people, (novices in Christianity for a great part) in the truth of it, and, for the celebration of those Offices wherewith hee is to be served by his Church. It came to pass, that divers, puffed up with the conceit of Gods using them to demonstrate his presence among his people, took upon them to bring forth those things, which the Spirit of God moved them to speak, in unknown Languages, at the publick assemblies of the Church; Who might indeed admire the work of God, but could neither improve their knowledg in his truth, nor ex∣ercice their devotion in his praises, or those prayers to him, which were uttered in an unknown Language. This is that which the Apostle disputeth against, throughout the fourteenth Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, ma∣king express mention of Prayers, Blessings, (which I have showed to be the consecration of the Eucharist) and Psalms, ver. 14-17-26. and concluding, v. 27, 28. that no man speak any thing in the Church, though it be that doctrine, those prayers or praises of God, which his own Spirit suggesteth, unless there be some body present that can interpret. Which, what case can there fall out for the Church, which it reacheth not? For you see, S. Paul excludeth out of the Church, even the dictates of Gods Spirit, evidencing his presence in the Church by miraculous operations, unless they may be interpreted, for the edification and direction of the Church. What can hee then admit for the Service of God, in the name of his Church, or, for the instruction thereof, which, it can neither be instructed by, nor offer unto him for his service? Nay, what cause can there be, why the Church should meet, according to S. Paul, if there be nothing done that is understood? What cause can be alleged, why there should be a Church, that is, a Body, and an authority to Order that Body, if there be no Office for which it should assemble, because, that which it understandeth not, is no such Office? For I have laid this for a ground, that the Society of the Church sub∣sisteth for the Service of God at the common Assemblies of the Church, in the Unity of the same Christianity; So that, though it may be alleged, that the U∣nity of Christianity may be preserved by the Society of the Church, though the Service of God be not understood, yet the end for which it is preserved is not compassed, when the Service of God is not performed, by those who understand it not, is Christianity requireth. Certainly, it is a question to be demanded of those of the Church of Rome, why they do not preach to the people in Latine, as well as they celebrate the rest of Gods Service in that Language, if they be content to submit themselves to S. Pauls doctrine? For, whatsoever reason they can allege, why that in the Vulgar, and the rest in Latine, will rather serve to demonstrate, that it would be more visibly ridiculous, than, that it is any more against S. Pauls doctrine. But, is it any more to the benefit of Gods people, toward the obtaining of their necessities of God, that they should assemble to offer him the devotions which they understand not, than, not to assemble, or of∣fer none? For, whatsoever may be said, that the devotions of those who do un∣derstand what they do, are available to the benefit of those who do not, will hold nevertheless, though they were not present, nor pretended to do that which the
Congregation doth, provided that they have as good a heart to do that which the Congregation doth, as they have being present at it; Unless wee suppose, that God values their hearts because they are there, more than hee would value them being elswhere. Nor can I possibly imagine what can be said to all this, but onely in abate∣ment of that ignorance, in the Latine of the Church service, which the Nations of the Western Church may be supposed to attain to; whether by custome of being used alwayes to the same form, or, because the Vulgar languages of Italy, Spain, and France, being derived from the Latine, may inable even unletered people to understand that, or the most part of that, which is said in Latine at the Church service; which is the reason, why the Jews, after their return from Captivity, having changed their Mother Hebrew, into the vulgar tongue of the Babylonians and Chldeans (being indeed derived from it, with lesse change, then the Italian from the Latine) maintained notwithstanding the service of God in their originall Hebrew, so farr as we are able to understand, by the cir∣cumstances produced elsewhere. And though, at this present, some parts of it are rather Chalde then Hebrew; yet, they are now in such a condition, that a great many of them are not able to attain, either that language, or the Hebrew but speak and understand onely that language where they are bred, the service which they use in their Synagogues remaining in the Hebrew. And the Greeks at this day, having got a vulgar language, as much differing from the ancient learned Greek, as the Italian from the Latine, notwithstanding, cease not to exercise the service of God in the learned Greek, which they understand not. Which the Western Nations and Nothern may continue to do, with as little burthen, as they voluntarily undergo; least they should give the minds of rude people cause to make more doubt then they see, upon a change which they see. And truly, I do think this consideration of preserving unity in the Church, of such weight, that I do not think it was requisite, when the Latine tongue began to be worn out of use, by litle and litle, through the breaches made by the Ger∣mane Nations upon the Western Empire; that the service of the Church should straight-way be put into the Languages of those Nations, who were every day changing their languages, and learning the Latine; or rather framing new lan∣guages, by mixing their own with the Latine. Neither will I undertake to deter∣mine the time, & the state, in which the Church first becomes, or became obliged to provide this change, for the same reason. For it is evident, that it had not been possible, to preserve correspondence and intercourse between all these Nations, with the maintenance of unity in that Christianity, which, while this change was making, they had received, had not the knowledge of the La∣tine among them, made it reasonable to continue the use of it in the Church service. But, as the case is now, that a totall change of the Latine into new languages, hath been accomplished; and, that the greatest part of Christian peo∣ple by many parts, are by no means able to learn what is done at the service of the Church, confiningit to the Latine, I must needs count it strange, that the ex∣ample of the modern Jews, in their Synagogues, or those miserably oppressed Christans in Turky, should be alleged, as to prove, that there is nothing to ob∣lige the whole Church to provide betr for all Christians, then those Churches do for their people, or the Jews for their Synagogues, when we dispute what ought to be done. We should rather look to the originall practice of Christen∣dom, (which there may be reason to intitle unto the Apostles, and consequent∣ly, the changes that may have succeeded, to a defect of succeeding ages, failing, and coming short of their institutions) then allege the practice of the Jews, (which the Christians have so litle cause to envy, that they may well conclude them to be a people forsaken of God, by the litle appearance of Religion in the offices which they serve God with) or, the necessities of ignorant and per∣secuted Christians, for a rule to Churches flourishing with knowledge, and means of advancing Gods service. If, from he beginning, when, by the means of those who spoke Greek and
Latine, or other languages used within the Empire, from whence the tidings of the Gospel came, other Nations had received the service of God in those languages wherein the Churches of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, or An∣tiochia, or possibly other Churches from which their Christianity was planted, did celebrate it; they might with some colour of reason, have argued, that so it ought to continue in the Western Church. But since it appeareth, that the ser∣vice of God hath been prescribed in the Arabick, the Syriack, the Ethiopick, the Coptick, the Sclavonian, the Russe, and other orain languages; what can a man inferr, from the practice of the Church of Rome, not allowing the Saxons in Britain, the Germanes in Almane, and the North and Eastland Countries, the Slavonians in Pole and Boheme, and other parts, the service of God in their Mother tongues, towards the disputes of this time, that they ought not to be allowed it; but the inhansing of the Popes Power, requiring of those who ac∣knowledge the same, absolute conformity, in things altogether needlesse to the unity of the Church, the true end of all due Power in the Church. For, were conformity in this point necessary to the unity of the Church, had the Power of the Church of Rome, and of the Pope in behalf of it, been such, by virtue of the first instituting of it, as might have required it; why then was it not requi∣red from the beginning, that the service of God through the whole Empire, should be celebrated in Latine, being the language which the mother Church of the mother City did use, and farr more frequented then in Greece, than now in the West, which is forced to use it? Seeing then it appeareth, that there is nothing at all to be alleged for so great an inconvenience, but that which I have alleged for it, and which I acknowledge to be truly alleged, and justly, but not justly admitted; it remaineth, that the Church is provided by God of other Laws, the observation whereof is, and would be a cure to the danger alleged, from the change of the publick service of God, into the vulgar languages. For, this danger proceedeth from nothing but from the false pretense of absolute and infallible authority in the Church, which is indeed, limited by the truth of that Christianity whereupon the Church is grounded; and for the maintenance whereof it subsisteth. For, though this pretense may be a mean to contain sim∣ple people in obedience to any thing which shall be imposed, so long as they know not any thing better that they ought to have; yet, if conscience be once awaked with reasons convincing, that the authority instituted by God in his Church is abused, to the prejudice and hinderance of the salvation of Gods peo∣ple, it is no marvail, either that they should neglect all their interest of this world, to seek themselves redress; or, that they should mistake themselves in seeking it, and think the redress to be the destroying of all authority in the Church. So that, the preventing of danger, by the necessary reformation of a∣buses in Church maters, must not be thought to consist in pretenses, as incon∣sistent with the common good of the Churches, as with the truth of Christi∣anity; But in submitting to those bounds which the grounds of Christianity e∣vidently establisheth; And which, unlesse Christianity make people more un∣tractable, then all the rudenesse which they are born and bred with, makes barbarous Nations and wilde Beasts; the sense of those mischiefs, which diffe∣rence of Religion hath brought in and maintained in Christendome, must needs have disposed them to imbrace and to cherish, for the future avoiding of the same. In the next place, supposing the Eucharist, as the rest of the service, to be celebrated in a language vulgarly understood, we are to debate, whither the Eu∣charist require Communion; or, whether the private Masses now allowed and countenanced in the Church of Rome, be of the institution of our Lord and his Apostles. Nor shall I need to use many words, to free the term of private Masses from the exception which is sometimes made; That, all Masses are pub∣lick actions of the Church, repeating the Sacrifice of Christ crucified to the be∣nefit of his Church. For, seeing the term of a private Mass signifieth a thing visible; The celebration of that Eucharist, whereof no body but the Priest that
consecrates it doth communicate; I ask no man leave to use the term, signi∣fying no more by it, but, putting the rest to debate, whither, as de facto in the Church of Rome, so, de jure, according to the institution of our Lord and his Apostles; the sacrifice of Christ crucified, is and ought to be either repeated, or represented and commended by celebrating the Eucharist, so as, no body but the Priest that consecrates to communicate; or whether the institution of our Lord require that Christians communicate in the Eucharist which they cele∣brate. A dispute, wherein, nothing that is said in the Scripture, concerning the order and practice of our Lord and his Apostles, can leave any doubt. For, though there may be mention of celebrating the Eucharist, where there is no mention of communicating in it (which is an argument meerly negative, not from the Scripture, but from this or that Scripture, and of no consequence to say; S. Paul, 1 Cor. XIV. 14-17. 1 Tim. II. 1-6. mentioneth the celebra∣tion of the Eucharist, not mentioning any Communion, therefore no body did communicate) yet are we farr from the least inckling of any circumstance, to show, that there was this Sacrament celebrated, when there was none but he that consecrated it to communicate. Nay, if we regard the institution, Do this in remembrance of me, referring as much to take, eat, and drinke, as to the bles∣sing or thanksgiving, whereby, I have showed, that our Lord did consecrate; If we regard S. Paul, affirming, that the bread which we bless, and the cup which we drinke, is the communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. X. 16. and, reproving the Corinthians, because the rich prevented the poor, and suffered them not to communicate in their Oblations, out of which the Eucharist was consecrated, as I showed afore: We shall be bold to conclude, that, so farr as appears by the Scripture, all that did celebrate did communicate; as, all that assisted did celebrate, if that be true which I proved afore, that the Prayers of the Congregation is that which consecrates the Eucharist, to wit, supposing Gods Ordinance. The same appears by Justine Martyr, and other the ancient∣est Records of the Church, that describe this office. But I canot better express the sense of the Church in this point, then by alleging the decretall Epistles of the Popes, before Innocent the I. or his Predecessor Syricius; which, being for∣ged by Isidore Mecater, some DCC years after Christ, as hath been discovered by men of much learning, do notwithstanding contain this Rule, that he who communicates not, be not admitted to the service of the Church. Which, he that forged them would never have fathered upon the ancient Popes, had it not been evident to all that were seen in the Canons of the Church, that it was of old a mater of censure, to be present at celebrating the Eucharist, and not to communicate in it. A thing evident enough by many Canons of Councils yet extant, and foisted into those decretals to no other purpose, but to make men believe in after ages, that those Canons were made, to prosecute and to bring to effect those things which the Popes had decreed afore; as if their authori∣ty had been always the same, as it was at the time of this forgery. Now it is well enough known, what pretenses have been made, and what consequences drawn, from the speculation of the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, repeted or represented by this Sacrament; to perswade Christendom, that the benefit thereof, in remission of sinnes, and infusion of grace, and all the effects of Christs Passion is derived upon Gods people, by virtue of the meer act of assisting at the Sacrifice, which hath been called opus operaetum, or the very external work done, without consideration, without knowledge, with∣out any intention of doing that which he is to do in it; that is, of concurring e∣very one for his share, to the doing of the same: Supposing alwayes, that this Sacrifice consists in substituting the Body and Blood of Christ, to be bodily pre∣sent under the accidents of the elements, the substance of them being aboli∣shed, and ceasing to be there any more; And not, in offering and presenting the sacrifice of Christ crucified, here now represented by this Sacrament, unto God, for obtaining the benefits of his passion in behalfe of his Church. And this opinion, I may safely say, I know to be still maintained, because I have heard
it maintained, though, as I suppose, by the more licentious and ignorant sort of Priests; that it concerns not the people to consider, to know, to intend to joyn their devotions, to the effecting of that which this Sacrament pretends; But onely to mind their own Prayers, assisting and accompanying that which the Priest doth, with those affections which they came to Church with. But, can I therefore say, that this is the doctrine of that Church, because it allows such things to be taught and said, without punishment or disgrace? Surely, he that peruses, not onely the Testimonies which Doctor Field hath produced, in the Appendix alleged afore, to show, that the true understanding of the Sacri∣fice of the Eucharist, was maintained in the Church, even till the Reformation; together with the opinions of many Divines of credit in that Church, and in∣structions of Catechisms, and devotions, that have been published since the Council of Trent; shall easily conclude, that it is allowed, though not injoyned by the Church, to oppose this palliating of abuses in the Church, by opinions so prejudiciall to Christianity. And without doubt, those who pretend no more then to excuse the Church, in not reforming the abuse of private Masses, by say∣ing, that the Church commands them not, nor forbids any man to communicate at any time, but rather exhorts them to it; are farr from saying, that the people are no further concerned in the Mass, then to assist it with their bodily presence, and the generall good intentions & affections which they come to Church with, imploying themselvs, in the mean time, at their own devotions. Though it is much to be feared, that this opinion is farr the more popular; The opposition which the Reformation hath occasioned, and the countenance given by the Sea of Rome, to those who are the most zealous and extreme in opposing the Hereticks, bearing down the indeavours of more conscientious Priests, to maintain more Christian opinions in the minds of their people. In the mean time it is visible, that the resolution of this point dependeth upon the true reason of offering the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in celebrating the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist; Which I have showed to consist, in presenting unto God the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, represented here now by the elements sacramentally changed, by the act of consecrating, into the body and blood of Christ, by those Prayers, whereby, the Congregation which celebrateth this Sacrament intercedeth with God, for their own necessities, and the necessities of his Church. For, if the virtue and efficacy of these Prayers be grounded upon nothing else, then the fide∣lity of the Congregation, in standing to the Covenant of Baptism; (as, if Chri∣stianity be true, it consists in nothing else) and, if the celebration of the Eucharist be the profession of fidelity and perseverance in it; what remaineth, but, that the efficacy of the Sacrifice depend upon the receiving of the Eucharist; unlesse the efficacy and virtue of Christian mens Prayers can depend upon their perseverance in that Covenant, which they refuse to renew, and to professe per∣severance in it, that profession being no lesse necessary, then the inward inten∣tion of persevering in the same. For, the receiving of the Eucharist is no lesse expresly, a renewing of the Covenant of Baptism, then, being baptized is en∣tering into it. So that, whosoever refuses the Communion of the Eucharist, in as much as he refuses it, refuses to stand to the Covenant of his Baptisme, where∣by he expects the world to come. I say not therefore, that, whosoever communicates not in the Eucharist, so oft as he hath means and opportunity to do it, renounces his Christianity, ei∣ther expresly, or, by construction and consequence. For, how many of us may be prevented with the guilt of sinne, so deeply staining the conscience, that they cannot satisfie themselves in the competence of that conversion to God, which they have time, and reason, and opportunity to exercise, before the opportuni∣ty of communicating? how many have need of the authority of the Church, and the power of the Keys, not onely fo their satisfaction, but for their directi∣on, in washing their wedding Garments white again? How many are so di∣stracted, and oppressed with businesse of this world, that they cannot, upon all opportunities, retire their thoughts to that attention, and devotion which the
office requires? How many, though free of business which Christianity injoyn∣eth, are intangled with the cares and pleasures of the world, though not so farr as to depart from the state of Grace, yet further then the renewing of the Cove∣nant of Grace importeth? Be it therefore granted, that there is a great allow∣ance to be made, in exacting the Apostolical Rule, for all that are present to communicate. But, be it likewise considered, what a pitifull excuse it is in be∣halfe of the Church, that it forbiddeth no man to communicate, that is pre∣pared as the rules thereof require; subsisting for no other purpose, but to pro∣cure the people thereof to be prepared for the service of God, whereof, the principal part is this office. But, when it is further allowed to be taught and said, that it concerns not Gods people to assist the office of the Church, with their actuall intentions and devotions, but with their bodily presence, and the generall affection which they bring with them to Church; what reason can be alleged why they should go to Church, to cary those affections to the Congre∣gations, which are exercised at home, with their particular devotions, to the same purpose? Nay, to what purpose subsisteth the Communion of the Church, if it subsist not in order to the service of God in the publick Assembly of his people, the chief office whereof is taught to be of that nature, that the pre∣sence of a Christian is of no effect to the purpose of it? Or, what reason can be alleged, why the parts of Christendom should not provide for themselves, by restoring the primitive practice of Christianity, without the consent of the whole; forbidding them to provide for themselves, but not providing for them in maters so grossely and palpably concerning our common Christianity? But having cautioned, that the service of God, and the Eucharist, be in a lan∣guage vulgarly understood, and that for the communion, as well as for the sa∣crifice; it must further be provided, that this Communion be complete, in both kinds in which the Sacrament is celebrated, not barring the people of the Cup, as it is the custome in the Church of Rome to do. And truly, there is not so much marvell at any thing in difference, as there is, why it hath been thought fit, to make this the cause of so great a breach. For, the precept running in those terms, which take hold of them who are obliged by it, that is, of the whole Church, consisting of Clergy and people both alike; (because I have showed, that, do this in remembrance of me, concerns the whole Church, by the prayers whereof it is consecrated.) How will it be possible to make any humane un∣derstanding capable to comprehend, that, when our Lord saith, take, eat, drinke, do this; the people shall stand charged onely with part of it. Indeed, had there been any limitation of the Law-givers intent expressed, either by way of pre∣cept, as this lies; or, by the practice of the Church, originally under the Apo∣stles, and generally throughout Christendom; there might have been pretense for dispute. And, it must not be denied, that there have been those that have attempted to show, that the Apostles so used it, even in the Scriptures; But by such means, as if they meant not, indeed▪ to prove it for a truth, but to show, how willingly they would gratifie those who would be glad to see it proved, whether true or false. And do therefore sort to no other effect, then to make it appear, that their desire to prove it out of the Scripture was farr greater, then the Scripture gave them cause to cherish. For, were breaking of bread put a thousand times in the Scripture, for celebrating the Eucharist, (as sometimes it is put, Act. II. 42. 45. XX. 7. at least for those Suppers, at which the Eu∣charist was celebrated) what would this avail, unlesse we could be perswaded, that, as oft as breaking of bread is put for eating, there we are to understand, that there was no drink? Or unlesse we could understand, by one and the same term of breaking bread, that all Priests had drink as well as bread, but the Lay people none? Therefore, whatsoever advantage it may be, (in regard it is cer∣tain, that the greatest part of the world will never be wise) to make a noise with any plea, though never so unprobable, rather then be thought to have nothing to say; men of judgement and conscience must needs take it for a confession, that there is no ground for it in the Scriptures, to see things alleged so farr from all appearance of truth. As for the practice of the Catholick
Church, I may very well remit all that desire to inform, and not to scandalize themselves, to those things which Cassander hath, which much learning, collected, as sufficient to make it appear, (if any thing that men are unwilling to see, can be made to appear) that, as to this day, there is no such custom in the Eastern Church, so, in the Western Church, it is not many ages since it can be called a custom: And that by so visible degrees introduced, as may be an undeniable in∣stance, to make evidence, that corruption may creep into the Laws and customs of the Church, though by those degrees, which are not alwayes visible. Indeed it is alleged, that there are some natures found in the world, that can by no means indure the taste of wine, (which therefore some men call abstemious) without casting it back again, nd induring as great pangs, as men are seen to indure, that are forced or couened to eat things which they hate. So that, to force such na∣tures to receive the Sacrament in both kinds, were to destroy the reverence due to it, both in them who receive it, and in them that shall see it used with no more reverence. It is alleged again, That Christianity goes further than wine; That is; That some Christian Nations dwell in Countries so untemperately cold, that wine will not keep in their Countries, but changes as soon as it comes. Now, as no reason appeareth, why the Sacrament should not be celebrated for the use of those people, who cannot receive it in both kinds; Neither can any reason appear why other people, receiving it in one kinde, should not receive the same benefit by it which they do. Last of all it is alleged, that, in the primitive Church, it was many times received by the people in one kinde upon several occasions. For, in regard that Christians could not alwayes be prsent at the celebrating thero, when there was not such means as have since been provided, especially those who were maried to unbelievers; it was a custom to send them the Com∣munion, who were known to joyn with the devotion of the Church, though hindred to joyn therewith in bodily presence; as wee learn by Justie Martyrs second Apology. And because, in the quality of wine, a litle quantity is not to be preserved, (as preserve it they did, besides other reasons, to take it Fasting) therefore it was sent onely in the other kinde, as wee finde by Tertullian writing to his wife. Again, if a man that was under Penance fell in danger of depart∣ing this life, before hee was reconciled to the Church, by receiving the Commu∣nion again; (which, by this one instance wee may see, how much the primitive Christians abominated to do) As the Law of the Church was, that they should not be refused the Communion in that case; So the custom was, for the same reason, to send it them onely in one kinde, as appeareth by an eminent example, related from Dionysius of Alexandria by Eusebius Hist. Eccles. VI. 44. But these instances, if they be looked into, will appear to be of the same conse∣quence, as if it should be alleged to a Jew; that, if two Jews should turn back to back, and go one of them East, the other West, till they came to meet again, (howsoever this may be possible to be done) seeing when they meet again, if the one count Saturday, the other must needs count Sunday; (as appears evident∣ly by the reason of the Sphere, and the dayly motion of the Sun round the earth) therefore they cannot both keep the Sabbath upon the day which the Law ap∣points; therefore, it is in the power of the Synagogue to appoint that no Sab∣bath be kept. Or, because, during the forty years travail of the Israelites through the Wilderness to the Land of Promise, their children were not circumcised, by reason that they knew not when they should be summoned to remove, by the moving of the cloud that was over the Tabernacle, which they were alwayes to be ready to do; Therefore, it was in the power of the Synagogue, to dis∣pense with the circumcision of male children, under the Law of Moses. Posi∣tive precepts they are all, that of circumcision, and that of the Sabbath, as well as this of the Eucharist. Neither can it be said, that those ever concerned the salvation of a Jew more nearly, than this earnest of our common salvation con∣cerns that of a Christian: And, why the Synagogue should not have more power in those precepts, than the Church in this, nothing can be said. But to the particulars▪ Suppose some fansies may be possest with such an
aversness to wine, that no use of reason, at years of discretion, when they come to the Eucharist, will prevail to admit that kinde, without such alteration in them, as the reverence due unto it can stand with; (for I have seen the case of one, that never had tasted wine in all his life; and yet, by honest endeavors, when hee first came to the Eucharist, receives it in both kindes, without any maner of of∣fense) doth it therefore fall under the power of the Church, to prohibite it all people, because there may fall a case, wherein it shall be necessry to dispense with some, though, not comprehended in the case? For, there is nothing, but the meer necessity of giving order in cases not expressed by the Law, that gives the Church power to take order in such cases: Therefore, without those ca, it hath none. And so in the case of those Nations, where wine will not keep, yet the people are Christians. For, neither was the reason otherwise, supposing that the ancients did reserve the Eucharist in one kinde onely, for the absent, or for the case of sudden death, to those that were under Penance. For, this reserva∣tion was but from Communion to Communion, which, in those dayes, was so frequent, that he who caried away the Body of our Lord, to eat it at home, drink∣ing the Bloud at present, might reasonably be said to communicate in both kinds. Neither can that sacramental change, which the consecration works in the ele∣ments, be limited to the instant of the assembly; though it take effect only, in or∣der to that Cōmunion, unto which the Church designeth that which it consecra∣teth. And, so farr as I can understand the condition of the Church, at that time, in these cases, there may have been as just cause to give it then in one kind, in these cases, as now to the abstemious, or to those Nations where wine will not keep. But, shall this necessity be a colour for a Power in the Church, to take a∣way the birth-right of Christian people, to that which their own prayers conse∣crate? If the Power of the Church be infinite, this colour need not. If it he onely regular, as I have showed all along that it is, there can be no stronger rule than that of common reason, which forbids servants to make bold with their Masters ordinances, where no other act of his obliges. For, all necessity is the work of providence, and excuses, or if you will, justifies where it constrains; not where it constrains not. The Greek Church hath an ancient custom, not to con∣secrate the Eucharist in Let but upon Sabbaths and Lords days, on the other five dayes of the week, to communicate of that which was consecrated upon those dayes, by the Council of Laodicea Can. XLIX. And this Communion is prescribed by the Council in Trullo Can. LII. But, that they held the Commu∣nion to be completed by dipping the elements consecrated afore in wine, with the Lords Prayer, it will to him that shall peruse that which is found in Cassan∣ders works pag. 1020, 1027. Whereby you shall perceive also, that the same was formerly done in the Church of Rome on good Friday, on which days the same course was and is observed, and that, with an intent to consecrate it as the Eu∣charist is consecrated; though, at this day, it is not so believed in the Church of Rome. For, the custom of the Church determining the intent of those Pray∣ers whereby the Eucharist is consecrated, to the elements in which it is com∣municated; (Because, wine presently consecrated, being in so small a quantity, was not fit to be kept) there is no reason why the Communion should not be complete; Though, how fit this custom is, I dispute not. But there is a new device of Concomitance, just as old as the with-holding of the Cup from the people; (that you may be sure, it would never have been plea∣ded, but to maintain it, for, in the Greek Church, that allows both kinds, who e∣ver heard of it?) It is said, that the bloud in the body accompanieth the flesh, neither can the Body of Christ, as it is, or as it was upon the Cross, be eaten with∣out the Bloud. Seeing then, that hee who receiveth the body must needs receive the bloud also, what wrong is it for the people, to be denied that which they have, which they have received already? And now you see, to what purpose Trnsntiation serves; To make it appear, that our Lord instituted this Sacra∣ment in both elements to no purpose, seeing, as much must needs be received in on in as in both. And yet, by your favor, even Transubstantiation distingui∣sth between the being of the flesh of Christ naturally in the body of Christ u∣pon
the Cross, (for so, it was necessarily accompanied with the bloud of Christ, not yet issued from it) and between the flesh of Christ being sacramentally in the element consecrated into it. And thus, it cannot be otherwise accompanied with the bloud, than, because hee that consecrates is commanded to consecrate another kinde into the bloud; And so, hee that receives the body being commanded as much to receive the bloud, the body may be said to be accompanied with the bloud. But otherwise, if hee receive not the bloud, then is it not accompanied with the bloud as it ought to be. For, seeing the command is to receive, as well as to consecrate several elements into the body and bloud of Christ, it is manifest, that the body and bloud of Christ are received, as they are consecrated, apart; Under one element the body, under another the bloud. Indeed, upon another ground, which the Church of Rome will have no cause to own, I do conceive, it may well be said, that the body is accompanied with the bloud, to them that re∣ceive the Sacrament in one kinde; in case it may or must be thought, that they, who, in the Church of Rome, thirst after the Eucharist in both kindes, do receive the whole Grace of the Sacrament by the one kinde; through the mercy of God, giving more than hee promiseth, in consideration that they come not short of the condition required, by their own will or default. Which is necessarily to be be∣lieved, by all that believe the Church of Rome to remain a Church, though cor∣rupt, and, that salvation is to be had in it and by it; Though, whether this be so or not, I say nothing here, because it is the last point, to be resolved▪ out of the re∣solution of all that goes afore. For, since it is no Church, unless the Grace of this Sacrament be convayed by the Sacrament ministred as the Church mini∣streth the same; And, seeing the precept of receiving the Eucharist is positive, and importeth not the promise of Grace, by the nature of the action commanded, but by the free will and appointment of God; it were injurious to the goodness of God, to think that hee denyeth the promise to those, who would perform the condition if they could, receiving the Eucharist in one kinde, because they cannot receive it in both. For, to say nothing at present, what reason may hinder him, that otherwise would betake himself where hee might receive it in both kindes; how many thousand souls live and dye in that Communion, without knowing, that there is any where means to receive it in both kindes? Which if it be so, then, this resolution leaves the charge where it ought to lye; not upon the people, who suffers in it, but upon the Priesthood, who injoy by it a fruit less privilege above them, at the charge of Gods Ordinance which suffe∣reth the sacrilege; But especially the Prelates, whose consent and connivence maintains the abuse. For, all that hath been alleged to excuse it, may appear to a reasonable man, not to have been the reason for which it was introduced, (nor yet, to avoid the irreverence of the wine that may remain in the countrey mens beards; for, what is that to women that have none?) but to add to the Clergy a pre-eminence above the people, by excluding them from that, to which it admit∣teth the Priest that consecrateth. A thing that had not needed, had the Clergy known, that all the reverence which is justly due to them, is grounded upon the difference between them and the people, in sobriety of cariage, and integrity of conscience, visible in the same: And that serves not the turn, but rather turns to a contrary effect, when the people may perceive, that they betray their trust, both to them and to God, by so unnecessarily abusing their Office. So that, the mean to recover and restore that trust and reverence due to the Clergy from the Peo∣ple, which, the maintenance of Christianity absolutely requireth, will consist in the recovering and restoring of that integrity and holiness of life in the Cler∣gy, grounded upon their renouncing the interests and ingagements of this world, which their profession importeth; Not in maintaining that difference, which, the people may discern not to agree with our common Christianity.
CHAP. XXIV. Prayer the more principall Office of Gods service then Preaching. Preachings, neither Gods word, nor the meanes of salvation, unlesse limited to the Faith of Gods Church. What, the edification of the Church by preaching further requires. The Order for Divine service according to the course of the Church of England; According to the custome of the universall Church. ANd now there is nothing in the way, why we should not judge between the Reformation & the Church of Ro. whether the Sermon or the Masse be the principall office for which Christians are to assemble▪ as the Romans once did between their neighbours of Ardea and Aricia; adjudging to them∣selves the land, which, they were chosen to judge, whether of those Ci∣ties it belonged to. There had been indeed just complaint, that the people were not taught the duties of their Christianity, at their assemblies in the Church: There had been just complaint, that the service of the Church was not understood, being performed in an unknowne tongue; That the Eucharist was celebrated without any Communion of the people; That the Commu∣nion, when it was given, as rarely it was, was onely in one kind. But never any complaint, that there were so many assemblies of the Church without preaching, whereas, when there is none, the Church ought not to assemble, though for the communion of the Eucharist, and the service of God, which, by the Apostles ordinance, it is to be celebrated with. No man living durst ever make any such complaint, nor can any man living justifie it. And yet, when the change comes to be made, as if such a demand had been both made and justified, the sermon is set up instead of the Masse in most places; And the Reformation is taken to be characterized as much, by putting down the Eucharist, or reserving it to foure times, a year, as, or so, by restoring the Com∣union of it in both kinds, with the service which it is celebrated with, in the lan∣guage that is vulgarly known. Not so the Church of England. The Re∣formation whereof consisteth in an order, as well for the celebration of, and Communion in the Eucharist all Lords days and festivall daies, as in putting the service into our mother English; desiring that there might be also a Ser∣mon, when it may be had in so good order, as to create no offense to Gods people, or irreverence in his Service; But, prescribing the order aforesaid, though that cannot be attained to. Whereby it may appeare, that is was no∣thing but the ares of false doctrine, sowed among the good wheat of the Reformation in England, that hath hindred this good order to take effect in practice. For, it were a great impertinence to me to dispute here, that the Eucharist thus celebrated, is to be preferred before a Sermon wihout it. no man having attempted to maintaine the contrary, and the reason being so cleare, upon the premises; That, as the undertaking of Christianity by Baptisme puts a man in possession of his title to the Kingdome of heaven which the hearing of it preached onely makes him capable to choose: So, the renwing of his undertaking, by the communion of the Eucharist, and the exercie thereof▪ by the service of God which it is celebrated with, is the meanes of attaining that, which, the further knowledge of Christianity attained by a Sermon, renders a man onely capable to attaine: Namely the gift of the Holy Ghost, inabling to make good that Christianity which our Baptisme undertakes, and so to attaine life everlasting. I proceed, here, upon supposition of that which I have said in my Book of the right of the Church Pag. 98-106 to ground the difference between preach∣ing the Gospell to those that are not Christians, and teaching those that are, upon the Scriptures of the old and New Testament. Our Lord and his Apo∣stles,
pretending (as indeed they were) to be prophets, might easily be admitted to teach the people in the Synagogue, wheresoever they came, be∣cause the whole Nation was to obey them, by the Law, Deutr. XVIII. 13. sup∣posing them to be Prophets indeed. Thus had they meanes to preach Christ and Christianity to the Jewes, so long as the Jewes, in regard of the credit, which, their doctrine, life, and miracles had among the Jewes, could not con∣demne them for false Prophets. As for the Gentiles, who had not any custome to assemble themselves for the service of God, worshipping false Gods, They could doe no more then give them the newes of the Gospell, till, having per∣swaded them to be Christians, they might assemble them as they found meanes both to praise God, and pray to God, according to that which they, ei∣ther had attained to, or desired to attaine; And, to teach them what they had further to learne, to make their Praises of God, and prayers to God the more Christian. He that understandeth this case, by the Scriptures of the new Testament, must conclude, that all preaching is to make men Christians; that the praises of God, and prayers to God (comprehending the Eucharist) are the exercise of Christianity. The one, the next meanes to attaine salvation, the other, onely the meanes to attaine that meanes. So that, this dispute also resolveth into that of my second Book, whether we are justified by believing, that we are justified and predestinate; Or, by professing and living as Chri∣stians. For, supposing the state of salvation to be obtained by so believing and that so, as, not to be forfeited any more; It is very reasonable to run infi∣nitely after Sermons, till a man find himselfe setled in so believing. But so, that then, he shall believe that, which, he can have no reason, supposing the Scriptures, to believe. Nor shall the frequenting of Sermons serve to show any resonable motive to believe; But, the very act of hearing a man speake out of the Pulpit, by the glasse, must be taken for the meanes appointed by God, by which, when he sees his time, he will determine the Elect to believe, leaving the Reprobate in their unbeliefe, though, perhaps, after they have slept out more Sermons then the other have done. So, the opus operatum of hearing Sermons, according to this opinion, succeeds instead of the opus ope∣ratum of hearing Masses, according to the corrupt practice of the Church of Rome. And in this chang, the worke of Reformation, according to this opi∣nion, must consist. But then, it will be necessarily consequent, that they who have attained this faith, give over hearing sermons for the future, and not one∣ly Sermons, but prayers, and all other offices of Gods service, and assemblies for the same, according to the opinion of that Sect, that now thinks themselves above ordinances. Which Sect, before ever it appeared, I had understood, by a person of integrity and knowledge, that there was a difference of opinion among those who frequented and maintayned Sermons, besides the order of the Ecclesiasticall Lawes in England; Some thinking it a meanes of faith, to con∣fer of the sermon after it is don, others laughing at so silly a mistake, as, think∣ing to attaine the state of salvation, by reason and freewill, not by Gods meer Grace. Whereby it appeareth, that, whosoever, as I doe, makes the preach∣ing of the Gospell (that is, not speaking out of a Pulpit, but, showing the rea∣sons which Gods word proposeth to move men to be true Christians) the meanes which Gods spirit useth to bring a man to the state of Grace; is obliged to grant, that it is no otherwise the meanes to maintaine a man in that state, then, as it is the meanes to maintaine him a good Christian. And, that his Christianity, in the first place, consisting in the publike service of God, to which he becomes ingaged by being baptized into the Church; The offices thereof are the immediate meanes of salvation, to which, as well as to the offices con∣cerning other men and our selves, all teaching of Christians immediately tendeth, as, all preaching to unbelievers, at a distance. Now, let no man think, that I take any pleasure in censuring the proceedings of forraine Churches, which I could willingly have passed over in silence, had not a pernicious affectation of being like them, caryed those that liked not this order, to destroy the very being of the English Church; out of a desire to
change the vertue of it for their oversight. For now I must say, whatsoever offence it may cause; that, when it had been well pleaded, that the communion of the Eucharist ought to be restored in both kinds, with the service of God in a known language; And, that order ought to be taken, that preaching might be frequented, for the instruction of the people; to infer thereupon for a Law, that there be no orders for holding any assembly of the Church, without Preaching, was to cure the abuse of Private Masses, by degrading the Eucharist from the preeminence that it holdeth, above all other offices that God can be served with by a Christian; And that without colour from the scripture, with∣out precedent, from any practice of the Church. There have been indeed pre∣tenses among us, that the word which giveth efficacy to the Sacraments, is the word preached; Meaning thereby, a sermon spoken out of the Pulpit. And from hence hath proceeded the affectation of Christning Sermons, as if that were the word whereof S. Austine saith; Accedat verbum ad elementum, & fit Sacramentum. Nay, this preaching afore meate, in a long discourse, in∣stead of thanksgiving, what is it but a mark of that sense which they give S. Paul, when he saith; that the creature is sanctified by the word of God & prayer, for the food of Christians, 1 Tim. IV. 5? And when Sermons are so aff∣ectedly called the Meanes; To wit, of saving us; Is it not manifest that they attribute vnto Sermons that which S. Paul Rom. X. 8-15. and the apost∣les elsewhere attribute to the preaching of the Gospell, whereby a man be∣comes convict, that he ought to become a Christian, without which no Christi∣an will grant any man can be saved? Whereby we may see, what consequence, slight mistakes, in the very signification of the words, may and doe produce. For, having showed an evident difference, between preaching the Gospell to those who as yet believe not, and teaching those that are become Christians the further knowledg of their Christianity; I may take for granted, that it is a mistake, when the difference is not made, between preaching to an assem∣bly of Christians, and declaring the Gospell to unbelievers, whom the Apost∣les could not deale with upon any supposition of Christianity but onely upon the force of those motives which they showed them to imbrace it; to whom therefore the onely meanes of their salvation was the knowledge of those mo∣tives. And though all Christians when they come among unbelievers, are bound to preach Christ to them, that is, to declare unto them the reasons why they ought to be Christians, so far as they are able to doe it without prejudice of Christianity; Yet, to preach it as the Apostles preached it, planting with all the Church, in which God should be served according to Christianity, is that which no private man can doe, without authority received by the Church from the Apostles. From which authority, all that is afterwards don in ser∣ving God, by the Churches so planted, must receive that warrant upon which Christians may ground themselves, that it is agreeable to the will of God. And upon these termes, it is to be granted, that sermons preached in the a∣ssemblies of Christians are the meanes of their salvation; because that, the al∣lowance of the Church groundeth a presumption, that they are according to Christianity. But if this be wanting, though it is not necessary that they should be contray to Gods word, yet, because there is no presumption, that they are so as God hath provided they should be, they are not to be accepted for Gods word, though they who preach them would make men be∣lieve it. And this is, now, the condition of the people of England. It is well e∣nough knowne indeed, that the Presbyterians have propounded a new forme of doctrine, according to which, had it been received, there would have been reasonable persumption for plaine Christians, that their sermons must needs procede. But it is as well known, that it is excepted against in every part of it by, those who joined with them against the Church of England; as, he that wil take the paines to compare that which I write here, with it, may know, what it is that I except against in every point of it. How they satisfie their people, to pay them for preaching, upon a supposition, which they know is contested
on both these hands, as well as by the Church of Rome, let them see to it, whom I have thus warned. As for those that are not Presbyterians, it is plaine, that the people have no other ground to presume, that they preach the word of God, but onely, that they maintain the Bible to containe Gods word, and that they are taken, by those that send them, for godly persons. The one whereof is common to all Hereticks: The other requires a ground, whereupon, those that send them may be taken for godly persons themselves; and then, how they come to be satisfied of those whom they send: Both liable to more per∣emtory difficulties, then their life time will serve to void. Whereupon I in∣ferr, that there is no ground to presume, that it is Gods word that is preached, where the authority of the Church interposeth not. And therefore it is lamentable to see how this miserable people are intoxicated with the conceite, that they want not the word of God, nor the meanes of sal∣vation, so long as they can goe and heare a man preach in a Pulpit, without consideration, what he professeth to teach for Christianity. One thing I de∣sire here may be considered. It hath been not onely commonly said, ut main∣tained by the writings of sober and knowing persons, that very many Jesuites have been, & are still imployed, in preaching the extravagant positions of this time, on purpose to gaine oportunity, and meanes, to infuse into mens minds, what they find effectuall to make them their Proselytes. I confesse it is none of my sense. For, I conceive, I show the principle, upon which, all these extra∣vagances have a naturall and reasonable dependence. But, I demand; where is the provision for simple soules, when wise men are not satisfied, that Jesuits are not admitted to preach? It is to be considered, that preaching, is ne∣cessarily, an office that requires a facility in speaking, which, all the world knowes, goes not alwaies along with a right understanding. Where there is both good understanding, and a faculty of speaking, it is manifest, if there be not a good intention, they are both as a sword in a madmans hand, instru∣ments to doe mischeife with, I will silence the mention of all that we have seen. The warres of the league in France, the troubles of the united Provin∣ces in the businesse of Arminius, who can deny that the Pulpit inflamed both? Whatsoever the Apostle S. James, in the third Chapter of his Epistle, hath ascribed to the tongue, for good or for bad, belongs to it in the Pulpit, as elsewhere. And therefore, it is in it selfe, an institution of doubtfull effect, to set men up to show their eloquence in the Pulpit, though, under pretense of making our common Christianity recommendable, by the meanes of it: And that, supposing them to admit the sense of the Church, for the bounds of that which they are to deliver, for the sense of the Scripture, But, supposing no bounds, utterly pernicious. For, seeing, no caution can exclude controversies from rising; neither is there any such mischiefe as division, to the Church, nor any such meanes, as Preachers tongues, to inflame it. And will any common sense allow, that all audiences of Christians can be provided of men of under∣standing, and eloquence, rightly informed of the whole interest of Christianity? If any such thing could be supposed, it would not be for the best. The satis∣faction indeed, of the more civile audiences, requires no lesse. For, to appoint men to goe to Church to heare a sermon, by heareing whereof, a man neither learnes that which he knew no afore, or can be moved, (by otherwise ex∣pressing that which he knew afore) to delight in it more then he did afore, what is it but that which the Sons of Eli did, to make the offering of God stink in the nostrills of the people? For, the time of seduction and errour, they may have such a stroke with their people, as to perswade them, that, the lo∣thing of bad sermons is a fruite of the corruption of our nature, which opposes Gods truth. But, whom God gives Grace to consider what I pretend to be Gods truth, they, finding that to be true which I shall say by and by, must find the name of God to be onely the pretense of faction and interest. In the meane time, the satisfaction of the more civile andiences will not stand with the edification of the maine body of Christians. The condition of the world chan∣geth not, by mens being Christians. There are idiots, and there are civile
men, and men of learning, among Christians as well as Divines, and a waies will be. That which satisfies the lesser part will not edifie the greater part. And, that is it the Church ought to aime at. Better the more refined should want their curiosities, then the whole body their necessaries. The plaine sort of Christians, (who for number, how much they exceede the rest, I refer my self to common sense; for weight, their souls being as precious to God as the souls of Princes) cannot edifie by that which satisfies the more learned. They understand no deduction of reason, no figures of language. Tell them the grounds of Christianity, they are convicted. Tell them what these grounds ob∣lige them to doe, for the end which they evidence, they are convicted. Tell them, that, for the interest of our common Christianity, they are to come to Church to heare the same said againe in more eloquent termes, or more curious conceits, they have no reason to be convicted of it; they have reason to suspect that there is some interest, besides the common interest of Christiani∣ty, in it. Tell them, that which remaines, that they are to come to Church for the grounding, for the inlarging of their Christianity, by the understanding of the scriptures; Supposing that, that they know what is necessary to save all Christians, by the Church, and by being made Christians by the Church, well and good: If they think not, that they are to give eare to whatsoever instruction may advance them in the knowledg of our common Christianity, I think them not good Christians. This for the whole Bible. And, suppo∣sing that difference between the Law and the Gospell, which I have setled in the first book, they may advance in the knowledg of Christianity, by the prea∣ching of those who understand it. But, not distinguishing that which is neces∣sary from that which is not necessary, by supposing that which is necessary; they may heare Sermons all their life long, and not know wherein their salva∣vation consists; (a thing found by experience, when there was a Rule of doct∣rine agreeable to the Scriptures) and, not knowing the ground there laid forth, upon which the Old Testament beares witnesse to the New; they may gaine nothing by hearing sermons all theire life long, but mere dissatisfaction in the grounds of our common Christianity. Whereas, going into the scriptures with those two principles, and the humility of Christians, they may teach them∣selves, that edification which they ought not to expect from those that acknow∣ledg them not. As for the present order, which suppresseth all Assemblies for the service of God when there is no Preaching; It is manifest, that, I will not say, no un∣derstanding, no eloquence, but no lungs or voice (For, of a truth, this order makes the service of God a worke rather of the lungs, and of the voice, then of any thing else) can furnish entertainement for the assemblies of the church, with that which is worth the hearing, so oft as it is fit for the people of God to assemble for his service. This makes the businesse, for which the greatest part now goes to Church, to be no more the service of God; but to get mater of discourse or debate for the Sabbath, as they call it, how well the man preached, or how well he prayed. For, whereas they were wont to object against the Church, that it was not praying but reading prayers, which was ministred to the Church, (as if attention of mind, & devotion of spirit could not aswel go a long with him that reades, as with him that is to study what to say when he praies) now, the censures that passe upon mens prayers do shew, that the hear∣ers minds cannot be imployed in praying, when they are taken up with judging how well the prayer they heare is made. Much more justly may the same be said, if it be considered, how a man is obliged to discerne what the mater of the prayer is, whether it be from blasphemy, Heresy, Slander Rebellion or not, least, before he be aware, he joine in such horible crimes by saying Amen to their pray∣er, which he is no otherway secured to be free from the same. Now it may be con∣sidered, that the prayers which usher sermons in & out, by the order of the church of England, but by the faction that destroyeth it; though they exclude the ser∣vice of God out of the Church, upon pretense of praying as the spirit indites, yet are indeed no lesse provided aforehand, then the prayers of the Church,
a little from time to time, as occasion may require, to make the people believe that they are ex tempore dictates of the spirit. So that, the change which many men call reformation consists in this; that the peoples devotions are now confined, to that which every one that dare mount the Pulpit dare say, instead of that which the Church, upon mature deliberation, had appoin∣ted to be said. But, if it be thus in prayers which are alwaies for substance the same, what shal we say of Sermons, the substance whereof changeth according to the compasse of the Scripture, and all the points of it, which, the texts, upon which men take their rise, occasion them to intreat? experience, in the decay of that reverence & devotion, which the publick service of God is to be performed with, may easily point a man of common understanding to the sourse of it, in those false & weak suppositions, upon which the order, or rather the disorder of the present chang, standeth. Instead whereof, therefore, acknowledging that there was just cause, at the time of the Reformation, to complain upon the want of Preaching and instruction of the people; I do and am to maintaine, that there was never any pretense, that the communion of the Eucharist, and the service of God that it is to be celebrated with, ought to give way, and to be excluded the assemblies of christians, to bring in that rule which is now, in e∣ffect, a cheife point of the chang that is made with us; that, without preaching no assembly for Gods service. And thereupon, though I desire, that the more solem service of God, when the Eucharist is celebrated, may have a sermon for part of it; (as I have showed, both by the Scriptures and by the primative practice of the Church, that the use was under the Apostles, and in the next ages) yet, that the order prescribed by the Church of England for the celebrating of the same, when and where there is not meanes for a Sermon, such as ought to be had, is not to be deserted, upon any pretense of frequenting Sermons. As for more oridinary occasions of assembling for the service of God, having proved afore, that they ought to be frequented, for the celebrating of other Offices of Gods service besides preaching, I take it for proved, that the order prescribed by the Church of England, for the celebrating of Gods service, up∣on such occasions, is no way to be deserted, but meanes to be sought, for the frequenting of it. Acknowledging with all, the zeale and the joy which S. Paul expresseth, for the further edification of those Churches, to whom he directeth his Epistles, in that Christianity which they had received. 1, Cor. I. 5, 6, 7. Eph. I. 17. 18. Phil. I. 9, Col I. 9. Rom. I. 11. 12. as a strong mo∣tive to the Church, to procure preaching as frequent, as it can be procured and maintained, without these offenses. That the same S. Paul incourageth & directeth frequent & ample use of these miraculous graces which God granted the Churches of that time, unto that purpose 1. Cor. XIV. 1-31. Eph. IV. 7-16. But, supposing alwaies the Spirits of the Prophets to be subject to the Prophets, because God is not the God of unquietnesse but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints: 1 Cor. IV. 32, 33. And, that there is one body and one spirit, even as we are called in one hope of our calling, the unity of which spirit is to be preserved in the bond of Peace Eph. IV. 3, 4. By vertue of that Order which God had setled in his Church, for preserving unity in it; decla∣ring his meaning, by bestowing the most Eminent Graces upon the most emi∣nent persons of his Apostles, by meanes whereof, the spirits even of Prophets became subject to greater Prophets, for avoiding of unquietnesse, and preser∣ving of peace, as S. Paul further declareth, when he addeth by and by. 1. Cor. XIV. 36. 37. What? came the word of God out from you, or came it to you one∣ly? if any man think himselfe a Prophet or spirituall, let him acknowledg the things I write to you to be the commandements of the Lord. Which is to say, that all, even Prophets, are to be subject to the Apostles, & by consequence, to none but them, who have received commission from the Apostles. For, howshal any order he setled to maintain unity in the communion of Gods service, upon any other principle, but that, upon which the Coirnthians are obliged to rest in this which therefore, being setled by order from the apostles, is from thencforth trusted with the teaching of Gods people, and no man further then he is trusted
by the same; Neither is it any marvaile, that, in the Church of England, after orders confirmed, after possession of a Church, license of preaching is granted by the Bishop: Because, there are divers offices, as well concerning the cure of soules, as the service of God in the Church, to which men may be appointed, by the Lawes of the Church, who are not to be trusted with Preach∣ing, even to their own people, but upon expresse submission to the Bishops correction, in behalfe of his Church. For, if sufficient power be reserved the Bishop to provide for his flock, it will be in him to provide instruction for them, by such persons as he shall think fit to trust; and, if it be not in him so to doe, the fault is in the Lawes, abridging his power, of making a cheerfull account to God for his people. Howsoever from hence it may appeare, how ridiculous a thing it is, to judge of the instruction a Bishop affords his flock, by the sermons himselfe preaches; unlesse it could be thought that his lungs and sides could reach all his people. For, his fidelity, in trusting such persons as are to be trusted with teaching his people, and his care, in watching over the performance of their trust, extendeth alike to all, and maketh his Clergy his instruments in feeding his flock. And, whatsoever may have decayed in this Order through the Church of England, the restoring there∣of by wholsom Lawes, aswell Ecclesiastcall as Civill, had been and is the Refor∣mation of Christianity; not the rooting up of the very foundations of the Church, out of zeale to exirtpate the order of Bishops. And, since the li∣centiousnesse of preaching what any man can make of the Bible, hath made so faire a way, for so few years, to the rooting up of Christianity, with the Church; what will there be to secure the consciences of Gods people, that they may safely go to Church, and trust their soules with the means of salvation that are there to be found, but the restoring of Gods Church; That is to say, of that authority, which he, by his Apostles, hath provided, for the determining of all things concerning his publike service; supposing the profession of that faith which the whole Church hath maintained from the beginning, as received from our Lord by his Apostles? Which if it be true, the same reason will ob∣lige all men to provide the meanes of salvation for themselves; that is, to fol∣low them of their owne choice, without direction or constraint of the Lawes in the meane time. I doe not conceive it becomes me to say what ought to be, as I conceive it behoves me to say what ought not to be. This I will say, having proved, that the prayses of God, and Prayers, (much more the Eucharist) are principal, in comparison of preaching, which is subordinate; That the assemblies of Gods people ought to be more frequent for them, then they can be for heare∣ing of Sermons, as I have showed by the premises. S. Paul commands to pray continually, and David saith, the praises of God shall be alwaies in his mouth; not expressing the assemblies of Gods people, but inferring that which I have said, of the dayly service of God in publick, in my book of the assemblies of the Church Chap. VIII. I maintain, there is no ground, no precept, no exam∣ple, no practise of dayly preaching, like this for daily prayers; which if it be true the confining of assemblies to sermons is to Gods disservice. It will be said, that S. Paul 1 Tim. IV. 2. Thus exhorteth; Preach the word, be instant in season out of season, examine, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and meek∣nesse. And it is as easily answered, that here is nothing to the purpose. In∣stance in the preaching of the word, refers to unbelievers. To induce them to be Christians, though out of season, is alwaies seasonable. Long-suffering and meeknesse in examining, rebuking, exhorting of Christians, privately, may be, publikely, if not according to order, must needs be unseasonable. Men seeme to imagin, that there were Pulpits, and Churches, and audiences ready to heare the Apostles preach, before men were Christians. When they were, they shall find, that meanes of meeting was provided by Christian people, according to their duty; the order appointed by them and their successors. That they sate upon their chaires in teaching, challenging the authority by which they taught; the people, sometimes standing, somtimes allowed to sit
downe. None but Deacons preached standing, when the order and discipline of the primitive Church was in force. To deal with those that were not Chri∣stians, S. Paul must goe out into the Piazza, or to the Exchange, to Gentiles, to do that which they did in the Synagogue, or in the temple, to the Jewes, Acts XVII. 7, 11. 46. In preaching to Jewes, it was their advantage to observe the orders of the Synogogue. And yet, he that shall peruse that which I have said in the book aforenamed, shall never say, that those assemblies were princi∣pally for preaching, which the Apostles made use of, to preach to the Synagogue When they had ordered the assemblies of Churches, what have you in their writings to recommed frequent preaching, but S. Pauls order, in the use of these miraculous graces given the Corinthians. 1 Cor. XIV unlesse it be drawne into consequence▪ that S. Paul prevailed till midnight. Acts. XX. 7. as if the act of an Apostle, being to depart, were a precedent to the order of the Church. Bu I have showed you in the foresaid book Chap X. that the Eu∣charists have a share in the use of the said graces, and the worke of the said assemblies, as also Hymnes of Gods praises. And in  Cor. XI. you read very much of the Eucharist, as also of praying & Prophesying, that is, praysing God by Psalmes, as I have said there Chap. V.) without any mention of Preaching. If the Doctrine of the Apostles, be joyned with breaking of bread and Prayer Acts XI. 42. If the Elders that laboure in the word and doctrine be preferred by S. Paul 1 Tim. V. 17. You have a solemn instruction concerning prayers, and the Eucharist 1. Tim. II. 1, 2. as also exhortations to frequent it, Ebr. XIII 15. without any mention of preaching. In fine, there is nothing in the Scripture to question the ground which I setled afore, As for the practice of the Church, I will goe no further then Gennadius de dogmatibus Eccles. Cap. LIII. neither commending nor blaming those that communicate every day; Though it were easy to show, how the rest of the Fathers agree, or disagree therewith. For, that supposeth the dayly celebration of the Eucharist; whereas, who ever heard of daily preaching all over the ancient Church? For, that the order thereof was to assemble for the praises of God, & Prayer, and for instruction by reading the scripture, more frequently, then the boldest pulpit man could preach; Neither is it questionable for mater of fact, nor for the consequence, in obliging them that would reform and not destroy, to follow the example, supposing the premises. One thing more I desire may be considered. All the affectation of precise∣ness in keeping the Lords day willnever induce any people indued with their senses, to doe that which the Jewes, by the Law of the Sabbath, whilst it was in force, stood obliged to doe; Namely, to dresse their meate the day before, that so, neither themselves nor their servants might he obliged to violate the rest of the Sabbath. If this precept oblige Christians to heare preaching, for the means of salvation how are servants dispensed with, to be absent from preaching, who cannot be dispensed with, for resting on the sabbath? For, though Christian servants may dresse meate on the Lords day; Yet, as they are not dispensed with, for serving God on the Lords day, so, if the service of God on the Lords day necessarily requires preaching, they must be also preached to on the Lords day. But, if being catechized in their Christianity, they may serve God by pray∣ing and Praising God, and by heareing the instruction of the scripture read, advance in the duties of Christianity; then may they doe the duty of Christans to God at Church, as well as, to their masters at home, the duty of Christian servants, without heareing sermons on the Lords day? In a point so unlimited, wherein a private mans opinion is not to be Law, I find no better ground for reasonable termes, then that which the practice of the Chatholike Church, reported by Gennadius, intimates. For, it is not to be gathered from Gen∣nadu, that there was meanes to receive the Eucharist every day every where; because, neither can it be imagined, that there was ever any time, since the Empire turned Christian, when there was meanes for all Christians to be pre∣sent at it, much lesse to communicate. On the other side, the relation of Gennadius supposing that the celebration of the Eucharist was maintayned,
when preaching neither was nor could be maintained; it followeth, that, by the Custome of the Catholike Church, Lords days and festivals, (the celebra∣tion whereof, all Christians were alwaies concerned in) are to be kept by cele∣brating the Eucharist, when they cannot be kept by preaching and hearing sermons. And, that there can be no better order that God may be served by all sorts of Christians, then (where there is provision, and where the custome is,) that all Christians may communicate on Lords daies and Festivales; and when, for reasons left to themselves, they doe not communicate, they may with their spirits as well as their bodies asist the celebration of it; Remitting the custome which Gennadius his resolution supposes (the celebrating the Eucharist every day) to the greater Churches of the more populous Cities and Places. But, whereas the Apostolicall forme of divine service makes the sermon a part of it; And, at Corinth, S. Paul orders many of those spirituall Graces to concurr to that worke; (which, at assemblies on extraordinary occasions, was somtimes practised by the primitive Churches, as I have showed there) it were too great wrong to common sense, to extend this to all assemblies of Christians in villages; and, not consistent, either with the necessities of the world, or the interest of Christianity, in frequenting those offices most, which are principall in Gods service. Laying downe then, that tyranny, which constraines all that have cure of soules, to speake by the Glasse every Lords day twice, which shuts all the service of God out of dores, saving a prayer to usher it in and out; The interest of Christianity will require, that, at and with the celebration of the Eucharist, all Christians be taught the common dutys of Christians, by them who are to answer for their Soules. Not to please the eare, with sharpnesse in reasoning, or eloquence in language; but to convince all sorts, what con∣versation, the attaining of Gods kingdome requires, of them who believe that he made the world, that he sent our Lord Christ to redeem it, that, by his spirit, he brings all to confesse and show themselves Christians; and in fine, that by our Lord Christ, he shall adjudge those that doe so to everlasting life, and those that doe otherwise, to everlasting death, For the rest, it is not my purpose to undervalue the labours of S. Chrysostome, S. Austin, Origen, S. Gregory, or whosoever they are, ancient or moderne, that have laboured the in∣struction of their people, even by expounding them the Scriptures out of the Pulpit; supposing they expound them within the rule of our common faith. But, upon the account in hand onely, I say, that if they withdraw Christian people, from serving God by those offices, which the order of the Church makes requisite, according to the premises; (which, I am sure enough, none of the ancients ever did) their laboures are not for the common edification of the Church, but, for maintayning of parties in the Church. The celebration of Lords daies and Festivales, and times of fasting, necessarily furnishes opportu∣nitie, both for all Curates, to furnish their people with that instruction which they owe them, as answerable for their soules, and for those whom God hath furnished with more then ordinary graces, of knowledg or utterance, to advance our common Christianity, by advancing the knowledge of Christians in the scriptures. But, the office of a Pastor necessarily requireth an exact un∣derstanding of the nature of humane actions, in maters of Christianity, whe∣ther, concerning believing or working, not to be attained, without the study, as well as the experience of a mans whole life. And therefore, to oblige them; who are to provide necessary foode for the soules of their flock, to be alwaies gathering the flowers of the scripturers, to make them nosegayes of, will be to starve them, for the want of that knowledge, which the common salvation of all necessarily requires, that the more curious may have entertainement of quelques choses. And therefore, for the rest, Christian people are to think them∣selves obliged to come to Church, to serve God by prayer, and the prayses of God, to learn instruction out of the scriptures, by hearing & meditating upon the lessons of them, on far many more houres, and daies, and occasions, then there can be for preaching of Sermons.
CHAP. XXV. Idolatry presupposeth an immagination that there is more Gods then one. Ob∣jections out of the scripture that it is the worship of a true God under an I∣mage. the Originall of worshipping the elements of the world: The Devil: And Images. Of the Idolatry of the Magicians, and of the Gnosticks. What Ido∣latry the cases of Aron and of Jerboam involve. Of the Idolatries practised under the Kings and Judges, in answer to objections. THere remaines some difference, aswell concerning the ceremonies and Solemnities, as the order & circumstances of Gods publicke service, which, I foresee, cannot be voided, without presuming upon some conclusions for grounds, which hitherto are not resolved. For, the chiefe of those difference concerneth the charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome, in those prayers to the Saints departed in that worship of Images and Reliques of Saints, in that adoration of the Eucharist, which they maintaine and practice. Also, those Prayers which are made for the deliverance of soules from Purgatory paines, is no small part of the controversies which concerne the publike service of the Church. Whereas, among our selves, it seemes yet to be in dispute, whether any ceremonies at all are to be used in the publike service of God. The pre∣tenses of this time having extended the imagination of Idolatry so far, as to make the ceremonies and utensils of Gods sevice Idoles, & the ceremonies which they are used with, Idolatries. For the voiding of which difficulties, I cannot find so neare a course, as, in the first place, to dispute, wherein the nature of Idolatry consisteth, and what the very being of an Idole includeth, requireth, & presupposeth. In the next place, I shall dispute of the state of soules depar∣ted hence before the generall judgement, rather then of the place or places in which they are bestowed, as being too obscure, and more for this purpose, which speaketh to common understandings; though, the new state of things in dispute constrain it to use those termes, the novelty whereof will make it obscure to most of them whom it concerneth. After that, of ceremonies generally, in the publike service of God, what is the end of them, and what use may and ought to make them receiveable (or rather recommend them) to Gods people, for that purpose. If God make me able to dispatch these propositi∣ons, with any satisfaction to my own judgement, I shall not doubt to conclude without any great difficulty, that which may remaine in dispute concerning the differences proposed. To begin then, first to inquire, wherein the nature of Idolatry consisteth, and what the crime thereof requireth, or supposeth; I doe not find what ex∣ception can be made to that signification of the word, which defineth it to be the giving of divine, or religious honour, or worship, to a creature; Taking Divine and Religious both for one and the same; that is, understanding that Religious honour or worship, which is also divine, in case it may appeare, that there is, or may be, some Religious honour or worship, which is not di∣vine. But, this being onely the signification of the word; (That is to say, the description of that whch the word Idolatry expresseth, to him that begins to consider it) I cannot tell, whether those that use the terms of divine and re∣ligious honour, doe consider the importance of those termes which them∣selves use. For, Divine honour or worship is that honor or that worship, which is due to God alone, in regard of his incomparable excellence above all his crea∣tues, to which, therefore, it remaines utterly incommunicable. And, I have cautioned that Religious signifies the same; Religion being that part of justice which gives God his due; which no man can doe, that honuors him, and wor∣ships him not wth that honour and worship which is utterly incommunicable
to any of his creatures. Now all honour, and all worship, is either the opi∣nion and conceit that a man hath of the excellence and worth of that which he honoureth and worshippeth, or the effect of it; Whether inward, in that reverence wherewith he submitteth himselfe, his soule, his heart and mind, to it; or outward, in those bodily motions and gestures, or other actions, wherewith man is wont to expresse and signifie the apprehension which he hath, of the excellence of that which he honoureth, and worshipeth. So that, supposing in a man an uncorrupted opinion, of the incomparable distance, that indeed, is found between God and the most excellent of his creatures, it is no more possible for him to attribue the honour due to God alone, to that which he conceiveth, to be a mere creature, then it is possible for a man, in any other case, to act against that judgement which presently dictates what he ought to doe. For, the pre∣sent apprehension of the excellence of God, above all creatures, necessarily in∣cludeth and inferreth a decree, resolving his Judgement to honour him as such; Honour being the opinion of excellence, as I said; and the reverence which it produceth being inseperable from that opinion, by any meanes, but the under∣standing of him that considers it. It is therefore utterly impossible, that a man should atribute that honor which is due to God alone, unto any creature, standing the opinion, that no creature is comparable with his excellence. For, that were at once to have an apprehension, opinion, or conceite, that Gods excellence is incomparably above that of any creature, and yet the same with it; in as much as we suppose all honor and worship to consist in this opinion of excellence. Indeed, if we speake of the outward acts of honor and worship▪ true it is, and easy to be seen, that a man may and must honor God with those expression, which may, and perhaps ought to serve him, to signifie the honor which he worshippeth some creature with. But, those acts are not properly ho∣nor or worship, but the signs of it, and are called honour & worship, by the same denomination, ab extrinseco, (or, if you please, the same figure of speech) by which signes are called those things which they signifie. Wherefore it is not onely no inconvenience, but absolutely necessary to come to passe, that these signes should be many times equivocall. That is, themselves the same, when the honour & respect signified by them to be attributed to God, holds that dist∣ance from that which by them is atributed to the creature, which is supposed be¦tween God and the creature. For, all Philosophers and Divine know, how much difference there is between the conceptions which men apprehend by the same termes of Wisdome, justice and goodnesse, when they are atributed to God, and, when they are atributed to his creatures, Though I dispute not, hereupon, whether equivocall or not; Because, nothing to the purpose whether so or no, so long as it is no inconvenience, that, in regard of the distance between the conceits so signifyed, they be called equivocall in that sense which the subject matter will beare. Now, that equivocation which words are subject to, when atributed to God and to his creatures, be∣cause of the distance of the conceite which they signifie, the same are all moti∣ons, and gestures, all actions, or other markes of honor and worship necessari∣ly subject to, when they are exhibited to God & to the creature both. Suppose, for the purpose, a man pray to God on his knee, or prostrate on his face, as the ancient people of God used to doe; and the custome of the coun∣try obliged him to kneele to the Prince, or, to fall flat before him upon his face, as the custome of the Persians required? shall any man be so mad as to say, that it is Idolatry to give a petition to a Prince upon his knee? Surely, if there were no other meanes for other men to discern, whether his intent be to honor him as a Prince, or as God, I should not onely grant, but challenge, that o∣ther men are to rest in doubt of it, nay, perhaps to take it indeed for Idolatry, in case he expresseth not his intent to have been otherwise. But, where the custome of the place makes that distinction that is requisite, between God & the Prince, and the mans profession conformeth to the opinion and practice of the place; to suspect a man of Idolatry in such a case, were that degree of madnesse, to which the jealous seldome attaine. For, suppose it were possible, that he should indeed, and in heart, attribute to the Prince the honor due to God alone nay,
suppose that indeed he intended inwardly in heart to do it, as all those did, who, under the Assyrians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romans, did commit true & proper Idolatry to their Princes; I demand, what obligation any man can have to quest on that, wherof God onely can be judge, remaining secret in the heart but no man can take any harme by, so long as it is not professed but kept secret. Seeing then, that there is no outward Idolatry, without professing to give the honour due to God alone to his Creature, as no inward Idolatry without secretly giving it, and no giving it secretly, without an apprehension adjudg∣ing the excellence proper to God to his Creature; I am of necessity to infer, that, there is no Idolatry to be committed, without an opinion, that the Crea∣ture is God, communicating the Name and Title, the Attributes and Perfe∣ctions, and so, by consequence, the Honour and Reverence due to the Incom∣parable Excellency of God, to his Creature. And this is the opinion of all Pagans, Hethens, or Gentiles, whose Idolatry, the Scripture, as well of the Old as of the New Testament taxeth; and the Law maketh a capitall Crime for all Israelites, but the Gospel, hath converted all Nations, besides Gods peo∣ple, from practising. For, had not the inward sense of all Nations, besides Gods ancient people, been corrupted by the deceitfulness of sin, to the imagining of other Gods besides the true one, from that light which convicteth all men of the true God; it had not been possible, they should have fallen away from the Worship of God to Idols. This is that which S. Paul calleth the holding of the truth prisoner in unrighteousnes, Rom. I. 18. when those who stood, or might stand convict, by the light of reason remaining in them, that there is but one God, Fountain, and Ruler of all Creatures, to whom all men must give account of their doings; were led along by custome, to worship the Creature instead of God, attributing unto it the excellence of God. And, how in unrighteousnesse, is plain enough to any man that shall consider, that the true God, searching the inward thoughts of all hearts, demandeth account of the most secret inten∣tions of the heart, for his own Service; whereas, those imaginations which men set up to themselves to be honoured for God, they are well assured, can demand no such account at their hand: Or rather, whereas the Devill, stri∣ving to derive upon himself the honour of God, by suggesting unto man the Worship of the Creatures, which they are known to be incapable of, and ther∣fore redoundeth upon him that seduceth them to it; is willing to allow those whom he seduceth the liberty, to wallow themselves in uncleannesse and un∣righteousnesse, yea, and to accept it at their hands for the Service of their false Gods, because, being enmity unto God it is indeed his service. For, it is to be acknowledged, that the Gentiles, though corrupted with the worship of Idols, had in them light enough to discern the true God, and his Providence over all thngs, and the account which he will take in another World, of all things, as S. Paul, Rom. I. 18. 13. at large chargeth; And Tertullian, in his Book de Testimonio animae, evidently maintaineth, by the Sayings which he produ∣ceth, frequented in the mouthes of the Gentiles. But it is withall to be main∣tained, that, being thus bribed by the Devill with license to sin, and, willing to perswade themselves that they were in the right, they whelmed it under the bushell of their Concupiscences, perswading themselves that they were righte∣ous enough, whilst they served their imaginary Deities. Be it therefore resolved, that all Idolatry, when it is formed, (for, I speak not of the degrees by which mankind might be seduced to it) necessarily includeth and presupposeth a conceit of more Gods then one, which being once admitted, there can no reason be given, why not numberlesse, as well as more then one. To all this I see but one Objection made, though from many Texts of Scrip∣ture, for all comes to this inference; That it is Idolatry to worship the only true God, in or under an Image representing him to mans remembrance; and therefore, that the nature of Idolatry requireth not the imagination of more Gods then one. This is first argued, from the first Idolatry of the Israelites af∣ter the Law, in making the golden Calf, and worshiping it. For, the people having said, when they saw it; These are thy Gods, or, this is thy God, O Israel,
that brought thee out of the Land of Aegypt; Aaron addeth, To morrow is a Feast to the Lord, Exod. XXXII. 4. 5. using that name of God which the Scrip∣ture never attributeth to any but the true God, Whereby it seemeth, that Aaron and the people intended to represent the true God that had brought them out of the Land of Aegypt, by this Image, and to worship him under the same. And Jeroboam, when he set up his calves, proclaimed in the same termes; Behold thy Gods, (or behold thy God understanding the words to be said severally at Bethel and at Dan) O Israell which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And indeed, there are so many circumstances seeming to argue that Jeroboam intended not to call a way the people from the worship of the true God, that Abenezra the Jewe, upon Exodus XXXII. and Moncaus a Wallon Gentleman, of late years, in a book on purpose called Aaron purgatus, se∣conded very lately by Gaffarell in his Curiosities, translated since into English, alleging a Persian author, whom Grotins also seemeth to follow, in his Anno-Annotations upon Exod. XXXII.) have made it their businesse to prove, that neither he, nor Aaron before him, intended any other, then to worship God before the representation of one of the Cherubims, which he had commanded to be made, to overshadow the ark of the Covenant. For indeed, there is a great deale of reason to maintaine, that those living creatures, consisting of four faces, whereof one was the face of an oxe, heifer, or calf, which Ezekiel in the I. II. III. and X. Chapters of his Prophesies describeth, drawing the Throne of Gods Majesty, were no other then the Cherubim which Moses, according to the pattern showed him in the mountaine, had caused to be made over the Arke; Which is also to be said of the Seraphim with six wings, which the Pro∣phet Esay saw about Gods Throne Esa. VI. and is expresly said of the four living creatures which Saint John sees Apoc. IV. 6, 7, 8. in compassing Gods Throne. They conceive then, that Aaron and Jeroboam, intended no more, but to give the people a visible signe of Gods presence, out of his own pre∣scription to Moses; Aaron, onely to satisfy the people, and to retaine them to the worship of the true God, whom he proposed to them to worship by this slight; But Jeroboam, being under the Law which God had made, that his pre∣sence should no where besought, but at the place which he should chuse, and that choice being executed, by his appointment of Solomon to build him the Temple at Jerusalem, Deut. XII. 5-14. compared with Levit. XVII. 3-6. 2 Sam VII. 2, 3-13. 1 King. V. 5. VI. 11, 12, 13. VIII. 29. 1 Chron. XXII. 10. 2 Chron. VII. 12. It is manifest therefore, that he transgressed this Law, and made a Schisme in Israel by transgressing of it, who were to re∣maine one people in Religion by the meanes of it, whatsoever might succeed in the civile government; But it seems neverthelesse, that he intended no way to recall them from the worship of the true God. And therefore, Joahaz the sonne of Jehu, not departing from the sinne of Jeroboam, prayes to God, and obtaines deliverance from the Syrians. And his Son Joas obtaines an an∣swer from God, by the Prophet Elizeus, 2 King. 4, 5, 6, 14-19. as did his son Jeroboam by Jonas XV. 25, 26, 27. And indeed, when Jeroboam is said to set upon house of high places, 2 King. 12. 31. why should we make this worse then other high places, which, for a time, were tolerated in Israel, because it was not yet fully declared, what place God would chuse; but, after the Temple was built, were indeed unlaw∣full, but so, that no man can conceive, that it was Idolatry to sacrifice in them. For, when the good Kings are commended for destroying Idolatry, and seek∣ing onely the true God, it followeth oft times, that, neverthelesse, the people still resorted to the high places, 1 Kings XII. 2, 3. XIV. 3, 4. XV. 3, 4, 34, 35. which would be inconsequent, if it had been Idolatry to resort to the high places, though it was an evil custome that prevailed against the Law. Therefore the Prophet Osee declares it for a curse against Israel, that they should remaine a long time without sacrifice, statue, Ephod or Teraphim. Os. III. 4. And Micah of Mount Ephraim, his mother having consecrated her mo∣ney to the Lord, (that is, to the true God, for it is the incommunicable name
God which the Scripture there useth) and made thereof a molten and a carved image, had an house of God, with an Ephod and Teraphim, having set them up in his house Jud. XVII. 1-5. to wit, because he served God in the same order as he was served at the Tabernacle, onely before an image representing his pre∣sence, as it was represented by the Cherubim in the Tabernacle. This there∣fore is the Idolatry which the second Commandment forbiddeth, namely, to make an image representing the prefence of God, and consequently, to fall down and worship the true God before it; Which when God declareth to be matter of jealousie to him, he sheweth it to be the breach of the Covenant of wedlock, which he had entred into with the Synagogue, which she, on her part, was found to renounce by so doing. Though it is true, those that excuse Aaron and Jeroboam, as if they intended onely to use the same symbole of Gods pre∣sence, which Moses and Solomon, by Gods order, had set up, at the place ap∣pointed by God, thereby to perswade the people, that it was all one, whether they found God at Jerusalem, or, where they set them up; must say by conse∣quence, that, in so doing, the Covenant of God was violated, by departing from that precept of his law, but, with no intent to fall away to other Gods, for to commit Idolatry in it. For, had Jeroboams intent been to bring in false gods, what had been the difference between his sinne and the sinne of Omri and Ahub, of Ahaz and Manasses afterwards, 1 Kings XVI. 25, 30-33. XXI. 25, 26. 2 Kings XVI. 3. XXI. 3-9? For, if all Idolatry implieth a defecti∣on and apostasy from the true God to imaginary deities, was it not the same thing for Jeroboam to set up his calves, supposing that he set them up to repre∣sent such deities, as for Ahab to serve Baal, or Manasses and the ten tribes 2 Kings XVII. 7, 8, 9. to commit the same Idolatries, for which the Amo∣rites were cast out from before the Israelites? Besides, that, in reason, it seemeth utterly uncredible, that, the Israelites having worshipped the true God till Solomons death; nay, that Jeroboam himself, having received assurance of the kingdome by Gods Prophet Ahiah, 1 Kings XI. 26-40. as Jehu by Eli∣seus, with instructions concerning the house of Ahab, the execution whereof God alloweth, 2 Kings IX. 7-10. X. 30. I say, it seemeth a thing very in∣credible, that those people, in a moment of time, as it were, upon the publish∣ing of Aarons and Jeroboams innovations, should change the inward sense and reverence, which, in their heart they had acknowledged the true God to yield the same to any imaginary godhead, which they, by their Calves, might pretend to represent. Neither was it a thing any way consequent to Jerobo∣ams interest; which, it is plaine, was the onely reason that moved him to inno∣vate, to debauch the people to this point. For, if he might obtaine of them not to go up to Jerusalem, to worship the true God there, how did it concern him, to insist further with them, to worship any false God of his devising, with∣in his dominions? A thing farre more difficult to draw all them to, who fea∣ed God from the heart, in the ten tribes, then to induce them for fear of him, to worship him at a wrong place, continuing faithfull to his Kingdome. This is the difficulty, or, if you please, these are the difficulties which are or may be alledged against that definition, which, to the nature of Idolatry, re∣quireth the beliefe of more gods then one; But no way tend to satisfy us, of any other generall reason, for which both, this and other actions, should hear upon them the common mark and stamp of Idolatry, by the penalties of it, in the Scriptures. For, what reason can indure to believe, that the mark and pe∣nalties of Idolatry should rest upon actions of so vast a distance in nature, as the worship of the true God, and the worship of the Devil for God, because that is done before an image? Let us survay the matters of fact which we have in the Scriptures. Moses thus warneth the Israelites, Deut. IV. 15-19. Take heed unto your selves, least you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likenesse of male or female, the likenesse of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged foul that flieth in the aire, the likenesse of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likenesse of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth. And, least thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and
when thou seest the Sunne, and the Moone▪ and the Starres, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be pushed aside to worship them, and to serve them, which the Lord thy God hath imparted unto all nations under the whole heavens. It is like enough, that the first Idolatry that ever was practised, was the worship of the Sunne, the Moone, and the Stars; But, that it was a part of the Gentiles Idolatries, by the Scripture alone it is evident and certaine. The Jewes, as Moses Mai∣moi relateth, in the Title of Idolatry, at the beginning, tell us, that, out of ad∣miration of the beauty and constant motions of those glorious bodies, men be∣gan of themselves to conceive, that it would be a thing pleasing to God, to addresse themselves to him, by the mediation of those creatures, which, they could not chuse but think so much nearer to him then themselves: That this conceit, being seconded with pretended revelations, to the same purpose, brought forth in time the offering of sacrifices to them, and making of images of them, by meanes whereof, the blessings of God might be procured through their influence. And Origen often gathereth out of those words, that God allowed the Gentiles, afore the Law, to worship the Sunne and the Moone, and the Starrs, that they might proceed no further to worse Idolatries; Though, so farre as I have observed, he is not seconded herein by any of the Fa∣thers. Nor, can he in my opinion, be any further excused, then the Booke of Wisdome doth excuse him, making the worship of the Elements of the World the lightest sort of Idolatries. Wisd. XIII. 10. It is a thing agreeable to all experience, that by degrees, and not in an in∣stant, mankind should be seduced to forget God, (having had the knowledge of God at the first derived unto them from their first parents) and to take his creatures for God. But, will any man therefore undertake, that, when they were come so farre, as to worship the Sunne, and the Moon, and the Starres, by sacrifices, and incense, and all those actions, whereby the honour of God was first expressed; all this was done in honour to God, because they were con∣ceived to be nearer him then other of his creatures? How will he then answer S. Paul, when he saith, Rom. I. 25. That the Gentiles, changed the true God into a ly, and worshipped and served the creature, , besides, or pa∣rallel to the Creator, who is God blessed for evermore? For, where was the ly▪ but, in taking the creature for God? And, how could they worship and serve the creature hand in hand with God, but, by degrading God into the rank of his creature, and advancing the creature into the rank to which God was de∣graded, by their false and lying conceit? How could they expresse this honour by actions formerly appropriated to the service of God, had they not first been seduced, in the conceit of that honour which they robbed God of, to give it his creatures? But it is a thing certaine, and palpable in the Idolatries of the Gentiles, that they deified dead men, by attributing unto them the names of the Heavens, the Sunne, the Moone, the rest of the Planets, and other Con∣stellations, of the Aire, the Earth, the Waters, in fine, of the World, and the Elements of it; So that Idolatry was committed, both to the men, and to those worldly bodies at once. In this case, will any man be so willfull as to hold still, that these worldly Bodies were no otherwise honoured, then in re∣lation to God as his creatures, when as it appeareth, that the honour due to God alone was studiously procured for dead men, by insinuating ridiculous perswasions, into the mindes of people seduced, to think that they were deified in those Bodies? Wherefore, it is not to be denied, that those creatures were advanced to the honour of God, by degrading God into the rank of his creatures, as if there might as well be more Gods then one, as more creatures of a kind then one. Againe, when Moses warneth them of making the image of any creature, can any man doubt, that his reason is, least it should be worshipped with the same honour, which immediately, he forbids the Sunne and Moone and Starres to be honoured with? And, could the meer priviledge of being Gods creature move any man to take any before another, and to make an image of it, that under it he might honour God that made it? Or, was it requisite, that first men should conceive an excellence in the creature which if
expressed with the same actions, whereby they honoured God, of necessity it must be taken for the same which they attributed to God? And what is that but the opinion of more Gods? Can any man find fault with that which the Fathers have so frequently objected to the Gentiles, that the gods whom they worshipped were dead men; seeing before his eyes, in the records of the Romanes, Macedonians, and Persians, during the time of Historicall truth, that their Princes were, of course as it were, deified, and worshipped as gods after their death? And was all this done in relation to one true God, whose graces, they had been the meanes to convey to so great a part of mankind? Or, in despite of that light of one true God, though inshrined in their brests, they suffered to be overwhelmed with that ignorance which custome had brought to passe. Is it possible to imagine, that the Egyptians should tremble at those living creatures, or those fruits of their gardens, which they honoured for their gods, if they had taken them for creatures of one true God, whom they intended to honour, by and under those his creatures? Or was it necessa∣ry, that they should further conceive, the Godhead in one City to be inclosed in this creature, in another in that, and thereupon find themselves obliged to honour the same for God? In fine, doth not the Scripture in many places, plainly declare, that which I pointed at in proposing my argument, that the Idolatry of the Gentiles was the worshipping of Devils in stead of God? Why the Israelites are commanded to sacrifice no where but before the Tabernacle, the reason is given Levit XVII. 7. And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. Deut. XXXIII. 17. They sacrificed unto Idol, which were not God: To gods▪ whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your Fathers seared not. Sacrificing to new gods, they sacrificed to devils. Psal. CVI. 35, 37, 38. And they served their Idols which were a snare to them, yea, they sacrificed their sonnes and daughters unto devils; and shed innocent bloud, even the bloud of their sonnes and daughters, whom they offered to the Idols of Ca∣naan, and the land was defiled with bloud. Offering their sons and daughters to the Idols of Canaan, they offered them to devils. And S. Paul. 1 Cor. X. 19, 20, 21. What say I then that an Idol is any thing? Or, that which is offered in sacrifice to Idols is any thing? (As afore, VIII. 4. we know that an Idol is no∣thing in the world, and that there is but one God) but I say, that the thinges which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: And I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils: Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and the table of devils. Having said, that an Idol is nothing, and that things sacrificed to Idols are nothing, because they are sacrificed to that which is nothing, and that, because there is but one God; how doth he inferre, that things sacrificed to Idols are sacrificed to devills? Surely, idols are nothing, because there is but one God, in regard they pretend to be gods, that is to say, images of gods, whereas indeed, there can be no more Gods but one. And if this were all, since nothing can have no effect, sacrificing to idols, being nothing, could not pollute the sacrifices; as some Christians alledged to prove that they might eat of things sacrificed to Idols. But because, in sacrificing to nothing, the devill steps into Gods place, having caused that nothing to be taken for a God, and maintaining that conceit, by the same wayes which he raised it with; therefore, all that communicated in serving those idols, (which all did that communicated in the feasts which they made of those sacrifices) communicated in the worship of devils. Whereby it is evident, that idolatry presupposeth an erroneous opinion of a false Godhead, under which, the devil suborneth himself to be worshipped; whom, did men take for that which Christians take him for, they would be farre enough from worshipping him for God. And herewith agreeth the reason of idolatry, in the worshipping of images. For▪ by the premises it is evident, that idolatry is more ancient then the wor∣ship of images; and perhaps the truth is, it came not in, till the custome came up to worship dead men for gods, which, as I said afore, I believe was later then the
worshipping of the elements of the world, though I go not out of my way to prove it, nothing obliging me so to do. Now, it appeares by Varr in S. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, IV. 31. that the Romanes had subsisted above CLXX. yeares before they had images. But, let no man therefore imagine, that they were not idolaters during that time. For, it is evident, that there is no record of learning so ancient among the Gentiles, as their Idolatries; one∣ly the Scripture recordeth time before the same. The words of Varro there recorded by the said Saint Augustine, tell us truth in that businesse, that those who brought in images, errorem addidisse, metum dempsisse; Increased error, abated Religion. For, it is not strange, that a knowing man, as Varro was, should bear witnesse to that truth which the Centiles imprisoned in unrighte∣ousnesse, by acknowledging an error in the multitude of their Gods; which was, by that time, grown so ridiculous, that a child, should it have spoken what rea∣son indited, might have reproved it. This Error then, Ʋarro saith not that it sprung from Images, but, that they were the means to increase it, though to the a batement of Religion, which could be but counterfeit. when men tooke upon them to make their own Gods. But, was it thus with the Romans onely? was not the case the same with the Grecians also, before Sculpture and Picture, and other waies of Imagery were devised, chiefly for the advancement of this error, as the wise Jew Wisdom XIV. 18-21. and diveres of the ancient Fathers of the Church as S. Austine de civitate Dei XVIII. 24. in Psalm. CIII. do of∣ten alleage. Why doe we reade then in Pausanias his most excellent survay of Greece, that, of old time, they worshiped stones, onely sharpned at the top for their Gods? Could they have found in their heart so to doe, had they not formerly imagined a Deity, which they meant to remind themselves of, by so grosse a marke rather then image? But, is not this madnesse an evidence, that they came by degrees, to the representation of those Dieties, which they had i∣magined afore, and sought onely meanes to have them alwaies present? Joseph Scaliger in that learned appendix to his book de Emendatione Temporum, show∣eth us, that the Phenicians had the like custome of having of rude stones for the symboles of their Gods. And no marvile. For, by the act of Jacobs pouring oyle upon the stone at Bethel it appeareth, that the Fathers themselves used such records of the true God, and of his worship, which Idolaters afterwards imagined their false Gods to be present at, and thereupon, no marvrile that the Law prohibited afterwardes, Levit. XXVI. 2. seeing it is evident by the writings of the Grecians and the Romans, that, Idolatry increasing, it became an or∣dinary custome, to make every stock and every stone a monument of that Worship, which, every superstitious sool thought, he had cause, there to tender to his God, by pouring oil upon it, as Jacob did Gen. XXVIII. 18. by dedicating garlands, or the like, as Tilullus▪ hath expressed in these verses; Et veneror seu stipes habet desertus in agris, Sive qui exiguus florea serta lapis; with infinite more authors to that purpose. And can any man doubt that the Idolatrie of the Persians were not as bad as these, though they had neither statues nor pictures? Surely those Hethen Philosophers found it otherwise, who, being weary of the Empire under Justinian, because of the ill counte∣nance they found there, in favour to Christianity; and betaking themselves into Persia, as Agathias in his second book relateth, found themselves quickly weary of it, in regard of those barbarous customes, as they understood them, which the Idolatries of the Persians had introduced. Thus much for certaine, that worship which the fire was served with, by the Persians, was not that, which could be tendred in honour of God that made it as conceiving it a prime creature. So that, considering these things without prejudice, wee must needs stand convict, that Idolatry, in generall, is more ancient, then the worship of ima∣ges, though particular Idolatries must needs be advanced by it. And, in that in∣stance that the wise Jew propoundeth, for the beginning of idolatry, Wisdome XIV. 14-17. When a Prince, hving lost a deare Son, causeth the image of him to be made, for his comfort and remembrance of him, which is propagated
by the honour done to his image. Not that he meanes, that all idolatry came from this beginning; (for certainely, it would have been utterly senselesse to have expected this, from men possessed of the beliefe of one true God till that time) But, because this might become the beginnig of that Idolatry that was performed to the deceased, among those, who, having once admitted the beliefe of more Gods then one, and in particular, worshiping dead men, could give no reason why they should doe lesse for them then for others. And, if it were posible for the Devil to induce men to worship the creature for God; it is not strange, that, by pretended apparitions, revelations and miracles don a∣bout these statues or Images, he should maintain in them a belief of the presence of that imaginary deitie, which they intended thereby to represent & record, in the statue or image; which must needs be a powerfull meanes, to multiply those ceremonies and solemnities, wherewith they pretended to honour the Deity there inclosed. Certainely, for this reason it was, that, among the Greeks and Romans, the consecrating of a Temple was the setting up and dedicating in it, the statue of that Deity in honor whereof it was built. So you see it every foot in Pausanias; and in the life of Alexander Severus, it is related for a singularity of Adrians curiosity in following all Religions, that he built, in every City, a Temple without any statue in it; which he had intended for our Lord Christ, had he not been advised that all the world would turne Christians, if he should take that course. And, though it is rather thought that Adrian indeed did intend them for Temples to himselfe, yet still that holds which the history addeth; Quae hodie, idcirco quia non habent numina, dicun∣tur Hadriani. That they are called Adrians, because they have no Godhead; Which, the Heathen believed them to have, so soone as the statue of that God was set up whose the Temple was to be. And this is not questioned, that Alexander Severus intended that our Lord Christ should be worshiped, as one of their Gods, which would have made him as much an Idole as their Gods, as the same Emperour did indeed (worshiping as wel Christ and Abraham, as the deified Emperours, Orpheus or Achilles, among his closet Gods) as his life relateth. Thus much is to be noted, that Maimoni, where he relateth the be∣ginning of Idolatry, as I alleaged afore▪ acknowledgeth, that it was mightily promoted by revelations, apparitions, & miracles, pretended to be done by the stars or elements of the world, at such monuments of their presence as had been provided; Which, since Gods truth imputeth to the Devill, the wor∣ship of these creatures was no lesse the worship of the Devill, then sacrifices offered to the dead. And all this is further confirmed by the Idolatry of Magicians, which, for Balaams sake, I hold unquestionable. For, having showed before, that Ba∣laam, though he knew there was a God, which was able to defeat all his witch∣craft; did neverthelesse addresse himselfe to his familiars, by offering sacrifices to obtain of them the cursing of Israel, which, he knew could not be obtained without the leave of their God, whom he acknowledgeth under the same name, which his people never conmunicated to any besides; shall it seeme strange, that people weary of their Christianity, because it easeth them not of the little discontentments of their estate in this world, which they meet with; should either formally, or by due construction, renounce the benefit of it, by contracting for some curiosities which they desire, but their Christianity hath appointed them no meanes to procure? Or that, renouncing God and Christ, in the same maner and degree as they contract for those things, they should translate the honor, which, the little Religion, that can allow such a contract, leaves in him that cannot deny a God, and yet serves him thus; unto the Devile, from whom they expect their desires? Especially, the experience of all nations, Christians, Jewes and Pagaus, acknowledging those acts, which them∣selves, though worshippers of Deviles, counted unlawfull, because upon con∣tracts tending to the mischiefe of mankind. And the evidence of the Sab∣baths and solemnities of witches, in these times of Christianity, being no way to be baffled by such reasons, as end to take away all reason, for the punishing
of witches, which the Law of Moses establisheth; Though nothing hinder the alleging of such, as may make men wary, what evidence they accept in cases more private and secret. In the life of Pythagoras, by Jamblichus, Cap XXIIX. there are divers and sundry feates of his doing reported, which to Christians, that know the difference between cleane and uncleane spirits, cannot see in to have been don otherwise, then by familiarity with uncleane spirits; Which he might easily learne, by his travels among the Egyptians and Caldeans, Nati∣ons among whom, as well Magick as Idolatry had been both bred and advan∣ced; if we believe either the scriptures, or the writings of Pagans, as well as of Christians. And truly it is manifest, that the being and office of Angels about God was knowne to him and to his followers, but without any distinction between the good and the bad, which the scripture onely teacheth. Which is al∣so to be seen in the writings of Plato, where  and  is never taken in any ill sense, as necessarily it is by all them who acknowledge Apostate An∣gels. Neither is it possible for any Christian to make any other interpretation of that familiar, which Socrates in Plato affirmeth, that he was alwaies atten∣ded with (called Socrates his Daemon or Genius,) then of a deceiving sirit; unlesse it could stand with Christianity to believe, that God granted the assi∣stance of his spirit or Angels, to Pagans, and that so constant, as is not to be found of any of his prophets. It is true indeed, that there are many things in Plato which learned men doe compare and reduce to the rule of the Christian Faith, concerning the Holy Trinity blessed for ever more. But, he that compares, The mind of God, the Word of God, the Idea of God, the Spirit of God, the Wisdome of God, , which Plato delivereth, with that Fulnesse of the God∣head, that , which Saturninus and Basilides propounded to be wor∣shipped by their followers, in Ireneus and Epiphanius; considering withall, that the Angels, (which are not distinguished from God by Plato, according to that infinite distance which is to be acknowledged between God and his creatures,) were, by most sects of the Gnosticks, admitted into that Fulnesse of the Godhead, which the severall sects of them worshiped; will have reason to believe the Fathers of the Church, when they make the Philosophers the Pa∣triarches of the Hereticks; And▪ that the divinity of Plato was a tradition de∣rived by Pythagoras, from the familiarity which he had with uncleane spirits, seeking to refine the grosse Idolatry of the Gentiles, into a more subtill way of worshiping the Devile. Which, being imitated by Simon Magus and his followers, (of whom, Menander professed Magick, as Basilides and Marcus also did; and the monuments of the Basilidians Magicke are extant to this day in the hands of Antiquaries, as you may see in Baronius his Annales, and the life of Peireski written by Gassendus; and still more plentifully in a lat∣ter Booke, on purpose to expound the monuments of the Basillidians God, called Abraxas) in those severall Fulnesses of the Godhead, which the severall sects of them tuaght, & worshipped brought forth that worship of Angels which S. Paul condemned Col. II. 8-9. Whether as belonging to the fulnesse of the Godhead, or, as revealers of it. Especially if it be conside∣red, that, the deriving of the Originall and beginning of evill, from a princi∣ple belonging to that Fulnesse of the Godhead, which each sect of the Gnosticks acknowledged, (a position common to them all) is also a part of Plato and Pythagoras his Philosophy; which the Stoicks also, (from whom the Heretick Hermogenes in Tertullian deriveth it) were tainted with, as well as with the opinion of Fate, utterly inconsistant with the worship of the true God; as Aristotle and Epicurus his Philosophy (free enough from familiarity with uncleane spirits) is with denying of providence at least in human affaires, which the eternity of the world necessarily produ∣ceth. Neither is the Heresy of Cerdon and Marcion which succeeded the Gnosticks, any thing else, but Pythagoras his position, of a principle of Good, and an other of Evil, applyed to the supposition of Christianity, though such as they thought good to admit. As for that of the Manichees, we may an
well allow Epiphanius, deriving it from one Scythianus, a rich merchant from Arabia to Egypt, who having also learned their Magick, writ foure books, to maintaine Pythagoras his two principles. And, going unto Jerusalem to con∣fer with the Christians there, who maintained one true God, and getting the worse, betook himselfe to his Magick, and exercising the same on the top of an house, was cast downe from thence and dyed. His disciple also and slave Terbinthus, whom he left his heire, going into Persia, to confer with the priests of Mithras about the same purpose, and being worsted, betook himselfe to his masters Magick, and got his death as his master had done. Thus saith Epi∣phanius, and that Manes, marying his widow, by his books and by his wealth became author of this sect; onely, that having got the books of the Old & New Testament, he used what colours they would afford him, to intitle his device to Christianity, for the seducing of Christians. But, whoso considers what master Pock hath produced out of the relations of the Saracens, concerning the reli∣gion of the Persians p. 146. 150. whatsoever contest his predecessors might have with the Persians, must acknowledg, the Heresy of the Manichees to come from the Idolatry of the Persians; the divines where of acknowedg a Principle of dark∣nesse, opposite to a Principle of light; as we read also in Agathias expressely lib. II. that the religion of the Persians is that of Manichees. And these considera∣tions, here put together upon this occasion, may well seeme, as I conceive, to sa∣tisfie us, that it is no marvaile, the Pagane Greeks & Romans should be so bru∣tish, as to worship stocks and stones, having among them those wits, that have left such excellent things of God, and of mans duety to God, upon re∣cord; Seeing it appeares, that the most divine of them were no otherwise taught, then, as it might best serve the Deviles turne, to detaine them in the more subtill Idolatry of Magicians; The rest being tainted with such positi∣ons, as stand not with the worship of one true God. So that it is no marvaile, if they complyed with the vulgar Idolatries of their nations; to him that considers that which I have written in the review of my booke of the right of the Church in a Christian state p. CLXVII. to show, that the followers of Plato and Pythagoras, in the first times of Christianity, as they were themselves Magicians, so were great instruments to promote the persecuting of Christi∣anity. Which is also the true reason, why the Gnosticks, having devised, every sect a way of Idolatry proper to themseves, did indifferently counterfeit them∣selves Jewes, Christians, or Pagans, for avoiding of persecution, or for gaining of Proselytes; eating things sacrificed to Idoles, in despite of S, Paul, and taking part in the Idolatrous spectacles and sight, of the Gentiles, as Irenaeus, with the rest of the Fathers, witnesseth. These particulars I have thus far inlarged, to make a full induction of all the waies of Idolatry mentioned in the scriptures, (wherewith all the writings of the Jewes, Pagans and Christians, exactly a∣gree) by which induction it may appeare, that all the waies of Idolatry, which the Scripture mentioneth, doe presuppose the beliefe of some imaginary and false Godhead, properly called an idole, as imaginary, and without subsistence; (though that name is no lesse properly attributed to the image of it, then the Image of any thing is called by the name of that which it representeth,) be∣cause of the intercourse, which, by the meanes of such Images, those that wor∣shipped them had, with the author of such Imaginations, even the Devile, think∣ing they had it with theire imaginary Deities. And, the worshipping of those Dieties, whether before & under such an image or without it, is that which is called Idolatry in the Scriptures. For, though the word  may ge∣nerally signifie all images, and can have no bad sense in the usage of Hethen writers, because they could never thinke amisse of the Images which, they thought, represented their Deities; Yet, when Christianity had brought in a beliefe, that it was the Devile whom the Gentiles worshipped under those Images, the word Idole, being appropriated to them, must needs be are a sense of that which the Christians detested. Iust as I said even now of the word , that it must needs beare another sense to the eares of Christ∣ans, then it could among the heathen poets or Philosophers. This language
S. Jerome useth, when, in his translation of Eusebius his Chronicle num. MDCCCLIV. he saith of Judas Maccabaeus; Templum ab Idolrum imagini∣bus expurgavit; that he purged the temple from images of Idoles; supposing the difference which I make, between imaginary deityes and their Images. And, S. Austine in lib. Jud. Quaest. XLI. speaking of the case of Gedeon; Cum Idolum non fuerit, id est cujusdam Dei falsi simulacrum: seeing it was no idole, that is to say, the image of any false God. Which if it be true, it will no way be possible, to exempt the case of Aaron or Jereboam from that reason of Idolatry, which this induction inforceth; Or to imagine, that it could be the same crime in them, to worship the true God under an image, as in the Gentiles, to worship the elements of the world, dead men, imaginations, in effect, the Devile, under the like image. They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshiped the molten image. Thus they turned their glory into the similitude of a Calfe that eateth hay, saith David Psalme CVI. 19. 20, of this act of the Isralites. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things, saith S. Paul Rom. I. 23. of the Gentiles; who, as I have showed, did truly intend to worship those creatures for Gods. And therefore must conclude, that, whatsoever Aaron might pretend to represent to the Isra∣elits, by this Calfe, that they intended to worship for God. And when the Israelites joined themselves to Baal Peor, and ate the offerings of the dead, Psal. CVI. 23 Num. XXV. 3-8. and Moses commandeth to hang up the Princes, and the Judges to slay every one his man, that were joyned to Baal. Peor; Phineas, out of his zeale to God, executeth his command, (not out of a private inspi∣ration, whereof nothing could appeare, as hath fondly and perniciously been imagined) and killeth a Prince among the Israelites. But, when Moses com∣ming downe from the mount, saw the calfe made, he caused the Levites to re∣venge the fault, by slaying three thousand of those that were guilty of it, Ex. XXXII. 25-30. And is it possible for any man to believe, that the same punishment is assigned by God to the offering of sacrifices to a dead man, as, to the offering of it to the living God, under or before an image. Not that I intend to say this of Aaron, or, what his intention might be, in complying with them, and avoiding their mutiny, without ever imbracing in his heart that idolatry, to which he pretended to conurre with them; (nor will I much contend with him that shall say, he chose that figure which might represent something concurring to that worship of God, which himselfe had commanded) but the act of them that mutinousely constrained him to make them a God to goe be∣fore them, I can by no meanes distinguish from the idolatries of Egypt, which, it was but late that they had forsaken. As for Jeroboam, it is most truly alle∣ged, that nothing obliged him to demand of the Isralites to worship any false God, or to require of them more then Aaron had done, upon their motion, concurring himselfe to their Idolatry. But, then I must say also, that by setting up his calves, and constraining the people to resort to them, for that worship which the Law obliged them to tender to God, he certainely knewe, that he must needs occasion the greatest part of the people to worship an other God besides the true God, howsoever some of them might do, that which Aaron had done, in concurring, with the rest of their people. And perhaps the truth is, that Jeroboam, for this reason, made choice of the same image, wherein Aaron had offended afore. But otherwise, the appearance of the Idolatry of the gentiles in the act of Jeroboam, that is, in the service tendred his calves, is evident in the scripture. Otherwise, how should the prophet Ahiah charge him, that he had set up other Gods and molten images, and groves; 2. Kings XIV. 9, 15, 16. as by Jeroboams owne fin? And Baasha, that walked in the way of Jeroboam, 2. Kings XV. 24. as did also Omri after him 1 Kings XVI. 26. are said to have provoked the Lord God of Israell to anger with their vanities 1. Kings. XVI. 13. 26. And Abia reproches Jeroboam 1 Chron. XIII. 9. and his party, that they had made them Pristes after the manner of the nations, and other lands, so that, who∣soever cometh to fill his hand with a bullock and seven Rames, may be a Priest
of no Gods? For what are vanities, or, no gods, but imaginary deities, as Saint Paul saith, that he preached to the Gentiles, to turn from those vanities unto the living God, Acts XIV. 15. And the Prophet Jonas, in his prayer, II. 8. they that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. And  in Da∣vid, Psal. XXXII. 7. Lying vanities, is the same that S. Pauls ly, when he saith; the Gentiles changed the truth of God into a ly, in worshipping the crea∣ture besides the creator, God blessed for evermore Rom. I. 25. So also Deut. XXXII. 22. 2 Kings XVII. 15. Jeremy II. 5. VIII. 19. X. 15. XIV. 22. And why should the Prophet Osee object, VIII. 6. The workman made it, there∣fore it is not God, but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces; Had not the calfe been taken for God? And againe▪ Os. XIII. 2. They say of them, let the men that sacrifice kisse the calves; For that this kissing was a signe of wor∣shipping that which was taken to be God, you have from Job XXXI. 26, 27. If I beheld the Sunne when it shined, or the Moone walking in her height, and my heart hath been seduced, and my mouth hath kissed my hand; The Sunne and the Moone being at a distance, because they whose hearts were seduced to think them gods, could not kisse them, they kissed their hands to them, in signe that they honoured them for gods; Therefore, they that kissed the calves, whom they might come nigh, did it in signe that they honoured them for gods. As the answer of God to Elias saith; I have reserved my self seven thousand men, all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, all the mouthes that have not kis∣sed him. 1 Kings XIX. 18. And therefore it seemeth very probable, that these calves are also called Baalim, by the said Prophet, when he saith Osee XIII. 1, 2. When Ephraim offended in Baal, he died. And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of their silver and Idols, according to their own understanding, all of it the work of craftsmen: They say of them, let the men that sacrifice kisse the calves. The author of Tobit, is, for his antiquity, more to be credited in the understanding of the Scriptures, then all the conje∣ctures we can make at this distance of time; And he saith, that the ten tribes went up to offer sacrifice , Tobit I. 5. to the heifer Baal. Whereupon it is thought, that S. Paul also, when he quoteth the answer of God to Elias, 1 Kings XIX. 18. I have reserved my self seven thousand men that have not bowed the knee to Baal; in the feminine gender, , Rom. XI. 4. referreth to the feminine substantive . And if these calves were of the nature of Baalim, it cannot be denied, that they signified imaginary godheads, such as the Baalim were. Wherefore, when it is objected in the first place, that Aaron proclaimed a feast to the Lord, by the name of the true God, and that, both he and Jerobo∣am said; This is the God that brought thee out of the land of Egypt; I answer with the Wisdom of Solomon XIV. 21. that idolaters did ascribe unto stones and stocks the incommunicable Name of God. Which if it can be said of the Gen∣tils, that knew not the incommunicable name of God, the Israelites which used it, must needs attribute it to those imaginary deities, which they advanced to the rank of the onely true God. And truly S. Steven Acts VII. 39, 40, 41. describing this act by no other terms then those whereby the Scripture expres∣seth the Idolatries of the Gentiles, prosecuteth with an allegation out of Amos V. 25. thus; Then God turned and gave them up to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the Prophets; O ye house of Israel, did ye offer me slain beasts, and sacrifices, by the space of fourty yeares in the wildernesse? Nay, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the Starre of your god Rempham, figures that ye had made to worship them. Which, it seems, is to be understood all, du∣ring their travaile in the wildernesse; because S. Steven charging them, that they sacrificed not to God in the wildernesse, seemeth to presse it further, by naming to whom they did sacrifice. And what Tabernacle doth he charge them to have taken up, but that which the Priests took up to carry in the wildernesse? Which, being the tabernacle of the true God, they, by intending to worship Moloch in it, made his Tabernacle. So that it cannot be strange, if they at∣tribute the name of the true God to those whom, turning idolaters, they held as true Gods as he. I will not dispute why they chose the figure of a calfe; let
who please allow the reasons alledged. If I did not find idolatry in the acts of Aaron and Jeroboam, I might easily be ridde of all these objections other∣wise; For, if Aaron and Jeroboam did not commit Idolatry, how is it Idolatry to worship God under an image? But, finding the markes of idolatry in them, I must needs acknowledge in them the reason of all idolatry, according to the Scriptures. Supposing Aaron intended onely a symbole of Gods presence, con∣secrated by him in his Tabernacle, Jeroboam to follow his example; those that were set upon apostasy, by the instigation of the mixt multitude that came with them out of Egypt, Exod. XII. 38. and set them on murmuring for flesh. Num. XI. 4. turning back in their hearts to Egypt, Acts VII. 38. that is, to the do∣latries which they had practised there. Ezek XX. 7. may well be thought to have set up the calfe which the Egyptians worshipped. But I need not build on conjectures, having showed, that idolaters might exercise their idolatry, even towards a symbole of Gods own service. Neither is it any marvaile, that Jehu should honor Josaphats posterity because he served God. 2 Chron. XXII. 9. (though that may be imputed to the time, when he had not yet declared to follow the sinne of Jeroboam) and his posterity seek God and his Prophets ha∣ving never tied the people to worship any false God, but onely done that, which, by necessary consequence (at least, if we count what, in discretion must needs come to passe, according to the common course of humane affairs) must needs produce idolatry. And supposing they set up the idolatry of the Egyptians, they might as well have recourse to God and his Prophets; in their necessities, as Ahab humbled himself at the word of Elias 1 Kings XXI. 27. how farre soever, we may suppose that he went in acknowledging the true God; for, the same will as easily be said of Jehu and his postirity. Now it seems to me a thing most certaine, that high places were tolerated between the dividing of the Land and the building of the Temple. Whether be∣cause the precept of the Law was not yet in force, God having yet declared no setled choice of any place for his seruice as he saith to David. 2 Sam. VII. 6, 7. or, because, soone after the Tabernacle was setled in Shiloh, the Ark was taken by the Philistines, and so the Tabernacle desolate, as the Jewes under∣stand it. For, who can allow that Gideon, a Judge stirred up by Gods Spirit, should set up an high place for Gods worship against his Law Judges VI. 34. VIII. 23. For, the mention of an Ephod there VIII. 27. is but to say; that the Order of Gods service in those high places was according to the Order of the Tabernacle. But, what occasion of idolatry these high places did give, we may easily gather by the Law, Levit. XVII. 5, 7. which declareth; that, when they were not tied to the Tabernacle in the wildernesse, but offered their sacri∣fices in the open fields, they sacrificed to Devils. For, being beset round with idolatrous nations, that confined the deities which they worshipped, to their Temples and Images, it is no marvaile if they were tainted by the same, not to understand, the true God, whom they worshipped in the tabernacle, to be every where as much present as in the Tabernacle. The true worshippers of God in Spirit and Truth, under the Law, understood it well enough, with Gideon; neither is it any marvaile, being then licensed and in use, if he conceived it might be for the service of God, to set up an high place in his City. But, by the e∣vent we see, what advantage the worse part hath, to turn that which is well meant to ill uses, when the people fell so soon to idolatry upon that occasion, that it became a snare to Gideon and his house. And surely, when Moses was in the mount with God, and the presence of God was not seen about the taber∣nacle, is not this that which the people allege to Aaron, to make them a God? as professing not to believe that Moses his God was among them, but finding it necessary, that God who brought them out of Egypt should go ebfore them Exod. XXXII. 1, 2? And so, Jeroboam setting up a new place of Gods presence, and the whole nation having admitted the presence of the God of Israel to be confined to Solomons Temple; it followed, that the grosser sort of people, who could not distinguish the omnipresence of God from the conceits of the idola∣trous nations which they were incompassed with, appropriating severall gods to severall countreys, (as the Syrians thought the power of God to reach to
the mountaines, and not to the valleys, 1 Kings XX. 23.) must needs take it for another God, that Jeroboam set up, for the God that brought Israel out of Egypt; and, conforming to his Law, worship him under that conceit. For, when S. Steven, having related how Solomon built God an house, addeth straight, to correct the mistake of the Jewes to whom he spake; Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in Tempels made with hands, as saith the Prophet; Hea∣ven is my Throne, and earth is my footstoole, what house will ye build me, saith the Lord? Or what is the place of my rest? Hath not my hand made all these things? Acts VII. 47-50 He showeth plainly, that the vulgar conceit of the Jewes came farre short of the doctrine of the Prophets in this point, and that this was then a great hinderance to the Jewes Christianity, which vulgarly publisheth that, which, onely the worshippers of God in Spirit and truth understood un∣der the Law; As Barnabas also, in that Epistle, which the ancientest of the Fathers have acknowledged, and is lately set forth, declareth. Now for the text of the Judges, concerning that which the Jewes call , or, the Idol of Micah; Is it to be considered, that there may be and are two opinions, concerning the true sense and intent of the second commandment, where it saith; Thou shalt not make to thy self any , or carved image, the likenesse of any thing—For, the word , by the origi∣nall of it, signifying all carved work, it may be thought that God intends, by these words to prohibite all use of carved work among his people. Not as if the making of a carved image were idolatry, but to avoid the occasions of ido∣latry, which, as I have said, that art, though it introduced not, yet it increased. And therefore it followeth; For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God; For jea∣lousie forbids as well the meanes of adultery, as adultery. But, if we suppose the signification of the word  extended by use, beyond the original of it, it may import onely such statues▪ as are made to represent a godhead imagined afore; And then, the letter of the precept forbids no more, then to make any carved work for the image of God. According to the first sense, the making of the Cherubims over the Ark falls within the precept; And is to be taken for a dispensation of the Lawgiver, in the matter of a positive precept, which his own act onely rendered unlawfull. But according to the later, being not in∣cluded in the matter of the precept, there needs no exception to render it law∣full. The same is to be said of the brazen serpent. Whether of these opini∣ons is true, I need not here dispute. Onely, as I began to say afore, I say further, that, during the time that high places were licensed, it can be no inconvenience to grant, that there was the like furniture provided for the service of God there to that which was prescribed in the Tabernacle. For, upon what ground that People thought it commanded by God there, (in which there could be no just occasion of idolatry) upon the like ground, and to the like purpose, it might be taken up in the high places. Though, that reason which had mo∣ved God to prohibit high places, after the place of his worship should be set∣led, Levit. XVII. 5. 7. might alwayes indanger them, to go astray, as the story of Gideon showes. For, though, so long as they understood the ground upon which, and the intent to which they were used, they remained secure; yet forgetting it, by the deceitfullnesse of error, they were subject to be seduced. The fact of Micah, then, hath two of these handles which Epictetus his ma∣nuall mentions: It may be taken, as if he meant onely to make an high place, for the service of the onely true God, according to the Law; the carved work which he furnished it with being onely in stead of the furniture of the Taber∣nacle. Which is the case of Gideon, as I stated it afore. For, when the Prophet Osee threatens the ten tribes, that they shall dwell a long time without Ephod or Teraphim; He does not mean it for a punishment, that they should be restrain∣ed of the idolatry which they practised to the Calves; But he signifieth, that the Cherubim of the Temple, (where they ought to have served God, and where it would be the blessing of that promise which the Law tendereth to serve God) have the name of Teraphim common to them with the Calves; Though, those the objects of idolatry, these the instruments of Gods service. For, on the
other side, the fact of Micah may be so taken, as if he intended to set up a carv∣ed image of an imaginary Godhead, to be worshipped for the onely true God. And this intent seems to me the more probable of the two. For, there stands upon it the mark of a thing done against Gods Law Judg. XVII. 6. In that day there was no king in Israel, every man did what seemed right in his own eyes; Which, of the case of Gideon, originally, could not have been said. And besides; That Micah could not have any of the Tribe of Levi to minister in this high place, but, was faine to take his sonne in the mean time, till he lighted upon a wandering Levite, whose necessity might debauch him to any imployment; This also seems an argument, that his house of gods, which he furnished with Ephod and Teraphim, Judg. XVII. 5. was erected to false gods. For, that his mother had consecrated her money to the incommunicable name of God, v. 2. is easily answered, by the same that hath been said to the cases of Aaron and Jeroboam. But, my opinion remaines never a whit prejudiced, though these arguments seem insufficient, and though it be said, that the worship of the true God was that which Micah hereby intended. For, still the same alternative will have recourse, which takes place in Jeroboams case; Either his intent was the service of the true God; and then, though we suppose, that he sinned against the precept of the Law Levit. XVII. 5. yet he sinned not the sinne of idolatry; Or, his intent was the service of some imaginary Godhead, and then he committed idolatry according to my opinion, notwitststanding that he used the name of the onely true God in the businesse. As for that which is objected, that, according to this opinion, there would be no sufficient reason for that difference which the Scripture maketh between the sinne of Jeroboam which made Israel to sinne, and the idolatries of Ahab, and of the house of Omri, and those wherein Manasses followed the Amorites; How much he is deceived that thus reasons, may easily appear to him that com∣pares those murders, those uncleannesses, those horrible vilanies, which the devil had seduced the Gentiles to, under the pretense of Gods worship, and, for the discharge of that obligation which the sense of Religion binds all men with; That compares these, I say, with the service of a false God, but otherwise, ac∣cording to the same rites and ceremonies, which the Law commands the true God to be served with. Nor shall I need to say any thing to that which re∣maines, either what interest Jeroboam could have, to cary the people to the worship of any other then the true God, who was to count his turn served, if they went not up to Jerusalem; Or how, either he, or they who conformed to his command, could, by onely so doing, blot out of their mindes that opinion of the true God which they had suckt in with their milke, and whereby, they thought they held their estate, whether of this world, or the hope they might have of the world to come. For my opinion obligeth me not to say, that Ido∣latry was commanded by this law of Jeroboam, or practised by all that conform∣ed to it. But that, though not expresly commanded, yet it followed by neces∣sary consequence, upon the introducing of the Law; Not by consequence of naturall necessity, from that which the terms thereof imported, but by that necessity which the Schoole calls morall, when the common discretion of men, that are able to judge in such matters, evidences, that, supposing such a Law, it must needs, and will come to passe.
CHAP. XXVI. The Place, or rather the State of happy and miserable Soules otherwise understood by Gods people before Christs ascension, then after it. What the Apoca∣lypse, what the rest of the Apostles declare. Onely Martyrs before Gods Throne. Of the sight of God. I Come now to the nicest point, if I mistake not, of all that occasions the present Controversies and divisions of the Western Church, the state of soules departed with the profession of Christianity, till the day of Judge∣ment; The resolution whereof, that which remaines concerning the pub∣lick service of God, the order and circumstances of the same, must presuppose. This resolution must procede upon supposition of that which the first book hath declared, concerning the knowledge of the Resurrection and the world to come, under the Old Testament; and the reservation, and good husbandry in declaring it, which is used in the writings of it. The consideration whereof mightily commendeth the wisdome and judgment of the ancient Church, in proposing the bookes which we call Apocrypha, for the instruction of the Ca echumeni, or learners of Christianity. For these are they, in which, the Resurrection and the world to come, and the happy state of righteous soules after death, is plainly, and without circumstance, first set forth. I need not here repeat the seven Maccabees and their mother, professing to dy for Gods Law, in confidence of Resurrection to the world to come, 2 Mac. VII. 9, 11, 23, 36. nor the Apostle Ebr. XI. 35-38. testifying the same of them, and the rest that lived or died in their case. But I must not omit the Wisdom of Solo∣mon, the subject whereof, as I said afore, is to commend the Law of God to the Gentiles; that, in stead of persecuting Gods people, they might learn the worship of the onely true God. For, this he doth by this argument; that those who persecute Gods people think there remains no life after this, but shall find, that the righteous were at rest as soone at they were dead, and in the day of judge∣ment, shall triumph over their enemies. Wisdome II. III. 1-8. V, From hence proceeding to show, how the wisdome of Gods people derives it selfe from Gods wisdome, who so strangely delivered them from the persecutions of Pha∣raoh and the Egyptians, for a warning to those that might undertake the like; In particular the Kings of Egypt, under whom this was writ, and the Jewes most used the Greek. The Wisdome of Jesus the sonne of Sirach, pretending to lay down those rules of righteous conversation, which the study of the Law, the off-spring of Gods Wisdome, had furnished him with; is not so copious in this point, though the precepts of inward and spirituall obedience, and service of God from the heart, which he delivers throughout, can by no meanes be parted from the hope of the world to come, being grounded upon nothing else. And▪ he proposeth it plainly from the beginning, when he saith; He that feareth God, it shall go well with him in the end, and at the day of his death he shall be blessed. The very additions to Daniel are a bulwarke to the Faith of the Church, when it appeares, that the happinesse of righteous soules after death is not taken up by any blind tradition among Christians; but before Christianity, expressed for the sense of Daniels fellows, in those words of their hymne; O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, blesse ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever. And whatsoever we may make of the second book of Maccabees, the antiquity of it will alwayes be evidence, that the prin∣cipall author of it, Jason of Cyrene, could never have been either so sense∣lesse or so impudent, as to impose upon his nation, that prayers or sacrifices were used by them in regard of the resurrection, if they believed not the being and sense of humane souls after death. 2 Mac. XII. 43.
Proceed we to those passages concerning this point, which the Gos∣pell afford us, and consider how well they agree herewith. I will not here dispute, that our Lord intended to relate a thing that really was come to passe; but to propose a parable or resemblance of that which might and did come to passe, when he said Luke XVI. 19—There was a certaine rich man, that was clad with fine linnen and purple, and made good chear every day—. But I will presume upon this; That no man, that meanes not to make a mockery of the Scriptures, will indure, that our Lord should repre∣sent unto us, in such terms as we are able to bear, that which falls out to righ∣teous and wicked soules after death, if there were no such thing as sense and capacity of pleasure and paine in souls departed, according to that which they do here. I will also propose to consideration the description of the place, whereby he represents unto us, the different estate of those whom it receiveth. And in Hell, lifting up his eyes, being in torments, he sees Abraham from afarre, and Lazarus in his bosome. And afterwards; And besides all this, between us and you, there is a great gappe fixed, so that those who would passe from hence can∣not, nor may they passe from thence to us. For, I perceive, it is swallowed for Gospell amongst us, that Dives, being in Hell, saw Lazarus in the third heavens. Whereas the Scripture saith onely , in the invisible place of good and bad oules; For so the processe of the Parable obliges us to understand it: Sing it would be somewhat strange, to understand that gappe, wherewith the place of happy soules is here described to be parted from the place of torments, to be the earth and all that is between the third heavens and it. The Jewes at this time, as we see by the Gospell, believing, according to the testimonies al∣leged, that righteous soules were in rest, and pleasure, and happinesse, wicked in misery and torments; called the place or state of those torments Gehenna, from the valley of the sonnes of Hinnom neer Jerusalem, where, those that of old time sacrificed their children to devils burnt them with fire. The horror of, which place, it appears, was taken up for a resemblance fit to represent the torment of the wicked soules after death. In like manner Gods people, being sensible of Gods mercy, in using meanes to bring them back to the ancient in∣heritance which our first parents lost, by rebelling against God▪ They could not use so fit a terme to expresse the rest and happinesse of blessed spirits in the world to come, as by calling the place of it Paradise. But, that the place of this rest, was the third heavens, before the sitting down of our Lord Christ at the right hand of his Father; I am yet to learn, that there is any syllable or tittle in the holy Scripture to signify, that the people of God understood, at such time as our Lord delivered this Parable. So that, there can possibly be no reasonable presumption, that the word , here used, not in reference to the body, which goes to corruption in the grave, but to the soul or spirit, should signify the same with Gehenna, in opposition to Abrahams bosome; Neither the originall signification of the word, nor the circumstance of the parable, nor any opinion received then among Gods people so limiting the signification of it. But, that the bosome of Abraham, should signify the place of rest which God had appointed for the righteous, the reason is plaine; The hospi∣tality of Abraham being renowned in the Scripture, and the happinesse of the world to come being usually represented to the people of God, at that time, under the resemblance of a Feast, whereof Abraham is made the Master, when his bosome is made the place to receive and refresh Lazarus. There is there∣fore no reason, why the bosome of Abraham, and Paradise should not signify the same state, or the same place, to the apprehension of Gods people at that time. But there is also no reason why , in the Parable, should not extend to com∣prehend both Gehenna and Paradise, in the sense of those, to whom our Lord addresses this Parable. For, neither is it any way necessary, when the good thief prayes, Lord remember me when thou comest into thy kingdome: And our Lord answers; To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, Luke XXIII. 42, 43. that Paradise should here be understood to signify the third heavens, (the way into which was not yet laid open standing the first Tabernacle; saith the
Apostle, Ebr. IX. 8. And againe, Which new and living way our Lord Jesus hath dedicated, or hanseled for us, through the vaile, that is his flesh) unlesse we abuse our selues with an imagination, that words can signifie things, which could not be aprehended ont of them, by those to whom they were said. For, as for S. Paul, who was ravished into the third heavens, that is into paradise 1 Cor. XIV. 3, 4. I conceive I need not insist upon an exception which there is no issue to try; To wit, that S. Paul speakes of severall raptures, one into the third heavens, the other into Paradise. For, to speake freely, it seems no more then reason to grant, that S. Paul was ravished to the presence of our Lord Christ; But, I must needs insist, that the word Paradise could not signifie the same thing to S. Paul after the Ascension of our Lord, as to the hearers of our Lord, afore it. As for the words of the same S. Paul, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ Phi. I. 23. whether they do confine the spirit of S. Paul departed to the place of our Lord Christs bodily presence in the third heavens; I will not conclude, till I have considered more of those scriptures which may concerne the same purpose. And indeed the Apocalypse, as it is the last of the new Testament, so see∣meth to declare more, in this mater, then all the rest of it before had done. For when, upon the opening of the fift seale, Apoc. VI. 9, 10, 11. the soules of Martyrs, having demanded vengeance upon their persecutors, were cloathed with long white robes, and bidden to expect the fulfilling of their numbers; And after that, the CXLIVM of the XII. tribes, that were to be preserved from the said vengeance, were sealed; It followeth, Apoc. VII. 9. 14. After that I looked, and behold a great multitude, whom no man could num∣ber, of every nation, and tribe, and people, and language, standing before the Throne, and before the Lambe, and cloathed in long white robes, with Plmes in their hands. And to show who they were, These be they who come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and have blanched their robes in the bloud of the lambe. Therefore they are before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sitteth upon the Throne overshadoweth them. They shall not hunger nor thirst, nor shall the sun fall on them, nor any, heate. For the Lambe that is in the midst of the Thorne feedeth them and guidth them to living wells of water, and God wipes away all teares from their eyes. Here you have the soules of the Martyrs before the throne of God, over shadowed by him that sitteth on the Throne, who wipeth away all teares from their eyes And again Apoc. XIV. 1-5. where the CXLIVM. that were sealed appear again upon mount Sion, and the voice of harpers is heard, singing to their harps, a new song, before the throne and before the foure living creatures, and Elders, which no man but the sealed could learne; It followeth; These are they that have not been defiled with women, for they are Ʋirgins: These are they that followe the Lambe whithersoever he goeth: These are redeemed from a∣mong men, as first fruits to God and to the Lambe: Nor was any deceite found in their mouthes; For they are unspotted before the Throne of God. Here, CXLIVM appeare upon mount Sion, hearing onely the song which the harpers sing to their harps. And therefore, those that were not defiled with women, that followe the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, that are unspotted before the thone of God, are the harpers, not those that were sealed. The same Martyrs soules, that appea∣red before in long white robes, with Palmes in their hands, now appeare singing the song of triumph to their harps. For, so it followeth v. 13. after denoun∣cing the the fall of Babilon, and vengeance of God, upon those that worship the Beast; I heard a voice from heaven say to me, Write; Blessed are the dead that from henceforth dye in the Lord. Even so saith the spirit, for they rest from their labour, and their works goe along with them. Well might Tertullian re∣straine this to Martyrs, for the consequence of the text mightiy inforceth it. The Lambe indeed is seen on mount Sion, with those that are sealed: But it is ne∣ver said, that they are before the Throne, but onely they who appeare in Heaven; that is the Martyrs, whose song of tryumph they heare and learne; which nee∣ded not have been said if they were represented as of one company. And,
perhaps it is said that they follow the Lamb whither soever he goes; Because they followed him to his Crosse, suffering that death for him, which he had suffered for us. And that they are Virgines; Because not stayned with the pollution of false Gods. For truly, when it is said: that guile was not found in their month, We cannot understand any thing more proper then the profession of the Christian Faith, forwhich they dyed. For, of whom can it be more proper∣ly said; that guile was not found in his mouth, then of him that dies, rather then transgresse that vvhich he undertook at his Baptisme; to professe the name of Christ unto death? He that likes not this vvill be obliged to grant, that vir∣gins also have the state of Martyrs, by this Prophesy. For, besides all that hath been said to shovv, that, in all this prophesy, save the XXIV, none but Martyrs ap∣pear in heaven before Gods Throne, (unlesse vve say, that here, Virgins also are seene among the Martyrs) vvhenas, in the beginning of the VII. Chapter, order is taken for the sealing of those, that should escape the vengeance of God in Judaea, being Christians and servants of God: (who, in the beginning of the fourteenth, appeare againe with the lamb upon mount Sion) But, the Martyrs soules appeare in heaven before the Throne, both in the fift and in the seventh (besides what I argue here by consequence drawne from the meaning of the foureteenth) it would be a thing incons quent to the text and grain of the Pro∣phesy, to say, that the servants of God, who are preserved, by the name of God sealed on their foreheads Apoc. XIV. 1. VII. 3. from that destruction which involves the persecutors of Christianity, should appeare in the same company & ranck with the Martyrs; Among whom are those that are slaine in the City of Jerusalem Ap. XI. 7, 8, 9. of a several condition from those that are preserved alive. Compare wee here with the doctrin of S. Paul 2. Cor. V. 1-4. For we know, that, if this earthly house of our Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a buil∣ding from God, a house not made with hands, eternall in the heavens. And for this we groan, desiring that our dwelling from heaven be vested upon us. If so be we shall not be found naked, having put it upon us. For wee that are in the taber∣nacle groane, as grieved, not because we desire to be stripped, but to be invested, that the mortall may be swallowed up of life. The whole text of this discourse manifestly imports, that S. Paul expects the resurrection as the accomplish∣ment of his hope not groaning for the day of his death, to have his soule strip∣ped from his body, but to have it invested with a heavenly tabernacle, made by God, his glorified body, which bringeth life, that swalloweth up the mortality of this. As also he saith Rom. VIII. 23. That we who have the first fruits of the spirit groane within our selves, expecting the adoption, even the redemption of our body. Where, the resurrection is the adoption of those who rise againe to be Sons of God, according to the word of our Lord, Luke XX. 36. For neither can they dye any more, for they are equall to Angels: And, being children of the re∣surrection, are children of God It is true, it appeares by S. Paul, that he was no further certified as then, of the counsaill of God, then to make it a question, whether he and the Christians of his time, should be found alive by the Lord Christ at his coming to judgement; For, therefore he saies with an if; If we shall not be found naked of our bodies, when we put on glorious bodies: Though he had said afore, that, if this body be dissolved we shall have a heavenly body for it. And so, 1 Cor. XV. 57. The dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. And, 1 Tim. IV. 15. 17. We that are left alive unto the comming of the Lord, shall not prevent those that are falne asleep. Againe; We that are left alive shall be ravished with them, in the clouds, into the ayre to meet the Lord, And so shall be alwaies with the Lord. So that the thousand yeares, which, it is revealed to S. Iohn, that the Church shall indure after the fall of Babylon, and the judgement exercised upon the whore, Apoc. XX. is a further revelation of Gods will and pleasure, for the subsistance of Christianity with the world; how much soever he hath determined it shall indure, more then he hath there declared. But notwithstanding, seeing that S. Paul, though uncertaine there∣of, suspends the accomplishment of his, and our happinesse, upon the resur∣rection; Most manifest it is, that the stripping of our bodies, by death, is not
the terme of Gods promise, according to S. Paul. Wherefore, when it fo∣lowes; Having therefore alwaies confidence, and knowing, that, dwilling in the body wee are ilgrims from God, (for we walke by faith, not by sight) we desire with confiderce, rather to travell out of the body and to dwell with God: Suppo∣sing that S. Paul expected this change by Christs second coming, before he di∣ed, he contradicts not himselfe, when he refers it to the resurrection; which if we think that he assignes it unto the meane time, wee make him to do. Therefore S. Iohn 1 Epistle III. 2. Beloved, we are now the Children of God. But it is not yet manifest what wee shall be: Yet wee know, that when he (or it) is made manifest▪ we shall be like him, for wee shall see him as he is. Sons of God because Sons of the resurrection, we saw before in our Lords words; Sons of God because adopted to his spirit, wee have here in S. Iohn. But as S. Paul made our adoption to be, the redemption of the body, so Eph VI. 30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, saith he, by whom yee are sealed to the day of redempti∣on. And, . 14, speaking of the same spirit; Who is the earnest of our inheri∣tance, untill the redemption of the purchase. As our Lord saith also Luke XX. 28. Lift up your heades, for your redemption draweth nigh; speaking of his second coming. If therefore, neither our adoption, and redemption, nor Gods pur∣chase be compleat before we rise againe, whether wee read in S. Iohn, When he shall be made manifest, or, when it shall be made manifest, what we shall be, the resurrection is the time. For, if wee be not like Angels till the resurrecti∣on, as our Lord saies, much lesse like God, or like our Lord Christ, as S. Iohn sayes. As for the terme of seeing God, upon which the School Doctors have stated the controversy of the Saints happinesse in the meane time; It is a thing evi∣dent enough, that the speech is borrowed from the comparison between Moses and other Prophets, Num. XII. 6, 7, 8. Where God saith, he will deale with other prophets, by a vision or a dreame, but with Moses face to face. And yet S. Paule 1. Cor. XIII. 12. comparing the knowledge of God by faith, with the knowledge of God by sight; Wee see now by a glasse in a riddle, but then face to face. Now wee know in part, then shall I know as I am knowne, Which S. ohn calls as he is, for sure God knowes us as we are. Nay he saith there, that Moses beheld,  which the Greek seems to translate , signifying that glorious appearance, witnessing the presence of God, which Moses communed with mouth to mouth, , by sight, (for we have no better English for S. Pauls , 2 Cor. V. 7.) not by riddles. Whereby it appeareth the knowledge of God, which blessed soules have is described by S. Paul in the very same termes, in which the knowledg of God which Moses had is described by God: And yet, none of those School Doctors believes, that Moses saw God, as the bles∣sed shall doe. Therefore, both of them seeme to be such an expression of intellectuall and spirituall things, borrowed from bodily things of this world, as this weakenesse of our nature is able to beare. And therefore, seeing God is represented to us throughout the whole scripture, in the Majesty of a King sitting upon his Throne, as the most glorious thing, that all sorts of men, (to whom the scripture is written) can imagine to themselves; it seemeth most reasonable to conceive, that both expessions are borrowed from thence. For, the custome of the world knowes no more evident marke of preferment, then for a man to see his King, and to be alwaies admitted to his presence; of which admission, Courts know that there are many degrees. As the VII. Prin∣ces in Ester I. 16. which see the Kings face; Or, stand before the Kings face, as the Queen of Sheba expresseth it, in Solomons servants, 2 Kings X. 8. As the souls of the Martyrs are before Gods throne, and see him day and night Apoc. VII. 15. And so, by consequence, those soules, that are admitted into Gods presence have an other manner of knowledge and familiarity with God then ever Moses had; because it is one thing to see God, & to speake with God mouth to mouth, in his Tabernacle, (Where, by a glorious appearance speaking in his person, he testified his presence) another thing in the third heavens, whereof the most
Holy Place of the Tabernacle was but a figure. Here, take notice, before we goe further, in what fashion the Majesty of God appeareth, or is described in the scriptures. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him, on his right hand and on his left; saith the prophet, 1 Kings XX. 19. that is, all the Angels attending on both sides of his Throne. God is to be trembled at in the great council of his Saints, and terrible above all that are about him; Saith David Psa. LXXIX. 8. The Majesty of his Throne is terrible e∣ven to the Angels that stand beneath and about it: For, the Saints of heaven, in the old Testament, are onely Angels. Thus far, none of them sits in Gods presence. In that vision of his throne which appeareth Dan. VII. 9. 10. (with God sitting on it like the Ancient of daies, with a thousand thowsands and a miryade of miryads, waiting upon him.) it is said indeed; Thrones were set; But no mention of any but this one in all that followeth. And, though the people of God are called there v. 22, 25, 27.  the Saints of the Highest; Yet the Angles are still the Saints of heaven; His people the Saints on earth, whom God there giveth sentence for against their enemies. But, to the prophet Ezekiel I. 22, 26, 27. he appearteth in the likenesse of a man sitting upon a Throne, pitched on a floor, which is drawne by foure living creatures, signifying those Angels, which covered the Arke of the Cove∣nant in the Tabernacle, upon which God is described to sit, as upon his Throne, in so many places of the old Testament; Whereas, in the vision of the Prophet Esay, his Throne is compassed by six, Esay VI. 1, 2. in that of S. Iohn, Apoc. IV. 2, 3, 5-8. with foure. But, in the new testament, our Lord promises his twelve Apostles, that, at the regeneration, that is, the Resur∣rection, they shall sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat. XIX. 28. Luke XXII. 30. where by the way, wee are also to note, that, the Kingdome of God which oure Lord bequeaths to them, to eate and to drink in it, and to sit on these thrones, is not till the resurrection; Therfore neither these joies which the said eating and drinking signifies. Hereuppon it is that S. Paul saith; Know you not that the Saints shal judge the world? 1 Cor. VI. 2. When, therfore, God appeareth to S. Iohn, as a bout to take vengeance upon the per∣secutors of his Church, his throne appeareth invironed with XXIV. Thrones, for XXV. Elders to sit on, and give sentence with him, Apoc. VI. 4. the An∣gels attending upon their Thrones, as upon his, Apoc. V. 11. VII. 11. and the soules of the Martyrs, which, Apoc. VI. . appeare , beneath the Altar of incense which stands before the throne, Apoc. VIII. 3. appeare before the Throne Apoc. VII, 9. Just as in the Church, the people was wont to stand at the service of God, with their faces towardes the Bishop sitting on his throne, in the midst of the seates on which the Presbyters sate, on both sides of him▪ the Deacons standing to gve them attendance; As I have shewed large, in my booke of the service of the Church Chap. III. p. 53-62. Chap. IV. p. 71-76. besides the review p. 74, 75. And further in my book of the Rght of the Church p. 93-98. But all this while we must remember, that, though this vision appeares to S. Iohn in the heavens Apoc. IV. 1. yet doth it not appear, that the Throne of God, before which the soules of the Martyrs stand, and round about which the XXIV Elders sit, is seene by them, as it is seene by S. Iohn, in the vision here described. For, whereas it is plaine, that all this is represented, as if there wre in Heaven, such a Temple as that at Jerusalem, in the inner court where∣of, the Elders sit, the people stand, praysing God; (For Apoc. VII. 15. the Martys serve God before the Throne day and night in the Temple) It is manifest, that the Throne of God (which, in the Temple, was the Arke of the Covenant shadowed with the Chrubnes,) was not seene by those who wor∣shipped without in the Court. And, Apoc. IV, 5. it is said, that thunder and lightning came out of the Throne; and, that there were seven lamps burning before the Throne, being the seven spirits of God. So that, the seven candel∣sticks being betweene the Holy of Holies and the Court in which these things, appeare; we are obliged to understand the Throne to be in the Holy of Holies,
as in the Temple, and the VII. lights in the outward Tabernacle, or holy place of the Temple. Which is still more plaine, when it is said Apoc. XI. 19. And the Temple of God in heaven was opened, and the Arke of his Covenant was seene in his Temple, and there were lightnings and thunders, and flashes and earth∣quakes, and great haile. For, if opened then, then shut afore; neither was the Throne seen which the arke of the Covenant signifyeth. And, Apoc. XIV. 17, 18. One Angel comes out of the Temple in Heaven with a sharpe sickle; another out of the Court, where all this appeares hitherto, called there,  or the Sanctuary, as also Apoc. XI. 2. in opposition to  the Temple; out of which came the seven Angels with the seven viols Apoc. XV. 5. so also XIV. 1, 17. And, you shall see by all this, what reason wee have to thinke, that those who are described, before Gods Throne, by this vision, are not admitted to see his face. And therefore, if to know God as we are knowne in S. Paul, to see him as he is in S. Iohn, be our happinesse, there is nothing to show us that it is accomplished before the generall judgement. For, if S. Iohn when he sayeth, we shall know him as he is, speakes of the resurrection; the same wee must needs think is meant by S. Paul, when he sayes, we shall see him, face to face & know him as we are known, for S. Paul, not expressing whether he speak of the resurrection, or, of the meane time be∣tweene death and it, must needs be limited by S. Iohn, speaking of the time, when our Lord shall be manifested, or, when it shall be manifested what wee shal be. And therefore, though Moses spake with God mouth to mouth, though he see him by sight, not in a riddle: yet, is this but the highest degree of pro∣pheticall vision; which notwithstanding, no man shall see Gods face and live, and therefore Moses himselfe sees but his back, Exod. XXXIII. 20-23. And, notwithstanding that the Martyrs are before Gods Throne in the third Heaven, yet for all this, they are but in the inward Court, and the Holy of Holies ap∣peared not open to S, Iohn, but upon occasion of judgements, the execution whereof comes from thence, where the sentence must be understood to passe. So that, to knowe God as he is knowne, according to S. Paul, and to see him as he is, according to S. Iohn, is that which is reserved for them that shall feast, after the resurrection▪ in his presence. For, seeing S. Iohn sees the Throne of God in vision of Prophesy, which the same vision describeth the Martyrs soules in heaven to see; It cannot be conclu∣ded, that the Martyres soules doe see God, as he is, and know him, as they are knowne, because they are before Gods Throne, or because they see him sitting upon it. For, Moses also communed with God mouth to mouth, & that upon his Throne, in the Holy of Holies, the Arke of the Covenant overshadowed by the Cherubines; unto whom God said neverthelesse, no man shall see my face and live. The Apostle indeed to the Ebrewes XII. 23. when he sayes; We are come to the assembly and Church of the first borne registred in the heavens, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; seemes to speak of this meane time. For, though some would have those sprits of just men made perfect, to be the soules of living Christians; (as when S. Peter saith, 1. Peter IV. 19. 20. that our Lord Christ being put to death in the flesh, was made alive by the spirit, in which departing, he preached to the spirits in prison; Which is necessarily to be understood of the Gentiles, whom the spirit of God in the Apostles won to repentance, though the same spirit in Noe could not effect it, as it followes) yet it seemes more consequent to the rest of the text, to under∣stand it here of the souls of Christians made perfect upon their departure hence. But, if just men made perfect, may be understood to signifie no more then Chri∣stians, because our Lord, distinguishing that righteousnesse which the Gospel requireth from that which the Law was content with, concludes; Be yee there∣fore perfect as your heavenly father is perfect; Mat. VI. 48. Certainely, the perfection of Christian soules, in the meane time between death and the resur∣rection, cannot be concluded to be such as nothing shall be added to, because, it is said, that they are made perfect. The same we have from the Apostle 1 John IV. 17. Herein is love perfected in us, that we have confidence in the day of
Judgement, because as he is, so are wee in this world. For, I beseech you, how can there be any thing added to his confidence at the day of judgement, who hath received his full reward from the day of his death? But Saint Paul 2 Thessalonians. I. 6-9. Seing it is just with God to render tribulation to them who afflict you, and to you that are afflicted rest with us, at the revealing of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his Angels, in flaming fire, rendering ven∣geance to them who know not God; Who shall indure the punishment of everlast∣ing destruction from the face of the Lord, and from the glory of his strength, when he cometh to be glorified among his Saints—at that day. Where, you see, he re∣ferreth, as well the rest of them who are afflicted, as the punishment of ever∣lasting destruction from before the Lord, to the last day of the generall judg∣ment, when he cometh to be admired among his Saints; Who shall then be, as well glorified Christians as the Angels, and that in heaven, according to the spirituall sense of the Old Testament; as upon earth according to the lite∣rall sense, the Prophet Esay saith, that, after the destruction of Senacherib; The Lord of hosts shall raigne in mount Sion, and Jerusalem, and be glorified in the sight of his Elders; Esay XXIV. 23. Here then all those scriptures, which referre the torments provided for the devil and his angels, unto the generall judgement, come in to bear witnesse in the same cause. For, therefore the words of the sentence bear; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. XXV. 41. to wit, against that time. And S. Paul 1 Cor. VI. 2. know ye not that we shall judge the angels? to wit the evil angels: And the possessed to our Lord, Mat. VIII. 29. Art thou come to torment us be∣fore the time? And the Apostle, 2 Pet. II. 4. For if God spared not the angels having sinned, but delivered them to be kept for judgement, in the dungeon, with chaines of darknesse. And S. Jude 6. And the angels that kept not their originall, but left their own habitation, he keeps in everlasting chaines under dark∣nesse, to the judgement of the great day. For, though there can be no reason why the devils, having rebelled against God, should not taste the fruits of their re∣bellion immediately, as there is a reason to be given, why man is not to be judged till he be tried; Especially, the Parable of Dives and Lazarus show∣ing, that wicked souls are in torment upon their departure; Yet, seeing God hath allowed them to tempt mankind, and to dwell in the air about them; Job I. 7. II. 2. Ephes. II. 2. VI. 12. (whereupon they desire our Lord not to send them into the deep, Luke VIII. 31.) it seemeth necessary to grant, that he will take account of them for the malice, which, at present he suffereth them to exercise, though sentenced to that dungeon, and those bonds, which they can no more escape, then be converted to goodnesse, from the begin∣ning.
CHAP. XXVII. The Soules of the Fathers were not in the Devils Power till Christ; Though the Old Testament declare not their estate. Of Samuels soul. The soul of our Lord Christ, parting from his body, went with the Thiefe to Paradise. Of his triumph over the powers of darknesse. Prayer for the dead signifieth no deli∣vering of soules out of Purgatory. The Covenant of Grace requires imper∣fect happinesse before the generall judgement. Of forgivenesse in the world to come, and, paying the utmost farthing. IT is manifest then, by these premises, that there is appearance enough of difference, in and between severall Scriptures, that concern the state of souls departed before the generall judgement. Neverthelesse, in this, it cannot be said that there is any difference, but that all is agreed, that the wicked are in paine, the righteous at rest, upon their departure; As the Parable of Dives and Laza∣rus distinguishes. And this I should here proceed further to limit, but that I hope to do it more clearly and resolutely, premising here the determination of two points incident. For it is manifest, that all parties in difference do allow the hope of salvation to those Christians, that depart imperfectly turned from their evil wayes, and amended in their inclinations and actions. Be it but for the example of the thiefe upon the Crosse, though we suppose, that, as there is but one example written, so there are few, and very few examples come to passe; yet, (seeing that which hath come to passe may come to passe againe, and, that the case cannot be excepted from the hope of salvation) the questi∣on will be what becomes of those soules, that depart hence in the state of Gods grace, but burthened with sins, which they have not repented of to amend∣ment. And, because all that is to be said of happinesse after death must come out of the new Testament, according to the premises; It will be requisite to inquire, in the second place, in what condition, the soules of the holy Fathers before and under the Law, and those, who, by their doctrine and example did belong to the new Testament, though they lived under the old; (as I have said) in what condition of ease or sorrow they are, between their departure and the generall judgement. Which drawes an other question after it, concerning the place where, or the company which Christs humane soul was with, during the time it was departed from the body. For, it is manifest that there is an o∣pinion which hath very great vogue, even among the Fathers; that the soule of Christ was in Hell, with the soules of the Fathers, during that time, and brought them along from thence when he rose againe, carying them up into heaven with him at his ascension, where ever since, the souls of the martyrs, and other eminent Christians, which now are properly called Saints (for in the writ∣ing of the Apostles, Christians who are generally called Saints, as in the old Testament Israelites, are received, when they depart hence; Those that dy not in Gods Grace, being condemned to hell torments: But those, who have not had care to cleanse themselves of sin by repentance and amendment, remaining in the Suburbs of Hell, (as I may well call that place, which the Church of Rome calls Purgatory) till by the prayers of the living, or, having payd the debt of temporall paine, remaining due when the guilt of sinne is done away with the debt of eternall paine, they are removed to heaven, and to the sight of God, which is the same happinesse they shall injoy after the resurrection, onely that the body hath no part in it, as then it shall have. That which the opinion which I have mentioned saith of the state of righte∣ous souls under the Old Testament, seemeth to stand upon those descriptions of the dead which it giveth. The Prophet Esay, describing the ruine of the King of Babylon, Esay XIV. 9. Hell (or the grave) from beneath, is moved for thee at thy coming: It stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the leaders of the earth.
To what purpose is it here to dispute, whether Hell or the Grave, where it is so evident, that the dead must rise to meet the King of Israel? To what purpose to allege a figure of Prosopopaeia, unlesse it could be understood, that dead corp∣ses could meet him, and receive him without their souls? The dead here, are, in the originall, the Giants, of whom we read, Gen. VI. 4. that, for the wick∣ednesse of their times, the World was condemned to the floud. For, though Moses call them Nephilim, and Esay Rephaim; Yet it is manifest, that the same word is attributed to the dead, because of the violence and wickednesse, which, the Scripture showeth, were multiplied upon the earth by the Giants before the Floud, and afterwards, by the Giants that inhabited the land of pro∣mise; whereupon the Scripture, by calling the dead by the name of Giants, signifieth, that the Giants were under that death, which God threatned Adams sinne with. And doth not the Scripture of the Old Testament describe unto us the Fathers of the Old Testament, in the same estate? What shall we say of the soul of Samuel, which the witch of Endor raises out of the earth, if the Scripture say true 1 Sam. XXVIII. 12, 14. when the woman saw Samuel; And Saul perceived that it was Samuel? And, that no man may say it is a witch, and that he that went to a witch says it; What shal we say to the language of Jacob; I will go down to my sonne into hell mourning? Gen. XXXVII. 35. For his grief for Joseph would not have been enough to make him dy with sor∣row, had he died with Saint Pauls expectation to be with Christ, so soon as he was dismissed. And therefore, the language of David, Psal. LXXXIX. 4.-7. entertaining the thought of death with such astonishment; seemeth to give credit to that grosse opinion, that souls have no sense till the resurrection, but sleep out the time. As also King Ezekias, weeping at the news of death, be∣cause the dead could not praise God; Esay XXXVIII. 3, 18. as also Psal. VI. 6. and Baruch II. 17. And Job III. 13. makes his case, had he never been born, the same with the dead. Not because he thought the soul mortall. Therefore because he thought it a light that death puts out, and the resurrecti∣on kindles it againe. But all this is to be imputed to nothing in the world but that dispensation of the Old Testament, which I have spoke of so many times, and now shall confirme it by so visible an instance as this. Death was proposed to Adam, for the mark of Gods wrath, and vengeance, which he was become liable to by sinne. The turning of this curse into a blessing, was to be the effect of Christs Crosse, which was not yet to be revealed. The life of the Land of Promise was proposed for the reward of keeping Gods law, in stead of the life of Paradise. Therefore, the cutting off of that life was to be taken for a mark of that curse, which mankind became subject to by the first Adam, till it should be declared the way to a better life, by the Crosse of Christ. Therefore, the Giants, that left it with the markes of enmity with God upon them, are described as within the dominion of Hell, but not asleep, unlesse we can think that it is a mark of misery, to go to them that sleep, when all do sleep. Prov. II. 17. IX. 18. XXI. 17. Esay. XXVI. 14. For, that there should be no praising of God after death, holds punctually, in virtue of the Old Covenant, which brought no man to life, and was then on foot; though they who writ those things, might and did know, that by the virtue of the New Covenant, (under which they knew themselves to be) they should not be deprived of the priviledge of praising God after death, and before the resurrection; how sparing soever they were to be, in imparting this knowledge openly to all the world. For, how otherwise should they whom the Apostle, Ebr. XI. declareth to have sought the kingdom of heaven, have showed themselves otherwise affe∣cted with death, then the Martyrs that suffered for Christ were afterwards? How could it be thought the same Spirit, that moved them to such a difference of effects▪ according to the difference of time? And therefore the same Solomon, that saith, there is nothing to be done in the grave Eccles. IX. 10. saith further Eccles. XII. 8. that, when the dust returns to the earth, then the soul returns to God that gave it. And when Exoch and Elias were taken away by God in their Bodies, neither sleep they, seeing Mo∣ses
and Elias attend our Lord Christ at his transfiguration Mat. XVII. 3, 4. Mark IX. 4 5. Luke IX. 30. nor is it possible for any man, that would have soules to sleep, to give a reason, why, the Covenant by which all are ordered being the same, the soules of Christians should sleep, when their souls sleep not. And therefore, when our Lord proves the resurrection by this; That God is called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; whereas, God is not the God of the dead but of the living; Mat. XXII. 32. Mark XII. 26. Luke XX. 37. he not onely supposes that his argument is good, but, that his adversaries, the Sadduces, granted it to be good. And so Saint Paul, when he argues, that if the dead rise not againe, then are we the most miserable of all people; As having no further hope then this life; 1 Cor. XV. 19. For, what needed more, to them that owned the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of Christ, and yet would deny the world to come, questioning the resurrection that supposes it? For the rest, I will not repeate that which I produced afore, out of the Books we call Apocrypha, which he that peruseth, will find a difference between the language of the Patriarchs and Prophets, speaking of themselves, and the language of those Bookes, speaking of them; But I will insist upon this, that our Lord, when he proposeth the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, manifestly accepts of that opinion, which, notwithstanding such difficulties from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, had prevailed over the better part of that people, by Tra∣dition of the Fathers, and Prophets; To wit, that the soules of good and bad are alive in joy and paine, according to the qualities in which they depart hence; and shall resume their bodies, to give account in them, for their workes here. The same doth the appearance of Moses and Elias at his transfiguration, the rendering of his soul into his Fathers hand, the promise of bringing the thiefe into Paradise the same day, signify. Whereby it appeareth, that, whatsoever might seeme to argue, either that the soules of the Fathers were in the devils hands, till the death and resurrection of Christ, or, that all soules go out like sparks when men dy, and are kindled anew when they rise againe, prove no∣thing, because they prove too much, For, if they prove any thing, they must prove, that there is no world to come, as the disputes of Ecclesiastes and Job seem to say; because, by the accidents of this world, there is no ground of a mans estate in it. Which, seeing it is so farre from leaving any dispute among Christians, that, among Jewes, the Sadduces, were reputed Sectaries; It is evident, that, whatsoever may seem to look that way in the Old Testament, cannot prove, that the soules of the Fathers were in the Verge of Hell, till Christ riseing againe, the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy City and appeared to many, as we read in the Gospel of Mat. XXVII. 52, 53. This indeed were something if the Scripture had said, that those Saints who arose with their bodies, when our Lord Christ was risen againe, had ascended into heaven with him in their bodies. Which, because it derogates from the generallity of the last resurrection, having no ground in the Scrip∣ture, can beare no dispute. Therefore, seeing these Saints, as Lazarus afore, and the Widowes sonne of Naim whom our Lord raised, restored their bo∣dies to the grave; there is no presumption from hence, that their soules were brought from Hell by our Lord, to be translated into the full happinesse of the world to come, with his owne. I do therefore allow, that which is writ∣ten in the Apocryphall 2 Esdras IV. 41, 42. In the grave, the chambers of souls are like the womb of a woman. For, like as a woman that travaileth maketh hast to escape the pressure of her travaile; Even so do those places haste to deliver the things that are committed unto them. And VII. 32. And the earth shall re∣store those that are asleep in her, and so shall the dust those that dwell in silence, and the secret places shall deliver those soules that were committed unto them. For, in most of those writings which the ancient Church counteth Apocryphal, be∣cause they are suspected to intend some poisonous doctrine, excellent things are contained; which, the agreement of them with Canonicall Scripture, and their consequence and dependance upon the truth which they settle, renders
recommendable, even from dangerous authors. And, for that which is here said, whether we suppose this book to be written by a Christian, or not, before Christ or after; Seeing there is no mention of any Saints, in those visions of the old Testament, where God is represented sitting upon his Throne, but one∣by the Holy Angels; (though, in the Apocalypse, the Martyrs are before the Throne, and the Elders sit on seates round about the Throne) seeing it can∣not be said that they are translated out of the Verge of Hell into the heavens, by the resurrection and ascension of Christ, who were in happinesse before, by the parable of Dives & Lazarus; I take the chambers or the houses here men∣tioned to be the bosom of Abraham in the parable, & Paradise in our Lords pro∣mise; secret indeed, because the script▪ is sparing in imparting unto us the know∣ledge of the place; But, such as oblige them, earnestly to desire & long for the consummation of all things, wch, not only the comparison of the womb in this Apocryphal scripture, but the cry of the souls in Apocal. VI. 10. XX. 12, 17, 20. witnesseth. But I must go no further in this point, till I have resolved the difficul∣ty of Samuels souls which, he that wil needs question, whether it were in the de∣viles hand, for a witch to bring up out of the earth, or, in the bosome of Abra∣ham, where ou Saviour placed Lazarus, may as well question, whether the witch or the Law sent us to the true God. To a heathen man, that acknow∣ledgeth not the enmity, betweene God and the Devil, which the scripture esta∣blisheh, Necromancy, that bringeth the likenesse of the dead out of the earth: need not goe for a diabolicall art, nor those spirits which minister such apposi∣tions be counted uncleane spirits. But, the scripture, even of the old testament, placing the Giants, Gods enemies, beneath, oblige us to take it for an uncleane spirit, that serves an act forbiden by Gods Law, by bringing the likenesse of Gods prophet out of the place where Gods enemies goe after death. For, though Gods friends goe to the dust, as concerning their bodies; and, as conce∣ning theire soules, the old Testament declares not whither they goe; yet hath it no where described them in that company to which Solomon deputeth his foole. And our Saviours parable, representeth Dives in▪ the flames which burnt Sodom and Gmorrha no otherwise, then Solomon quartereth his fool with the Giants that tyranized over the old world, or the land of pro∣mise. Wherefore, though I reject not Ecclesiasticus for commending Samuel, because he prophesied after his death (because, at the worst, it is not fit to re∣ject a booke of such excellent use, for one mistake) yet I had rather say, that Saul▪ having by his Apostasy declined to the worship of the Devile by Necro∣mancy▪ did thinke it more satisfactory to be answered by Samuel, then by any other likenesse & that this is indeed for Samuels honour; but, that otherwise, it is no more for Ecclesiasticus to say that Samuel prophesied, then for the scrip∣ture, that Samuel spoke to Saul: Who, whether he tooke it for Samuel, or for an uncleane spirit, the scripture would call it no otherwise, then the witch, whom he submitted to pretended. Shee, when she, saith, I see Gods asc∣end out of the earth, though I find it no incongruity, that she should pretend, the Spirit whom she imployed to be of that number, whom the scripture calleth Gods, or Gods sonnes; yet, because it is rather to be thought, that she pre∣tended to bring up Samuel indeed, it is more convenient to translate it; I see a Judge come up out of the earth; understanding, that, by the habit of a Judge in which he appeared, she shows him to Saul for Samuel. For the observation of the Jews doctors is most true, that Elohim signifies the Judges of Gods people. These things thus cleared, it is manifest, that the soule of Christ, parted from his body which lay in the grave, did not goe into hell, to free the Fathers souls out of th Devils hands, and to translate hem to the full happinesse, which wnts only the company of the body as an accessary to complete it. But, seeing he may be thought to have gon thither, to declare the victory of his Crosse, & to begin that triumph over the Devill and his partie, which the Gospell shall accomplish at the generall judgement, by the redemption of the Church; Let us see what the Scripture teacheth. S. Peter Acts. II. 25-35. first affirmes that David spake of Christ▪ when he said Psalme XVI. 11, 12. Thou shalt not leave my soul in Hell: Nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Thou shalt
shw me the path of life, thou shalt fill me with the gladnesse of thy presence; And proves it, because David was dead and buryed, and his Seulchre was seen to tht day. Just as he proves afterwards, that when David said, Psalme CX. 2. The ord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footestool; he meant it of Christ, because David never went up into the heavens. And there is no doubt, the opinion of the Jewes at that day bore him out in that exposition, because, as to this day, so then, they did expound those texts of the Messias. So he had nothing to doe, but to show hw true they were of our Lord Jesus. That this no way requireth, that thy should not be uner∣stood of David in the literall sense; I refer my self to that which hath been aid already. But, what fignifies it in the literall sense, that God shwes David th path of life, and fills him with the gladnesse of his presence. Surely, that he pserves him alive, in his state & title of King of Gods people, to serve God before the Arke. So Hezkias, when he was unwilling to dy,  because the living onely praise God; d aid; What is the signe that I shall goe into the Temple of the Lord. Esa. XXXVIII. 19, 22. So David, how many times doth he et forth, for the comfort of his life, that he might come and see God in the Temple? Ps. XVII. 15. XXIV. 3. 5. XXVI 6-13. XLII. And in a word, every where. If this be the literall sense of the Psalme what shall i signifie in the mysticall sense, supposing our Lord Jesus the Messias, and suposing him killed by the Jewes? Let S. Peter be judge, when he saies, tha avid, knowing as a Prophet, that the Messias, our Lord Jesus whom ye have slin▪ should come out of his loines, foretold of his resurrection, that his oule was not left in Hell nor aid his flesh see corruption. For, is it any way reqisite, to the  of this argu∣ment, that our Lords humane soule should triumph over th Devile and his party, in the entralls of the earth? Therefore, f you accept his sou to signi∣fie his person, (as David Psalm XXV. 12. His soule, (himselfe) shall lve at ease, and his seed shall inherit the Land,) thou shalt not leave my soule in Hell, will be no more, then, thou shalt not suffer thine holy one to lee corruption; Thou shalt not suffer me to be cut off from thy presence, to which I am to present the sacrifice of my Crosse. But, if you will needs have the soule to signifie that which stands in opposition to the flesh; seeing the soules of the Father which by the dispensation of the Law, appeared not freed from the Devin▪ wre in∣deed free by the Gospel; uder the Law it is no marvaile, that ur Lord Christ represents his soule, as in the power o those who had the power o death, who aith; This is your time, and the time of the powers of darkenesse. Doh S. Paul make any more o ths text? Heare his words Act XI. 34-37. That he raised him from the dead, no more to returne to corruptio; thus he saith; I will give you the sure mecies of David. Wherefore he saith also in an other Psalm; Thou shall no suffer thine holy one to see corruption. For, David, having served the counsaile of God in his generation fell asleep and was added to his Fathers, and saw corruption. But, he whom God raised w no corruption. He argues the mysticall sense in our Lord Christ  the literall sense in David was come to nothing, by his death, but how the mysticall sense in our Lord Christ? By his triumphing in Hell, or by rising againe? Therefore S. Paul againe Rom. X 6-9. thus wrsteth the words of Moses out of the Jewes hands, to the establishing of the Gospel, upon supposi∣tion that the law is the figure of it▪ Say not in thy heart▪ who shall goe up into hea∣ven, (as Moses Deut. XXX. 12. faith; The Law is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, would to God some body would bring it us from heaven, that we might heare and doe it; So, saith he, of the Gospel, thou needest not say, would to God some body would go up into heaven) To wit, to bring downe Christ: Or, who shall goe downe into the deep; (as Moses addeth; The Law is not beyond sea, that that thou needest say, would to God some body would goe beyond sea and bring it us, that we might heare and doe it: So thou needst not say; would to God some body would goe downe into the deep) To wit, to bring Christ up from the dead? But what saith it? (The Law, correspondent to the Gospell) The word is neere, in thy mouth, and in thy heart: That is, the word of Faith which wee preach.
That, if thou prfesse with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, believing with thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. Here, it is plaine, the deepe is not named for the place of the damned, but for that place, or for that state, out of which it was hard to recover Christ, supposing him dead. As it was hard to bring the law from beyond the seas▪ The deep, I deny not, represents to us the place of the damned, Luke VIII. 31. as also, the parts that are un∣der the earth Phi. II. 10. Apoc. V. 13. may comprehend also the dead. Therefore, the deep signifies the place of the damned, not necessarily, as here, but because the speech is of the region of Devils, & of the sealing up of the de∣vill in the deep. Just as I said of the grave, the pit, and the place under the earth, that, when the scripture speakes of the Giants, of the enemie of Gods people, of Davids enemies in Gods people, it signifies, either the place, or at least the state of the damned, which the Old Testament must needs acknowledg acknow∣ledging the happinesse of Gods people. Psalme IX. 18. Proverbs V. 8 VII. 27. IX. 18. And so went Corah and his complices, quick into Hell Num. XVI. 30, 33. So▪ Psalme LV. 24. LXIII 10. The proper place of the dmned spirits seemeth to be properly called by S. Peter Tartara, when he saies; that God delivered them to be kept for judgement, , in chaines of darkenesse, being cast downe into Tartara or Hell: 1. Peter II. 4. Now, the state of death brings not Christian soules into Hell, unlsse wee sup∣pose that the place of good souls, under the Law; which supposition I have de∣stroyed. Therefore, the bringing of Christ from the deep is done, by raising him again. So, quoting David againe; Ephes. IV. 8, 9, 10. Therefore he saith, Psa. LXVIII. 17. Going upon high he led captivity captive, and gave men gifts▪ Now, that he ascended, what is it, but that he first descended into the lower pats of the Earth? He that descended is the same that ascended far above all things, to fill (or fulfill) all things. The Psalme speakes of the Arke going up into the Tabernacle, or Temple, figuring the going up of our Lord to the right hand of God, as Psalme XXIV. 6-10. XLVII. 5. The going up of the Arke was Gods triumph over the Idolatrous nations, whom he cast out of the Land of promise, giving gifts to his people in it. The going up of our Lord Christ, S. Paul saies, implies, that he had come downe before, into the lower prt of the Eearth; Either in respect of mount Sinai, upon which the Psalme describes God, with that attendance, which the ake; & the Cherubines thereof signifie his host of Angels in the words just afore: Or, we may well understand the lower parts of the earth to signifie, by the figure of apposition, the earth that is below as flumen Rheni, & Vrbs Patavii signifie the river Rhine and the City Padna For we have a peremptory instance in Psa. CXXXIX 15 where David saith, that he was fashioned in the lower parts of the earth▪ speaking of his mothers wombe, & there∣fore meaning the earth below. The ascension therefore of Christ, pretending to fill rather then fulfill all with his graces, (of which he proceeds to speake,) re∣quires no descent into hell, which he pretends not to fill with his Graces, If the resurrection & ascension of Christ satisfie these texts, so that they require no further descent then into the state of deah; supposing what I said before, of the soules of the fathers under the Old Testament, I must needs conclude, that, the body of Christ being buryed, his soule went with the good theifes soule in∣to Paradise, or the bosome of Abraham, where the soules of the Fathers were refreshed of their travells, till the first, and then, the second comming of our Lord. Paradise, we know, was the place of mans happniesse, wherein he was crea∣ted, whence, having sinned, he was shut out. In our Lords time, Gods peo∣ple, it is plaine, understood well enough the state of the righteous soules in the other world. You have seene it out of those bokes which we call Apocrypha. Supposing the place unknown, as indeed it is, how could it be more properly signified, then by the name of Paradise▪ opening unto us the whole allegory, by which the happinesse which wee seeke to recover by the covnant of grce, was expressed to us by God; first in the Land of promise, secondly in the Church, after in the heavens, after the redemption of our bodies. The true
Land of promise, to which the Gospell, and the Church, secretly taught and built under the Law, introduceth us, because the Law cannot; is that Paradise to which Christ restoreth Adam, that was driven out of paradise. If you call the same Jerusalem, it will appeare, why the place of the damned is called Gehenna, which was the place without Jerusalem, where, those that were sacri∣ficed to the Idoles of Canaan▪ were consumed with horrible tortures of fire. The Scripture of the old Testament yeeldeth not the name, but the true inter∣pretation of it. In the meane time, though our Lord, by carying the thiefe into Paradise, show, that it continues not shut, yet continues it no lesse secret, no better knowne, then it is knowne where Adam first dwelt. It is strange that the bosome of Abraham should signifie the same? He is acknowledged the Father of the faithfull, by Jewes as well as Christians. His hospitality is recoun∣ted in the scripture. The kingdome of God, which his people then expected, is proposed by our Lord, in dvers passages of the Gospell, under the figure of an entertainement, as an expression then familiar to his people. It is no mar∣vaile, that it should be called Abrahams bosome, from whom, the faith that purchaseth it hath so eminent a beginning though the Fathers before Abra∣ham be there. One thing we must note. A vast gap wee see, between it and the flames where Dives was tormented. But where the partition is fixed; so little is determined by the words of the scripture, that, whether both within the earth, or, one within the earth the other in the heavens, or whether both with∣out this visible world (as of the place of the damned, some argue, with great probability, from the darkenesse that is without, in the Gospell) no rule of aith determines. And therefore, whether the Greek word , which the parable useth Luke XVI. 23. when the rich man lifts up his eyes in Hell and sees La∣zarus in Abrahams bosome; whether it comprehend the bosome of Abraham as well as the place of torments, no Rule of faith determineth. For, as it ma∣nifestly signifyeth the place of the damned, in the scripture; (which, it is mani∣fest, Gods people must needs distinguish by the scripture, is the place, where, they were sure by the scripture, that God would punish his and their ene∣mies) So, comprehending also the place of righteous soules, nor distinguish∣ed from the other, to Gods people, by the ancient scriptures, how should the signification of it be restrained here? For, as the Hethen, so Josephus also, manifestly extendeth it to the place of righteous as well as wicked soules, after death. For when he saies that, de Bello Jud. II. 12. the Saduces , take away the punishments and rewards of the World to come; under the one name of ; he comprises both estates, which, the rest of Gods people attributed then to good and bad. The Pharises, he saies, Antiq. XVIII. 2. maintaine , punishments and honors under the earth: And that, as it followeth, for ever; which is as much as if he had said, : Because, those things which were thought to be , are called ▪ things under the earth. Again, of the Jews; . And, agreeing with the Greekes, they affirme that good soules are assigned a seate beyond the Ocean, in a place not grieved with raine, or snow, or heate, but alwaies refreshed with a milde West wind blowing from the O∣cean. But, the evill ones they assigne a darke and stormy nooke full of torments without ceasing. And yet, in an other place, he saith, they assigne them , the most holy place of the Heavens. So little ground is there for the distinct signification of  in the sense of those to whom our Lord spoke. It behoveth us therefore, to acknowledge the victory of our Lord Christ, and his triumph over the Devill, and all the damned, which S. Paul, as, in the text quoted out of the Epstle to the Ephesians, he ascribeth to the Ascension of our Lord, according to the Psalme which he alleageth; so, Col. II. 15. to the Crosse, when he saith, Spoiling principalities and powers, he made open show of
them, triumphing over them, in it, (by it, or upon it) to wit, his Crosse; to which, he had said just afore, that he nayled the hand writing which was against us. This victory and triumph belongs to the rule of faith, and the beliefe of it to the substance of Christianity; because, by vertue of it, we have recon∣ciliation with God, and the rest of that which the Gospell promiseth. But, that it should be performed, by the descent of Christs soule into the place of the damned, being begun upon the Crosse, and finished at the ascension; as the necessity of our redemption requireth not, so, no Rule of Faith will oblige to believe. There is great appearance, that the devil did not understand the effect of it till our Lord rose againe, as Ignatius saith, that he understood not the the birth of the blessed Virgine. Pilates Wives dream is a signe, that, doubt∣ing of the consequence, he would have hindred that, which, by Judas, he did pro∣cure. He thought himself Lord of mankind, because, for sin, they were condem∣ned to death. That by the death of Christ, this condemnation was to be voided, possibly he might not understand; till Christ rose againe. Though the soules of the Fathers were delivered out of his Power before the death of Christ, yet might he not understand, that, by virtue of it. Our Lord saith John XIV. 30. The Prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me; Because he found no∣thing of his owne, that is of sinne, in Christ. Though he had nothing to do with Christ in justice; seeing, in deed, he had meanes to swallow him, and might not know, that the swallowing of him would oblige him to render his interest in all that should escape with him; is it a marvaile that he swallowed him, being a murtherer from the beginning? Thus farre I have owned the reason of our redemption, against Socinus. Which if it be true, the victory of Christ was declared, that is, the triumph be∣gunne, at his rising againe. And therefore, it is no way prejudiciall to the common Faith, which, I know, some have imagined, that our Lord Christ, having been in Paradise with the good thiefe, or in the bosome of Abraham with Lazarus, till Easter day morning, when he was to rise againe, went from thence, in his humane soul, to the place of the damned, to declare to the devil, that, by laying violent hands on him, who had not sinned, he had lost, not onely the Fathers, but all that should believe at the preaching of the Gospel. For, herein, the triumph of his victory upon the Crosse consisteth. But the substance of this ceremony being so fully provided for, by the death of his Crosse, and by his riing againe in virtue of it; that he who believeth it not, should be thought to come short of believing all that, which it is necessary to salvation to believe, seemeth to me utterly unreasonable. For, the Parable representing unto us Dives and Lazarus, conferring together at that distance; what reason can there be, why this victory might not be declared at the same distance? Or, why the soul of Christ should move to do that, which might be done at that distance; Least of all, why it should be necessary to salvation, to believe that, which, there is no reason why it should be necessary to be done. It is true, our Lord entered into possession of his conquest, when he raised the bodies of those Saints, which, upon his resurrection, appeared in Jerusalem. For that was to say, that their bodies, as well as their souls, were, from hence∣forth, free from the dominion which sinne gave death over mankind. But, see∣ing their soules, as we have seen, were not to change their abode till the gene∣rall rsurrection; and seeing, therefore, that the soul of Christ was not to go to take them from the verge of Hell, for the marke and exercise of his triumph; I do not see why it should go into the nethermost Hell, the place of the damned, to declare his victory, and to exercise his triumph, and nothing else. Now, having proved, that the soules of the Fathers, were not removed from the Verge of Hell to heaven, by the descent of Christs soul, at such time as, the passage from the Law to the Gospell might seem to make such a change reasonable; I shall be very difficult to be perswaded, that any soules of Christians, who depart in the state of grace, are sent to the Verge of Hell, by the name of Purgatory, there to remaine, till, having payd the debt
of temporall punishment, reserved at the restoring of them to the state of Grace, they are, by the prayers of their friends here, dismissed to heaven and happinesse. Every man knowes, that this opinion is chiefly built upon the words of Saint Paul 1 Cor. III. 12-15. If any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; Every mans work shall be made manifest: For, the day shall show it, for, it is revealed with fire, and the fire shall try what every mans work is. If any mans work remaine, which he hath built upon (this foundation of Christ) he shall receive the reward. If a mans work be burnt up, he shall suffer losse, yet himself shall be saved, but so as through fire. But, who shall consider these words, without prejudice, seeing he findes them very difficult, shall find it impossible to build an article of faith upon them. And, finding the issue of them to be at the generall day of judgement, shall find, that removing of souls out of Purgatory (upon which all the consequence there∣of depends) utterly inconsistent with the same. For, the day whereof S. Paul here speakes, can be no other then the day of judgement; because, had it been any day of inferiour note, it must have been described by some further marke, which that day needs not. I know two opinions, that will not have that day to signify the day of judgement. Saint Augustine thinkes that it may signify any day of triall; For, the fire, is the meanes of that triall: And, tribulation being that triall, the day will be the day of tribulation. Grotius thinks the day to be the judgement of the Church here, whereby, that which men build upon the foundation of Christ shall be tried, whether it be gold, silver, precious stones, according to the foundation; or wood, hay, stubble, no way suitable to it. For that which agrees not with the foundation, there is no reason why it may not be lost, and yet he that laid it upon the foundation be saved, though not by that fire, yet, through that fire that tries. What pretense is here left for the purging of soules by that fire, whereby they are tried? If the triall be at the generall judgement; to bring souls out of Purgatory then, what thanks can it deserve? And, of the generall judgement S. Paul must needs speake, be∣cause there is no other triall that is certaine. Affliction may try, and the Church may try, but it may also not try. S. Paul speakes of a triall that must be not that may be. I confesse this is avoided by saying, that Saint Paul here prophesies of a judgement of God to come upon those who adulterated the Gospell at Corinth, of whom he speakes; For, that judgement which S. Paul foretelleth must certainly come to passe. But, S. Paul when he saith the day shall show it; speaketh not of a day, which, hereby he declareth that it shall come: But of a day, which otherwise they acknowledge was to come. Name∣ly, by our common Christianity, whereof, the day of judgement is a part. And, whatsoever judgement Saint Paul foretelleth to come upon them, seeing the judgements of this world do not use to make every mans work manifest; nei∣ther can it be said, that he whose work remaines, shall receive his reward, he whose work is burnt up, though he suffer losse, shall escape, as through fire; Speaking of such a triall, as, by the ordinary course of providence, manifests not all mens works, but some. Besides, when S. Paul saith, the day is revealed, he speakes of a day, which, in the mean time, is concealed, when it shall be, though allready revealed that it shall be. And what day is that but the day of judge∣ment? Or what fire did they expect that day to be revealed with, but that fire which our Lord shall come to judgement with? Now the fire of Gods vengeance, which the last day shall come with, why should it not try as well as punish? This is indeed, in my understanding, all that possibly can remaine questionable, in the sense of those words, the rest seems clear beyond dispute. The fire of the last day is a bodily fire, which shall burn up the world, or purify it, to that constitution which shall remaine for the future. But what is that to the trying of their workes? Saint Pauls words require it not. The day tries, the fire consumes the workes, and so leaves the men purged by suffering that losse▪ So, mens workes being tried by that great day, if it, the fire of it, cleanse their bodies by sensible torments, (for, that which we speak of▪ comes to passe after the restoring of bodies,) then it is plaine how the man escapes through
fire, whose workes are consumed by the fire, which punishes the man by whom they are done. If this fire cannot be properly understood to try what every mans work is, it will be nothing unproper to understand the judgement of God to be the fire which examines mens workes; by which examination, they which have built hay and stubble, upon the foundation of Christ, shall loose what they have built, and yet themselves scape through that fire of conflagration, which shall involve those that hold not the foundation, with their works. The other text of S. Paul is more obscure then this, and yet, being brought to prove this purpose, cannot here be balked. 1 Cor. XV. 29. What shall be∣come of those that are baptized for the dead? why are they then baptized for the dead? The Commentaries upon Saint Pauls Epistles, that go under Saint Ambrose his name, tell us plainly, that there were some then, who, if a man were prevented of Baptisme by death, baptized another for him, for fear he should either not rise at all, or not well. And this he saith, Saint Paul hereby alloweth not, onely argueth, that this supposeth the resurrection. And true∣ly I showed you before, that, according to Epiphanius, the Cerinthians did in∣deed, at that time, baptize another for any that was dead in that case, having imbraced Christianity, but dying before he was come to be baptized. Of the Marcionites S. Chrysostome upon the place, and Tertulliane, de resurrectione mortuorum XLVIII. and contra Marc. V. 10. do witnesse the same. Where∣upon it need not be said, that the Marcionites were not in Saint Pauls time because they derived their customes from the Gnosticks that were. Nor can I allow Saint Chrysostome, that , can signify here, ; upon condition of rising agine from the dead; as being baptized upon condition of that which the Gospel promiseth. I grant,  may signify, . But that  should sig∣nify , no example justifyeth. Nor does Saint Chrysostome cure it by expounding , to signify, . For if Christians may be said to be baptized , as, for the recovering of their bodies from death; they cannot therefore be said to be baptized , because their bodies are alive. And divers Copies, in the second place, in stead of  read , or, . As you may see in the readings of the Great Bible. And  will not serve to signify, : But requires the sense which the Syriack renders,  in stead of the dead. Now the objection is easily satisfied. For it may be demanded, why Saint Paul, writing to Gods people, informes them not that this was not well done. For, he writes to Gods people indeed, but, upon that which was done by those who seduced Gods people: And therefore, need not stand to condemn that from whence he argues, condemning all along, those who pretended to seduce Gods people. This is the supposition upon which I must argue. False Chri∣stians baptized others for those who, intending to be Christians, were prevent∣ed with death, before they could be baptizd. That this was done in regard to the resurrection, you need not believe the supposed S. Ambrose, it would not serve Saint Paul, to prove the resurrection from that which they did, other∣wise. That the benefit which they might find at the resurrection by being baptized must be expected to come by the prayers of the Church, which al∣wayes prayed for Christians, never for those that were not baptized; is that which is demanded of them, who will never give any other pertinent reason, why others should be baptized for those who were dead without Baptisme. When it was found, that Judas Maccabaeus his souldiers, that were slain in the battell▪ had committed sacriledge, in turning to their own use things consecra∣ted to the Idols; we read that they betook themselves to prayer, and besought God, that the sinne committed might wholy be put out of remembrance. And that Judas made a gathering throughout the Company, to the summe of M M. Drach∣mes of silver, and sent it to Jerusalem, to offer a sin-offering, doing therein very well and honestly, in that he was mindfull of the resurrection. For, if he had not
hoped that they who were slaine should rise againe, it had been superfluous and vaine to pray for the dead. And also, in that he perceived, that there was great favour laid up for those that died godly, it was an holy and good thought▪ whereup¦upon he made reconciliation for the dead, that they might be delivered from sinne. This we read 2 Maccab. XII. 42, 43, 44, 45. The consequence whereof may stand upon two presumptions. He that taketh it not for Historicall truth, pre∣ferreth his own empy fansy before all times and persons that have admitted it. He that would have it passe for Gods word, must shew the writer to have been inspired by God, of which there remaines no Tradition in the Church. What should hinder the fact to be true? Doth not the Law, which provideth no sa∣crifice for sinnes unreconcilable by the Law, provide sacrifices for sacrilege? Referre but the particular of the case to the determination of Gods people, and the Elders which obliged it in every age, what is there in the relation that agrees not with the Law? Did our Lord Christ or his Apostles, by word or writing, ever blame any such practice? Thus farre there is nothing to render it either suspect for truth, or if true, contrary to the Law. What have we in the New Testament, for it or against it? S. Paul 2 Tim. I. 16, 17, 18. God grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; For he refreshed me many times, and was not ashamed of my chaine: But being in Rome, carefully sought and found me. The Lord grant him to find mercy of the Lord in that day. For, how many things he furnished me with at Ephesus, thou better knowest. Shall I say that Onesiphorus was alive at Rome, when S Paul writ this, and that therefore, he prayeth for his houshold apart, and himself apart? Let impartiall reason judge, whether Saint Paul would have prayed for him that was with him at Rome alive, as one, who, coming to Rome, and not ashamed of his bonds, found him out and refreshed him? Or whether he prayes for him being dead, that he may finde mercy in that day; For his family onely, that they may finde mercy. But, fall that how it may, he prays for that which could not befall him till the day of judgement; and therefore, may be prayed for, on behalfe of those who are not come to the day of judgement, though dead. And there∣fore all those Scriptures, which make the reward of the world to come to de∣pend upon the triall of the day of judgement, do prove that we are to pray for the issue of it, in behalfe of all, so long as it is coming. Besides Ephes. IV. 30. John III. 2. Luke XXI. 18. and 2 Thes. I. 6-9. quoted afore. Saint Paul 1 Cor. I. 8. Who shall also confirme you unto the end, that you may be blamelesse in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts III. 19. Repent ye and be converted, that your sinnes may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord. Phil. II. 16. That I may rejoyce in the day of Christ, that I have not runne in vaine, nor laboured in vaine. 1 Thes. II. 19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoycing? are not even ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? 1 Pet. I. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed at the last time. 1 Cor. V. 5. that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 2 Tim. IV. 8. Henceforth, there is laid up for me a crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. Luke XIV. 14. Thou shalt be recompensed at the re∣surrection of the just. For all which, there were no reason to be given, but the mention of the day of judgement would be every where utterly impertinent, if the reward were declared at the houre of death, and that judgement which then passeth. For how can that be expected, which is already injoyed. You have seen the souls of the Martyrs, that appear to Saint John before Gods Throne, where none but Martyrs appeare, as I have argued; bidden to expect the conummation of their company, before the vengeance of God be exerci∣sed upon their persecutors. Apoc. VI. 9, 10, 11. VII. 14—After this ven∣geance is exercised, and they had raigned M. yeares with Christ, and the devil was loosed againe, and had brought Gog and Magog to fight a∣gainst Gods Church, and they had been destroyed, and the generall judgement represented, Apoc. XX. the Spirit returneth to show Saint John the New Jerusalem, containing those that see Gods face, and have his Name upon
their foreheads, Apoc. XXI. XXII. 1-5. Who have no need of the Sunne, be∣cause God is their light, and shall raigne for everlasting. For, after all this againe, The Spirit and the bride say come: And let him that heareth say come: And let him that thirsteth come, and let who will come, and take of the water of life for nothing. And, he that testifyeth these things saith; Indeed I come quick∣ly, Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus. What demandeth all this? That which seemeth not to be refused, admitting the consequence of the Visions. That those souls, who appear before Gods Throne, pray for the second com∣ing of Christ, and the consummation of all things. The renewing of their pray∣er Apoc. VI. after the representation of the generall judgement, Apoc. XX. inforceth it. The Saints, therefore in heaven still desiring the second coming of Christ, is it marvaile, if there remaine something to be prayed for on behalf of inferiour rankes; having showed, that those who were sealed and saved in Jewry are not described to appeare in heaven before Gods Throne? Whither we admit all that dy in the state of Grace to be with Christ, as well as S. Paul, and that in Paradise, taken for the third heavens; Or, reserve, as well we may reserve so much privilege to an Apostle, and a martyr, (according to that which I have showed you out of the Apocalypse) as not to equall with him all that dy in the state of Grace; Certaine we are, the estate of those that dy in Gods grace admits a solicitous expectation of the day of judgement, though assured of the issue of it. That is it which, so many texts of Scripture alledged afore, signifie nothing if they signify it not. What is it then, that reason, grounded upon the Scriptures requires? Certainly, did our justification consist in the immediate imputation of Christs righteous∣nesse, revealed by that Faith, which, therefore justifieth, no man could dy in the state of Grace, but be must be as pure as the Blessed Virgine; and he that can digest such excessive assertions, may think strange, that any difference should be made among them that dye in Grace. But I must and do suppose that which I have proved, that the performance of that common Christianity, the undertaking whereof justifies, makes as much difference between the righ∣teousnesse of severall Christians, as must needes be found between the Highest of Gods Saints, and the Lowest of those that escape the second death. And therefore inferre, that, the difference of theire estates, between death, and the generall judgement, must needes be answereable; though, from their death, they know, to whether lot they be deputed▪ as for their particular judgment. And this will necessarily follow, supposing this world to be the Race, and the next the Gole, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, which hath been declared. For, supposing that he who keepeth account of his steps, and watcheth over his wayes, may be ready for Gods call, and appeare before him without sinne, having washed it away by the blood of Christ infused in the tears of finall repentance; Must we not of necessity suppose, that, they who doe not so (who are, evidently, the farre greater part of Christians) departing with the guilt and slaine of such sinne upon them, must needs appear with it before God, notwithstanding the Covenant of Grace? Againe, the ove of this world, and of our selves, from whence such sinne proceedeth, and would have proceeded, should men proceed to live; suppose it be such as drives not Gods Spirit away, because incident to that humane railty which the Covenant of Grace presupposeth; how shall it be washed out of that soule after death, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, which hath failed of the Covenant of Grace, in not washing it away, being alive? It is therefore necessarily consequent upon the premises, that Christiane soules, which escape the second death, because the love of God was alive in them to strive against sinne, though not to clear them of it, continue in that estate wherein they departed, till the generall judgement; As, for the love of God, or of the World, so for the joy, or remorse which they have in them selves for it. That the purity of this joy, or the mixture of it with remorse, be not meerly the punishment of sinne committed, but the effect and conse∣quence
of the estate in which it departeth, though the sin which it committed in the Body be the meanes to constitute this estate. That the departure there∣of bring it to that anxiety, concerning the everlasting judgement, which is proportionable to the love of the creature which it departeth with. That, be∣ing reposed in an estate and place of refreshment, (which those secret recepta∣cles and chambers of Esdras seem to signify) it remaine subject, as well to those clouds of sorrow and remorse, which the sense of sinne done, and the love of God, which hath not conquered the love of the Creature, produceth, as to that light and refreshment, which the Spirit of God may create. That the end of all this may be the trial of the day of judgement, purging away all the dregs and drosse of sinne, and of the love of this world, which may remaine, in soules that depart, or are found then alive in the state of Grace, by the fiercenesse and sharpnesse of that griefe, which the triall of the generall judgement shall cause. It may be thought, that the fire wherewith the day of the Lord is revealed, seizing their bodies which they shall have resumed, by the paine which it breedeth, purgeth away the love of the creature. And it may be thought, that, the examination of the conscience, the conviction of sinne, the remorse and shame of so many disloyalties, the feare of the Judge, and in fine, the strictnesse of the judgement is the fire which Saint Paul sayes shall try every mans work; (as the fire which burns up the world shall their bodies) and sever the dregs and drosse of them, to the Devil and his Angels, from whom they came, with the dregs and drosse of the world, which, divines say, shall be conveyed to Hell, as the inke of it. But, hereupon, the Apostle, when he sayes; Ye are come to the spirits of just men made perfect. Hebrews XII. 23. may be understood, that they are thus perfected; supposing him to speake of the generall judgement to come to passe then straight, as the destruction of Jerusalem did, and, that therefore he saith; Ye are come. But he may be also understood to say, that they are perfected by Christianity, in comparison of Judaisme, as our Lord saith; Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: And as he saith, that, the least in the kingdome of heaven is greater then John the Baptist. Whereas, if we understand him to say; Ye are come to the Spirits of just men perfected, between the departure and the day of judgement, we make him to say that, which, is no where else either said or intimated by the Scripture. And that is it which distinguisheth my opinion from the position of Purga∣tory, or rather, the doctrine of the scriptures from the decree of the Councils of Florence and Trent. For, will the present Church of Rome be content with such an estate of soules, as no man can be helped out of? What were Purgato∣ry worth, if men were perswaded, that there is no meanes to translate their soules out of the flames thereof into heaven, before the generall judgement? Or, what were Christianity the worse, if all were perswaded that those soules, which wee speake of all this while, need their friends prayers, to help them through this middle estate, and especially, through the dreadfull tryall of the day of judgement? Surely thus much the worse, that men must of necessity keep a better account of their steps here, and take a better care to cleare themselves of the sins which they commit, that they may passe it with the more joy and cherefullnesse. Well may they part with the drosse and stubble of the imme∣diate imputation of Christs merits & sufferings, (which they have built upon the foundation of the remission of sins and everlasting life, in consideration of the same, but upon condition of Christanity) upon these termes here, rather then part with it at their charge, then, if perhaps they have not failed of the foundation, by the meanes of it. And, upon these termes, I am not troubled at the words of our Lord Mat. XII. 32. Who shall speake a word against the Son of man, it shall be remitted him; But, who shall speake against the Holy Ghost, it shall never be remitted him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. For, as for mine owne part, I finde the force of the words well enough sa∣tisfied,
taking it onely for, a fashion of speech, signifying onely; that that sin could by no meanes be pardoned, no not in the world to come; not suppo∣sing that the world to come hath meanes to pardon so great sins, as this world hath no meanes to doe. I confesse, according to my opinion, there is, in some sort, pardon for sins in the other world, though, absolutely there is not; be∣cause there is none, but in vertue of the covenant of Grace, the termes whereof onely take place in this world, though the effect thereof extend to the world to come. For, after departure in the state of Grace, for a man to know, that there is no more danger of failing of everlasting life, is absolutely that, which the greatest Saints of this world could never attaine to; Though some effects of sin stick to those that are so assured between death and the day of judge∣ment; in respect to which, he who is absolutely said to be pardoned, because in no danger of forfeiting it, may be said, so far not to be pardoned, as the continuance of those effects imports. But, there is nothing in my opinion to signifie, that there is meanes of obtaining pardon for those sins in the next world, which there is no meanes to obtain pardon for in this; Which, this say∣ing of our Lord, at the foote of the letter signifies. And therefore I, for my part, can very well rest satisfied with this sense, taking the inlarging of it, by men∣tioning the world to come, for an elegance which common speech beareth, and that of our Lord frequenteth. But, if any man thinke I respect not the Fathers, that have expounded it to the sense which I refuse not; the rule of faith being safe, let every man injoy his opinion in it. Of the figure , which Grotius observes in the words, in the world to come, whereby, it shall not be for given him in the world to come, signifyes; He shall be soundly punished for it in the world to come; let them who are capable see him discourse learnedly in his Anotati∣ons upon this place. As little am I troubled at that other text of the Gospell, Mat. V. 26. Luke XI. 58. Thou shalt not come forth till thou hast paid the utmost farthing. For, I can easily grant, that the taking away of those effects of sin, which remaine in those that dy in grace, according to my opinion, may be said to come, by paying the utmost farthing. But, I need not grant, that he who saies, thou shalt not come forth till thou hast paid the utmost farthing, saies; Thou mayest come forth by paying the utmost farthing. For, the condition of paying the utmost farthing will be unpossible, if wee understand the prison to be the Lake of the damned, which, the executioner mentioned afore requires; In S. Luke for a Preface to the Parable, Why doe yee not judge what is right from your soules; saith our Lord; That is, why doe ye not judge what ye are to doe in the mater of my Gospell, by that which you use to doe in worldly matters? If you be liable to an action, you find it best to compound it, before the judge give sentence, and grant execution upon it. For, then you must stand to the extremity of the Law. The preaching of the gospell showes, that the Law o God hath an Action a∣gainst you, which you may take up, by becoming Christians, and yet you will not doe it. In S. Mathew, it followes upon the precept of being reconciled to a mans brother; which showes, that God accepts not that sacrifice which is not offered in charity. But, it cannot signifie lesse then in S. Luke; That our Lord, upon that occasion, puts all in mind to be reconciled to God because there is no redemption if he grant execution against us. This execution then is, either upon refusing the termes of reconcilement, or, upon failing of that which we undertake by accepting them; That is, not upon those failleures which may consist with reconcilement, as those who would have these words to sig∣nifie Purgatory imagine; but which destroy it: And therefore the limitation, till thou hast paid the utmost farthing; signifies as Mat. I. 15. He knew her not till she had brought fourth her first borne son; though he never knew her▪ That is to say, his utmost farthing shall never be paid. My opinion would allow me to accept of Tertullians and S. Cyprians sense of this text; who do indeed acknowledge, the voiding of those effects of sin, which may remain upon those that depart in the state of Grace, between death and the day of judgement, to
be the paying of this utmost farthing. But, I have shewed you why it agrees not with the intent of the words. And if it did, it were nothing to Purgatory, because Tertullian expresseth it to be paid, mra resurrectioni, by the delay of the resurrection, that is, not before te generall judgement; whereby Purgatory is quite spoiled: For, pretending the expinting of veniall sin, (which consisteth with reconcilement) together with satisfying the debt of temporall punishment, reserved by God upon that sin which he remitteth, it cannot be intended by him that gives warning of seeking reconcilement, not, of voiding the penalties which may remaine when it is obtained. Where you may see, by survaying the scriptures which have been debated, that there is not the least pre∣tense in them for paying this debt, by induring the flames of Purgatory, for that sin which is forgiven afore. But, that all satisfaction endeth in voiding the guilt of sin, by appeasing the wrth of God for it before wee goe hence. There be other texts, both of the old and New Testament, that are usually alleaged in this dispute. But because, rather for show then substance I will rather pre∣sume that all reasonable men may see where the consequence failes, then use so many words as it requires to show it. He shall sit as a refiner that purifieth silver, and all purifi the Sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in rightousnesse, saith the Prophet Mala∣chi III. 3. But manifestly speaking of the first coming of Christ and triall which the Gospel passes them through, that turn Christians upon mature advice. Whatsoever trial the second coming of Christ may bring with it, correspondent to the first, it will be nothing to Purgatory, the day of judgement determining it. As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth the prisoners out of the pit where in was no water; Saith the Prophet Zachary IX. 11. speaking of the returne, from the Captivity of Babylon, and of the prince of Israel that should figure ot our Lord Christ, and rule from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth. Whereby it appeareth that, the spiritual sense of this Pro∣phesy, ending n the redemption of mankind by the death of Christ, and his Kingdome, by the preaching of his Gospel, can by no meanes be extended to any delivering out of Purgatory; and if it could, must not be intended to take place before the second coming. Which intent would also appear ground∣lesse in this; Because I have showed, that he did not deliver the soules of the Fathers out of the Devils hands at his first coming, which this text is alleaged to prove no lesse then Purgatory. For, this will confine it to the delivery of mankind from sin, by the death of our Lord Christ and his sufferings.
CHAP. XXVIII. Ancient opinions in the Church, of the place of soules before the day of judge∣ment. No Tradition that the Fathers were in the Ʋerge of Hell, under the Earth. The reason of the difference in the expressions of the Fathers of the Church. What Tradition of the Church for the place of Christs soule, during his death, The Saints soules in secret mansions, according to the Tradition of the Church. Prayer for the dead supposeth the same. No Purgatory according to the Tradition of the Church. LEt us now consider the Tradition of the Church, in these particulars. Justin the Martyr in his dispute with Trypho the Jew, by the example of Samuel, proveth, that the soules of the Fathers and Prophets were in the hands of the Powers of darkenesse; And that, by the prayer of our Lord Psal. XXII. 21. wee are taught to pray, at our departure, that God would not give us up to them: as he, at his death, commends his soule into his Fathers hands. It s wel enough known that Clemens Alexandrinus believes, that both our Lord & his Apostles went into Hel to deliver from thence such soules, as should admit that which he came to preach. He followed in it, the Apocryphall visi∣on, of Hermes, then in request, where this is still found libro. III. similitud. III. and, what followers he hath in this opinion, you may see by the late Lord Pri∣mate his answer to the Jesuites Challenge p. 274. S. Austine de Haer. LXXIX. after Philastrius de Haer. LXXIV. counts this opinion in the list of Heresies; Yet doubted not, that he did deliver thence, whom he found fit, Epist. XCIX. de Gen. ad Lit. XII. 33, 34. Nor S. Jerom, that he did them good who were there, though, how it can not be said, in Ephes. IV. libro II. To the same purpose, in IV. Dan. I. in III. Lament. II. That this opinion had great vogue in the Church and must be counted in the number of Ecclesiasticall positions, cannot be denyed. That it is, or ever was held, as of the Rule of Faith, it must. Marcion was the fist that placed the Fathers soules in Hell, that he might assigne heaven for the part of his Christ, and his God, as wee learne by Ter∣tullian IV. 3, 4. to wit, to entertaine his disciples, For, this ingageth Ter∣tullian to oppose the Gulfe, and the rich mans lifting up his eyes in Hell, for arguments, that Abrahams bosome is no part of it, but higher then Hell, though not in heaven, to refresh all believers, Abr. children, til the resurrection, for he allowes paradise, onely to Martyrs, which he maketh also the place under the Alar. where S. Iohn saw onely Martyrs soules, (though else where Apolog. cap XLVII. and in his Poem de Judicio cap. VIII. he assigneth it to incertaine the Saints soules, without any difference) alleaging a revelation to Perpetua, a Montanist Virgine, to that purpose, de Resurr. XLIII. And therefore, de Anima LV. makes that, which he made before higher then hell, but not in hea∣ven, a part of hell where our Lord visited the Fathers soules; to wit, the up∣per part of it, being all contayned within the entrailes of the earth. To the same purpose▪ Iraeneus, V. 31. saith it is manifest, that the soules of Christians goe into an invisible place (the English of ) assigned them by God, to at∣tend the resurrection in it; Because our Lord, being to undergoe the lot of mortals stayed till the third day, in the lower parts of the earth, where the soules of the dead were. And, though he allege for this an Apocryphall pass∣age, which he takes to be Esayes III. 23. but Jeremies IV. 39. yet saies it no more but, that the Lord God of Israel remembred his dead, a sleep in the delve of the Earth and went down to them to bring them the news of his saving health; Of which preaching otherwise Irenaeus and Tertullian say nothing. Here then, to show that there is no Tradition in the Church for Limbus Patrum, you have in the opinion of Irenius and Tertullian, a state of
coutent and joy for all righteous soules, till the resurrection, though within the earth for the place; Where our Saviour was with them, during his death. But, it is stil more particularly described, in a fragment of a very ancient Christian, who is called Josephus, but is thought to be Caius, that writ a∣gainst the Montanists in Tertullians time: The booke is mentioned by Pho∣tius XLVIII. the fragment is published by Heschelius, in his annotations there, And there is a copy of it in the Library at Oxford, a transcript whereof I have to show, by the favour of the late learned Doctor Langbane. The tenor of it is, that  is a place under the Earth, where light cometh not, and therefore darke, and assigned for soules to be guarded by Angels, that distribute them their lots for a time. One quarter of it is the lake of unquencha∣ble fire, which the wicked shall be thrown into at the last day, when the righ∣teous shall receive the kingdome, who, in the meane time, are in the same , but quartered a part. For, there is one common descent, at the entrance where∣of stands the Archangel, with his host, distributing the souls that are conducted by theire Angels, the righteous, to the right hand, to be lighted and conducted with melody by the good Angels to the company of the righteous, in a place of light and joy; The wicked as prisoners, with violence and shame on the left, to, hard by the said lake, hearing the boyling of it, and seeing the righteous in joy afar off, and expecting, as the righteous better things, so they worse, at the day of judgement, Set aside the limiting of the place to be under the earth, in what description can the scriptures better agree, then in this? The verses of the Sibyls libro. I. conducting the three sons of Noe to Acheron in the house of , tell us, that there, they shall be honoured, . Because they are the off▪ spring of the blessed, happy men themselves, whom the Lord of Host, gave a good mind, and conser∣red counsels with them, who shall be happy though they goe to , or Hell. And is not this a cleare resolution of S. Austins doubt, whether Abrahams bosom be∣long to Hell or to Paradise Epist. LVII. in Psalm. XXXV. and whether inferi, or Hell, doe ever signifie a good place, in the Scripture, as Abrahams bosome certainely doth de Gen. ad lit. XII. 23, 34. which he supposeth to be resolved in the negative, Epist. XCIX. But finds no absurdity in the affirmative de Civit. XX, 15. For, taking  onely for a place invsible, where the souls of good as well as bad are disposed of untill the day of judgement, in which the Scriptures and the Church both agree; If inferi be the Latine of it every where, Inferi also must signifie such a place. But, taking it to signifie a place under the Earth as it is true the word Inferi signifieth; who dare undertake, that either the scriptures have taught, or, there is any tradition of the Church, that the soules of the righteous, till the resurrection, are guarded under the Earth, though the authors hitherto quoted have believed it; whose opinion, therefore, in that point, is no part of the Tradition of the Church. S. Austine, for certaine, admitteth all but that, resolving, Euchirid. CIIX. Tempus quod inter hominis mortem & ultimam resurrectionem interpositum est, animas abditis receptaculis continet; sicut unaquaeque digna est, vel requie vel aerumna▪ pro eo quod sortita est in carne dum viveret. The time that comes be∣tween a mans death and the last resurrection guards soules in secret receptacles, as every one is worthy of rest or sorrow, according to the Lot of it whilst lived in the flesh, For, what are these secret receptacles, but the invisible place which  signifieth? Pope Pius I▪ in his letter to Justus Bishop of Vicuna, (the ancient∣est that the latine Church hath, that is unquestionable) Presbyteri illi, qui, ab Apostolis educati, usque ad nos pervenerunt, a domino vocati, in cubilibus aeternis clausi tenentur. The ancients (saith he) who, being bred by the Apostles▪ were come to our time, being called by the Lord, are kept shut up in eternall bed-chambers; to wit, until the last judgement. Novatianus, of S. Cyprians time in his book de Tri∣nitate I. Quae infra terram sunt, neque ipsa sunt digestis & ordinatis potestatibus vacua: Locus enim est, quo, piorum impiorumque animae ducuntur, futuri judicii praejudicia sentientes. Nor are the parts under the Earth void of orderly dis∣posed Powers. For, there is the place, to which the soules of the Godly and the wick∣ed
are conducted, feeling the prejudice of the judgement which is to come The same saith Origen, all but the place, de Principiis IV. 2. Qui de hocmundo secundum communem istam mortem recedunt, pro actibus suis & meritis dispensantur, prut digni fuerint judicati; Alii quidem in locum qui dicitur Infernus, alii in sinum Abrahae, per diversas mansiones. Those that goe out of this world by this common death, are disposed of according to theire works, and de∣serts; some into the place called Hell▪ others into the bosome of Abraham, accor∣ding to severall lodgings. So also in Num▪ XXI. hom. XXVI. S. Hilary saith the same in Psalm. II. & CXX. For thus he writeth; Exeuntes de corpore, ad in∣troitum illum regni caelestis, per custodiam Domini fideles omnes reservabuntur, in sinu scilicet Abrabae interim collocati, quo adire impios interjectum chaos inhibet, quosque introcundi rursum in regnum coelorum tempus adveniat. All the faith∣full▪ going out of the body, to the entrey of the heavenly kingdom, shall be kept there under the Lords guard, as placed, for the time, in Abrahams bosome, whether, the gulf interposed prohibits the wicked to come, till the time of re entring the kingdom of heaven come againe. And therefore, the same he meanes, when he saies in Psalmum CXXXVIII. that, the Law of human necessity, which our Lord refused not, is this, that, the body being buryed, the soule goe ad Inferos For in Psalmum II. he exemplifies in Dives and Lazarus. And Lactantius VII. 21. Nec tamen quisquam putet, animas post mortem protinus judicari. Omnes in una communique custodia detinentur, dones tempus adveniat, quo maximus index meritorum faciat examen. Yet let no man think that soules are judged straight after death. They are kept in one common guard, till the time come for the Soveraigne Judge to examine theire deserts. He denies them to be judged, whom Novatianus acknowledgeth to be prejudged, or forejudged. He means our common guard, but intends not to deny the gulfe which it is parted with. S. Ambrose de Bono Mortis X. XI. saith, that those lodgings, which the Apocry∣phichall Esdras speaketh of, are the many lodgings, which our Lord saith are in his fathers house Iohn XIV. 2. and, speaking of the Gentiles; Satis fuerat dixisse illis, quod liberatae animae a corporibus  peterent, id est, locum qui non videtur, quem locum Latine infernum dicimus. It had been enough for them to have said, that soules, freed from their bodies, goe to , that is, to a place not seen, which place wee call hell in Latine. Signifying that, according to Christianity, all soules, going to Esdras his lodgings, may be said to goe to , which the La∣tine makes to be under the Earth; But whether Christianity so understand it or no, not expressing. Againe, Ergo, dum expectatur plenitudo temporis, ex∣pectant anims remunerationem debitam Alias manet paena, alias gloria: Et ta∣men nec illae interim sine injuria, nec istae sine fructu sunt. While therefore the ful∣nesse of time is expected, soules also expect their own reward. Some punishment, some glory attendes; yet neither they without hardship, nor these without bene∣fit in the meane time. Yet, as it followes, neither grieved with cares, neither vexed with the remembrance of that which is past, as the wicked; but, fore∣seeing their rest and glory to come, injoy the quiet of their lodgings, under the guard of Angels. If it be excepted, that there is; no mention of the Fathers soules. Let it be considered, how many Church-writers have made the bosome of Abraham in which Lazarus rested before our Lords death, a place of rest and refreshment from death till the day of judgement. Their words you may find in the answer to the Jesuits Challenge named afore p. 260-267. Where, those expositions of the Gospell which goe under the name of Theophilus of Antiochia & Euthymius of Lions write two opinions, the one placing it under the earth, the other above, because the rich man lifted up his eyes; From whence, the second of those dialogues against the Marcionists that goe under Origens name, argueth that it is in heaven. So far is the ancient Church from being agreed, that those store-houses, wherein, it is agreed, that all soules are kept till the generall judgement, are beneath the earth. And, though he was a Christian that writ the Apocryphall book of Esras II. from whom S. Ambros and S. Austine receive their store-houses of Soules; yet speakes it in the person of Esdras, concerning the Fathers of the Old Testament. In the meane time, of the removing of them, by the de∣scent
of Christ out of the Verge of Hell into heaven, not one word in all this; which certainely may serve to evidence, that there never was nor is any such Tradition in the Church In fine, the descent of righteous soules in to hell, and the deliverance of them from thence by the descent of our Lord Christ may be understood two severall waies; Either according to the literall sense, of the old Testament or according ot the mysticall sense of the New. For, it is manifest, that Adam was condemned to labor the earth first, and then to returne to the earth; And this, being expul∣sed out of Paradise. The secret of Christianity consisting in this; that our Lord Christ should restore the posterity of Adam, from those sorrowes which brought him to the earth, whence he was taken, to Paradise, whence he was ex∣pulsed; was not to be revealed, though it was to take effect, in all, who, in e∣ffect, though not in forme, imbraced and held the Covenant of Grace, during the old Testament. The land of promise, and the blessings thereof, were then the pledges of this hope. To leave them by death, was then, to acknowledge themselves liable to the second death, which returning to the earth signified, so long as their returne to Paradise was not revealed; Though, to them which understood what the Land of promise signified, it was to returne into paradise. The new testament succeeding to reveale the mystery of the old, must it not needes seeme strange, that the Fathers of the old Testament should behave themselves towards death, as they who had not this hope? Supposing this reason not then to be declared, it neede not seeme strange; not supposing the same, it seems to cal in question som thing of our common Christianity. The Gos∣pel opens the secret, representing Dives in Hel torments, Lazarus in Abrahams bosom? But, our Lord Christ himselfe being brought downe to the dust of the earth, to deliver mankind from the second death, signified by the same; did our common redemption require, that he should come any further under death, and them who had the power of it, our common Faith might seeme maimed in not believing it. But, the worke of redemption being accomplished upon the Crosse, the effect of it was to be tryed, by the disposing of his soule. Which effect, whether those that belonged to the new Testament under the Old un∣derstood by the scriptures of the Law, they understood it as did the Devil, by theire deliverance out of his hands; For, the reason of their deliverance, he might not understand, till the rising of Christ againe taught it. When there¦fore, wee see the soules of Adam and his posterity assigned, by the Fathers of the Church, to the powers of darkenesse; let us understand it to hold accor∣ding to the Old Testament, and it will comprehend also, the souls of the Fathers; Who belonged to the New Testament. When we heare them describe them in the rest of Abrahams bosome, according to that which our Lord revealeth, let us understand the effect of the New Testanent, in them that dyed under the Old. Without distinguishing thus, I conceive, it will be impossible to recon∣cile the Fathers, to themselves and the common faith. For, pressing that which they say on either side, you will not faile to make them crosse one an other, as well as the Scriptures. But, thus distinguishing, the common faith will remaine, that which Macrina, in Gregory Nyssens dialogue de anima & resur∣rectione answers to the question, Where  is; To wit, that the translation of the soule from this visible world, to that which is not seen, is all that can be had, either from Hethen writers, or from the Scriptures; There being nothing un∣der the earth, but that which answereth this Hemispere? above the earth. Which clause is added, to meete with one opinion of the Gentiles; that the lower he∣mispere is the place of soules, and the torments of Hell (which they call Tarta∣ra) as much beneath it, as heaven is above this. Onely here it must be pro∣vided, that the gulfe be not forgotten, which our Lord fixeth, between A∣brahams bosome, and the place of torments. Dionysius Eccles. Hierarch. Cap. II. seemeth to agree with Gregory Nyssen, and so doe others, whom, unlesse you distinguish thus, you wil not find to speak things consequent to themselvs. And I am much confirmed in it, first, by the difference of opinions, among the fathers, concerning Samuels soul; Which we as there be enough of them, that
cannot indure, to yeild it to have been in the devils power, to raise; so are they by that meanes obliged to maintaine the rest of the Fathers souls, with Samuels, to have gon into Abrahams bosom, with Lazarus. Secondly, by their agreement in acknowledging, that Paradise, which was shut upon man for the sinne of Ad∣am, is opened by the death of Christ, to receive the righteous. For to con∣ceive, that they understood this of that Paradise which Adam was expulsed, would be to make them too childish. But, understanding it of that estate which that Paradise signified, you have Saint Basil assigning Paradise to Lazarus de Jejunio Hom. I. Besides another Homily intitled to Zeno Bishop of Verona. Nay, you have expresly in Philo Carpathius upon Cant. VI. 2. My love is gone into his garden: Or, his Paradise; Tunc enim Paradisum triumphator ingres∣sus est, cum ad inferos penetravit. Then did he enter Paradise in triumph, when he pierced into hell: Making the beds of spices there to be the souls of the Fathers, to whom our Lord conducted the good thiefe. And Olympiodorus upon Cant. III. saith, that some make Paradise under the earth, and that there Dives saw Lazarus: Others in heaven; Whereas the letter of the Scripture placeth it upon the earth. But howsoever, that the righteous are both in joy and peace, and also in Paradise; Thinges not to be reconciled, not distinguishing as I do. Lastly, the reason of Faith setleth me upon this ground. The reason of Faith, I say, not the rule of Faith. For, I do not say that any part of the dis∣pute belongs to that, which the salvation of all Christians necessarily requireth them to believe. He who understandeth, that himself is saved by imbracing Christianity, and living according to it, I do not understand why he should be damned, because he understood not by what meanes the Fathers afore Christ were saved; provided he deny not their salvation, to the disparagement of Christianity, whereof they were the forerunners. And this is the case of Hermes, and Justine, and Clemens, and if there were any others, who thought, that the Fathers, or the Philosophers were saved by believing in Christ, at his descent into hell; meerly because they understood not the ground of that difference, between the litterall and mysticall sense of the Old Testament, which I have said. Indeed, in regard it is, by consequence, destructive to Christianity, that the Fathers should have attained salvation any wayes but as Christians; in that regard, I answer, the position is, by consequence, prejudiciall to Christi∣anity. But because, by that consequence, which the most censorious of the error do not owne, and, not owning, necessarily incurre some other inconve∣nience to Christianity; I say not that they destroy the common faith who hold it, but that they destroy the true reason of it, which subsisteth not, unlesse we grant, that the Fathers obtained salvation by Christ; Nor that, unlesse we grant, that they came not under the Devils Power by death, who died qualified for salvation, as that time required. There remaines no question, what company the soul of Christ was with, for the time that it remained parted from the body, nor how the descent there∣of to Hell is to be understood, supposing the premises. The Tradition of the descent of Christs soul into hell can by no meanes be parted from the Tra∣dition of an intent to visite the soules of the Fathers. That supposes, that the soules of the Fathers were disposed of under the earth; (whether in the intrails of the earth, or in the hemisphere below us, as the Heathen did imagine) And, infers, that the intent of it was to redeem them out of the devils hands, to go with our Lord Christ, into his kingdome. Could this be maintained to be the Tradition of the Church, I might be straitned by the Tradition of the Church. But, as I have showed it, to be, by consequence, prejudiciall to the Faith; So, I have showed, that there is no Tradition of the Church for the disposing of all soules, before Christ, under the earth, whether in the devils hands, or other∣wise. Nor▪ for the translating of any soule from under the earth to heaven, with Christ, and by Christ. But, for the continuance of all, in those unknown lodgings, where they are disposed, at their death, till the day of judgement, whether before or after Christ; Though the Latine hath no name to signify them, but inferi, or infernum, necessarily signifying, as to the originall
of the word, the parts beneath the earth. There is therefore no questi∣on to be made; as to the Tradition of the Church, that the soule of Christ, parting with the body, went to the soules of the Fathers, which the Gospell represents us in Abrahams bosom, (whether the death of Christ removing the debt of sin, which shut Paradise upon Adam, make that place known to us, by the name of Paradise, to which our Lord inducted the good thiefe; Or whether the Jewes had used that name, for the place, to which they believed the soules of the righteous do go) But, there is therefore no Tradition remaining of the descent of Christs soul into hell, to rescue the soules of the Fathers out of the Verge of Hell, (commonly called Limbus Patrum) to go with him into his kingdome. True it is which Irenaeus saith, and the Tradition of the Church will justify it, that our Lord Christ was to undergo the condition of the dead, for the redemption of mankind. And therefore, the separation of his humane soul from the body was really the condition, in consideration whereof, we are freed from the dominion of death. True it is, that this dominion of death is signified in the Old Test. by the returning of Adam to the earth of which he was made: And, that the grave is an earnest of the second death, in all those that belong not to the N. Test. while the Old was in force. Therefore, that our L. Christ was to undergo the condition common to mankinde, to which the first Adam was accursed, is a part of our common faith; Because the curse was to be voided by his undergoing of it. Accordingly therefore, you shall find by the answer to the Jesuites Challenge, Pag. 308-326. that the spoiling of Hell is attributed, by the Fa∣thers, to the rising of our Lord Christ from the grave, whereby, the law of death was voided. Which if it be true, what Tradition can there remaine in the Church, that our Lord Christs soule should harrow hell, and ransacke it of the soules of the Fathers, there detained, or in the Verge of it? Saint Basil de Sp. S. cap. 15. . How then do we go down to Hell aright? Imitating the buriall of Christ by Baptisme. For the bodies of these who are Baptized, are as it were buried in the water. Saint Chrysostome in 1 ad Cor. Hom XL. . For, to be baptized, and first to sink, then come up againe, is an Embleme of going down into Hell and coming up againe. And truly, if the force of Christs death in voiding the dominion of death stood by the merit of his sufferings; Then was the de∣scent of his flesh into the grave of force to that effect, without any descent further of his soul into the lower parts thereof. And, if the death of Christ, and his continuing in death for the time that God had appointed, was declared by God, to be accepted by him to that effect; then was his rising from death, his tri∣umph over hell and death; whereby, the title of his rising againe being declared, it must needs appear, that neither death nor hell, nor the devil, hath any more interest in Christians. Nor is it so strange, that the descent of Christ into hell should be mentioned by the Apostles Creed, after his buriall, if it signify not the descent of his soul; as it would be, that it should be left out of other Creeds, if it did signify, that it is necessary to the salvation of all so to believe. For, neither is it expressed in the Creed of Nicaea or Constantinople, nor was it found in that which the Church of Rome, or that which the Churches of the East used, saith Ruffinus upon the Creed; who, notwithstanding, expoundeth it, because the Church of Aquileia, which he belonged to, used it. Which, had the signification of it been a distinct truth, necessary to the salvation of all to be believed, the Churches could by no meanes have connived at one another, in not delivering it. And truly, seeing the dominion of death (intimating the second death, to which those who belong not to the New Testament are accursed) is signified in the Old Testament, by going under the earth; The signification of going down into Hell in the Creed, can by no meanes be thought superfluous, though our Lord neither went thither to rescue the Fathers soules, nor to triumph over the Powers of darknesse. For as thereby the common curse, from whence we are
redeemed, so is also the reason and meanes of our deliverance from it intimated. And seeing there is appearance, from that which hath been said, that the divell himself did not understand the secret of Gods intent, to dissolve his interest in mankind by the death of Christ, untill it appeared, by what right our Lord resumed his body, which he had Laid downe; this being declared in the other world, by his rising again, and, in signe thereof, the soules of the saints that slept rising againe with him, and resuming their bodies; there is no reason, why the mention of his resurrection, following immediately upon the descent into Hell, in the Creed, should not sufficiently expresse that tri∣umph, which this declaration importeth. Which triumph being effected by the Godhead, though in his flesh, it will be no marvaile to meet with some sayings of the Fathers, that ascribe it to his Godhead. Now, the common doctrine of the Schoole maketh it no matter of Faith, to believe the descent of Christs soule into that Hell, where the damned were; but onely to the Verge of it, where the souls of the Fathers were. It is enough, with them, that the effect of this Power reached to the place of the damned. Cardinall Bellarmine, when he published his controversies, held it probable, that the soul of Christ descend∣ed to the place of the damned; But, upon better consideration, in the review of them, thinks, that the other opinion of Thomas, and the rest of the Schoole, is to be followed. And yet it is not possible to distinguish between this Verge, and the lowest hell, by any Tradition of the Church. Nay, Durandus goes so farre out of their rode, as to maintaine, that the soul of Christ went not to hell, (that is to Lymbus) but onely by the effect of it, in making the soules of the Fathers happy; Which is, in my opinion, declaring to them the reason of their happinesse. And the opinion of Suarez the Jesuite is, remarkable; That, taking an Article of Faith for a truth necessary for the salvation of all Christians to be known, the descent of Christ into hell is no Article of Faith. For, that is not very necessary for single Christians to know. And, for that cause perhaps, it is not in the Nicene Creed, which whoso believeth, believes enough to save him. And that perhaps for this cause, some Fathers, expounding the Creed to the People, make no mention of it; In III. Disput. XLIII. Sect. II. and IV. I may adde, for the advantage of my opinion; That, if it be not necessary for single Christians to believe, much lesse is it necessary for the Church, as a body, to believe it. For, those things which the Church believeth as a body, it impo∣seth, to be believed, upon them who are of the body. But it cannot be rea∣sonable, for the Church as a body, to impose upon the members thereof, the beliefe of that, which, it is not necessary to their salvation, as single Christi∣ans, to believe. And therefore, allowing the conscientiousnesse of S. August∣ine, who, having presumed, that he who believes not the descent is no Christi∣ane, doubts not that, by the descent, as many were delivered, as Gods secter justice thought fit. Epist. XCIX. And of Saint Jerome in Eph. II. allowing some work of God to be managed by it, which we understand no more then, what good our Lords death did the good Angels; I allow also the reservedness of those of the Confession of Auspurg, or of Suisse, who, acknowledging the literall sense of this Article, find not themselves bound to maintaine, for what reason it was: I am not offended with those in the Church of England, that assigne the triumph of our Lord for the reason of it. But believing with Saint Gregory Nyssene, in Pascha & Resurrect. Christi & Epist. ad Eustath. that our Lord, by the descent of his body into the grave, abolished him that had the power of death, by his soul made way for the thiefe into Paradise, where it self was; count this enough for the salvation of all Christians to be belie∣ved: And therefore, that the Church cannot impose upon them, as the ne∣cessary meanes of their salvation, to believe any more. I do not intend to say much more then I said before, to show you, that the ancient Church, from the beginning, held the happinesse of the Saints souls to continue imperfect, till the resurrection of their bodies. Gennadius de dogmat. Eccles. LXXVIII. LXXIX. will have us to take it for the doctrine of the Church, that, the soules of the Fathers before Christ were in hell til they were delivered thence by Christ. That since Christ, they go straight to Christ, ex∣pecting
the resurrection of their bodies, that with them they may attaine in∣tire happinesse. And, that this doctrine had, for some time, great vogue in the Church, I deny not; Nor intend to deny, that the Saints are with Christ, some whereof the Apocalypse represents before the Throne; But, that there is no Tra∣dition for the translating of the Fathers souls, &, that the saints are in Abrahams bosom (or Paradise with them) till the resurrection, I conceive I have showed, by clearing the sayings of the most ancient Christians from the misprisions which they are intangled with. He that shall consider the premises may find Tertul. Lactant. and Victorinus, (whom Cardinal Bellar. acknowledgeth to detaine all soules in their store-houses, till the resurrection, De S. Beat. I. 5.) good com∣pany among the rest of the Fathers. And therefore I will referre it to the reader, to judge between that exposition that he fits the passages of the Fathers with, which he produces, and that which my opinion requires. Especially, having Doctor Stapleton, Defens. Ecclesiast. Authorit. . 2. to confesse, with others of that side, that all the ancients, in a manner, do hold the contrary, of that which is since defined by the Councile of Florence. Saint Bernard, I must not omit, because it is he, who, considering the text of the Apocalypse, which, you may, see by the premises, sayes more then all the Scripture besides; hath so perti∣nently observed out of it, that they are but in the Court as yet, but, at the con∣summation of their blisse, shall enter into Gods house. Therefore he maketh three states of the soule; The first, in tents, the second in the Courts, the third, in Gods house; into which, neither the Saints shall enter without the common people of the Church, nor their soules without their bodies. De omnibus Sanctis, Serm III. And Serm. IV. the Saints, which, now see onely the man∣hood of Christ under the altar, he saith, shall be lifted upon the altar to see the essence of God. The Schoole, since his time, upon occasion of the contest with the Greek Church, believing with Saint Bernard; hath stated the dispute upon this terme of seeing God; And John XXII. Pope is questioned, whether, intending to determine with Saint Bernard, he held heresy heretically, or not. For, his successor Bennet XII. first, and after him the Councile of Florence hath decreed that for matter of Faith, which, before the decree was not matter of Faith; And therefore, if that be true which I said in the first book, can ne∣ver become matter of Faith. For my part, I see Saint Augustine de cura pro mortuis cap. IX. resolve the question, how the dead can know what is done here, three wayes: By the report of those who go hence, and, by the will of God, remember what is done here; by the ministery of Angels, and, by the revelation of Gods Spirit. And if Saint John, being in the Spirit, saw by visi∣on of Prophesy, God sitting upon his throne in heaven, as well as the Elders and Martyrs soules did; I can easily grant, that those souls, which should have such revelations of Gods Spirit, (whether by the ministery of Angels, or without it) might see God upon his Throne, as Saint John and the Prophets did, and and as the Elders and Martyrs are there described to do. But, this would be no more that sight of God, in which Saint Paul and Saint John seem to place the happinesse of Gods kingdome; then that sight of God, which Moses had, when he communed face to face with God before the Ark, was that sight where∣of God said to him, Thou shalt not see my face. For no man shall see my face and live. This for certain; S. Augustine, deriving the knowledge of our maters which blessed soules may have, from the ministery of Angels, and revelations of Gods Spirit, and perhaps from report from hence, was farre enough from owning Saint Gregories consequence; Quae intus omnipotentis Dei claritatem vident, nullo modo credendum est, quod foris sit aliquid quod ignorent. Those who see, within, the brightnesse of Almighty God, it is not to be thought that there is any thing, which they are ignorant of, without. Moral. XII. 14. For, sup∣posing the Saints see the essence of God, it followeth not, that, thereby, they see what is done here, because it is not the essence of God, but his will, by which it may appear. So farre it is from any appearance of truth, that he who hath recourse to soules that go hence, to the ministery of Angels, to revelations of Gods Spirit, to inform the saints departed of that which is done here, should believe them to have that sight of God, wherein the happinesse of his kingdom
consisteth. In fine, by the Arch-bishop of Spalato, de Rep. Ecclesi. VIII. 110-120. you shall find the opinion of Calvine, to be the same I here main∣taine, though his followers, it seemes, are afraid of the evidence for it, or the consequence of it. Let us see whether justly or not▪ It hath been a custome so general in the church to pray for the dead, that no beginning of it can be assigned, no time, no part of the Ch. where it was not used. And, though the rejecting of it makes not Aerius an Heretick, as disbelieving any part of the faith, yet, had he broke from the Ch. upon no other cause but that, which the whole Church besids him owned, he must, as a Schismatick, have come into Epiphanius his lift of Heresies intending to comprise all parties severed from the Church. All that I have known pretended, is that which the learned Blondel, in a French work, of the Sibyls verses, hath conjectured; that it had the begnning from that book. Which book, as divers before him have show∣ed reason, why it should be thought the worke of a Christian, intending to ad∣vance Cristianity by such meanes; So I confesse, I can not see whence it should come, more probably, then from Montanus, or some of his fellow Prophets, as he conjectureth For, though he hath failed of his usuall diligence, in clearing the difficulties, which the account of time raiseth, how Justine Martyrs Apology and Hermes his Pastor, should borrow from Montanus; yet doe I not see why Montanus might not begin to declare himselfe by it, before the date of them. But neither doth my businesse require, or my modell allow me to debate it. For, supposing Justine Martyr, or Clemens, or Tertullian, or Lactantius, or many more particular writers were induced to allege it, as for the advantge of the common Christianity; He that sees not, how much more it were, to induce particular Churches, and by consent of them, the whole seemes to me to re∣nounce the advice of common reason, for love of his own voluntary prejudice. Can it be imagined, that the Sibyls verses, coming from an author of doubtfull credit, could perswade the whole Church, to take up a custome of praying for the dead, because they have perswaded divers writers, to alledg them in favour of Christianity? Why could not then Montanus perswade it to imbrace the pretense of his Prophesies? Why? But, because it was more to give Law to such a Bdy, then to surprise a few Scholars. And yet, could all this be over∣seen, would not that serve the turne. The opinion of Justine, that our Lord by his prayers Psalm XXII. 21. and by commending his soule to God, on the Crosse, teacheth us to pray, that our souls may not fall into the hands of those spirit, which had the fathers soules in their power; is the mold in which, some prayers in the Church of Rome, for the dead, are framed. Suppose this, not granting it. This is not the doctrine of the Sibyls verses. For, they place the sons of Noae, in blisse, not in the devils hands, though under the earth; as I showed you. Neither could the raigne of Christ upon earth, for a thowsand years, come from the Sibyls verses, how many soever were transported with the conceit of it. For, though Montanus be found as ancient as Justine, he will never be found so ancient as Papias, who preached it. As for the quarte∣ring of righteous soules under the earth, and in Paradise; I have showed you how both are true, according to the dispensation of the old & of the new Testa∣ment. If the simplicity of the primitive Chistians, speak some times according to the one, somtimes according to the other, as following the language & stile of the Scriptures; It is not because they followed any Montanist, as a disciple of Mon∣tanus, whom the Church disowned. It must be, because they knew him not to be Montanus, or any disciple of Montanus; And, they knew him not by these par∣culars, because others before and after him, had committed the same mistakes (for, supposing they understood not the secret which I spoke of, in the Scriptures, they were indeed mistakes) and were not by the Church disow∣ned for it But, what is it that I apeale to, in the prayers of the Church for the dead? That they are made for the Patriarches and prophets, for the Apostles and Mar∣tyrs, even for the Blessed Virgin, as well as for all the departed in the communi∣on
of the Church. The words of the ancient Liturgies, I remit you the an∣swer quoted afore, to see p. 185. Be this, in regard to the resurrection, and the day of judgement, so it be in regard to their resurection and judgement, so that the benefit which they receive by it, not which their bodies receive by it, (which were not prayed for) be acknowledged. If that be acknowledged considerable for the whole Church to pray for, in behalfe of those; how much more in behalfe of all others▪ that were admitted to communion with the Church? I acknowledge a scruple made in S. Austines time, to the ass∣umption which I supose; de verbis Apostoli Hom. XVII. Ideque habet Ec∣clesiastica disciplina quod fideles noverunt, cum Martyres eo loco recitantur ad al∣tare ei, ubi non po ipsis retur, pro caeteris autem commemoratis desunctis oratu; Ijuia est enim pro Martyre orare, cujus nos debemus orationibus com∣mendari. And therefore the Church hath that discipline which the faithfull know; When the Martyrs ae reckoned at Gods altar, in that place, as not to pray for them, but for others departed, who are reckoned. For, it is an injury to pray for a Martyr, by whoe prayers we ae to be commended. Thus, S. Austine whereas S. Cypian, in his time, made no question of offering for Martyrs, Epistle XXXIV. The same S. Austine, Enchir. cap. CX. Cum sacrificia▪ sive altaris sive quarumcun{que} eleemosynarum, pro baptizatis defunctis omnibus offeruntur Pro valde bonis gra∣tiarum actiones sunt, pro non valde malis propitiationes sunt pro valde malis et si nulla sunt adjumenta mortuorum, qualescun{que} vivorum consolationes sunt. When sacrifices, either of the altar, or of whatsoever alms are offered for all the dead after Baptisme; for the very good, they are thankgivings for the not very bad, propitiati∣ons, for the very bad, though no helps to the dead, yet some kind of consolations to the living. Thus S. Aust. avoideth an objection; How the same prayer should be a petition for some, for others a thanksgiving. For, the custom being that, the St. departed, were rehearsed in one place of the Service, others in an other place; he takes it to be the intent of the Church, to give thanks for Saints and Martyrs, to pray for others. The forme then used in Africk we have not; neither can say, why this construction may not stand with it. For, the very Latine Masse at this day is capable of it, where you have first; Memen∣t Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum N. et omnium circumstantium, pro quibus tibi offrimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudes com∣municantes & memoriam venerantes inprimis gloriosae semper Ʋirginis Ma∣riae. Remember Lord thy servants, such and such, and all here present, for whom we offer unto thee, or, who offer the this sacrfice of praise, communicating▪ in, and reverencing first the memory of the glorious ever Ʋirgine Mary. So proceeding to the rest. Whereby, the wy, it is manifest, he that made this, read in S. Paule Rom. XII. 13.  communicating in the me∣mories of the Saints; as S. Ambrose and other Fathers did: Not, as now we read, , the necessities. But, after the consideration, Memmento domine famulorum samularum{que} tuarum, qui no paecesserunt cum signo fidei, & dormiunt in somno pacis, Npsis domne, & omnibus in Christo quiescentibus locum, refri∣gerii lucis & paci, ut indulgeas deprecamur. Remember Lord thy servants such & such, that are gone before, with the badge of faith, and sleep in the rest of peace. We pray thee ord grant them, and all that rest in hrist, a place of refreshment rest and peace. This then showes, that there ws some ground, in the maner and forme of praying for the dead in the Affrican Church, for S. Austines construction; That the intent of the Church was not to pray for Saints ad Martyrs at all. Which notwithstanding, it is evident, by the formes, which I alleaged afore, that the intent of the Church, was to pray for them. What account Gennadius his position would give for this difference, & for the prayers then used for the dead; I understand not; Supposing it to extend the name of St. to all that dy in the state of Grace, and to intend that all such, sice Christ, goe to Chrst, and are wth Christ; afore Christ, under the eath▪ But, ac∣cordng to S. Austin, and hose that dispose of them till the day of judgement in secret stoe-houses, signifyed by the name of , or, the invisible place of
the dead; (against which opinion, I maintaine, there is no Tradition in the Church) the reason is plaine, from the dfference of those lodgings, according to the difference of the qualities in which men depart, though all in the state of Grace. Take but the Court of the Temple in heaven, which S. Ion saw in the vision of Prophesy, for one of those secret store houses, in whih the Saints soules are bestowed, til the day of judgement, and the scripture remaines recon∣ciled to it selfe, and to the primitive and generall practice of the Church. Ter∣tullian mistook a little, when he affimed, that onely Martyrs soules appeare there. For, the XXIV. Elders sit as judges with God, according as our Lord promises that his disciples shall doe, when he comes to judgement. But, if they and S. Iohn sawe both the same Thorne, S. Paul may be with Christ, as one of them, and S. ohn may say, that, when Christ appeares, or, when it appeares what we shall bee, we shall see God as he is; that is, not aoe. And so the reason is plaine why the Church prayed for all, because it hath some thing to pray for on the behalfe of all; To wit, that which the Martyrs in the Revela∣tion pray for; the vengeance of God, upon the enemies of the Church, and the second coming of Christ, upon which theire owne consummation depends. What account Innocent III. Pope gives for the change of a prayer that had been used for the soul of Pope Leo, and how the Divines of the Church of Rome are inangled about it, you may see in the place alledged, pag. 197. But, nei∣ther had the change, nor the account for it, needed, had it beene considered and admitted, that the resurrection shall be a benefit even to the soules of saints and Martyrs, supposing, that in that estate there remaines nothing else to de∣sie for them. And this Epiphanins also alledges against Aerius; that to make a difference between our Lord Christ, and the Saints, we pray for them. Not that Chrstans need to be taught, a difference between Christ and his Saints; But because the difference between the state of our Lord Christ having resumed his body, carryed it into heaven, in perfect happinesse, and the Saints departed, whoe happinesse is not compleat till they rsume their bodies in the whole ground of those prayers, in reference to Saints and Martyrs. And the same is signified by Epiphanius, when he saith wee pray for the dead,  as yet in travaile: And perhaps also when he saith; ; to signifie that which is more compleate. But, shall there be therefore no difference, between the storehouses in which the Apostles & Martyrs, and those in which all that departe in the state of grace are ldged? Is their intertainment the same, because there all rest till the day of judgement. The Martyrs soules in the Apocalypse, praying for Gods vengeance upon the persecutors of his Church, thereby pray for their owne accomplishment. And therefore the spirit of the Bride saith, come; Even the spouse of the Lamb, the new Jerusalem, which S. Iohn saw come down from hea∣ven dressed like a bride for her husband Apoc. XX. 2. To wit, with fine linen that shineth, which is the righteous deeds of the saints Apoc. XIX. 8. This bride still prayeth for the coming of her spouse. But, I have showed you the Lamb upon mount Sion with the hundreth forty foure thowsand that hd the Fathers name marked upon their foreheades, which sing not the song of tryumph which the Martyrs sing to their harps, but understand it, and they onely Apoc. XIV. 1, 2, 3, And therefore I have showed you an other storehouse for soules of a lower rancke, yet wth the Lambe. And S. Austins doubt, supposeth no doubt of praying for those, whom the Church accounted not of, as it did of Martyrs. And therefore, If there be written Copies of the latine Masse in which the prayer for refreshment rest and peace, to them that are falne a sleep in Christ, appeares not, as it is alleged in that answer p. 196. it appeares sufficiently other∣wise, that the church did pray to that effect, for those that were not taken for Saints and Martyrs. Epiphaneus alleageth, against Aerius, that, because wee sin all with our will or against our will, therefore the Church prayeth for re∣mission of their sins. And perhaps when he said  to signifie that which is more compleat; he meant to distinguish the prayers which
were made for Saints, from those which were made for others. So the formes which you have in the Apostles constitutions VIII, 4. and other Lythirgyes, so S. Cyril Catech. V. Mystag, saith that though the Church knit no Crownes, for sinners, yet it offereth for them Christ slaine for our sins, to render God pro∣pitious. And the supposed Dionysius though he mention no prayer for Saints whoe names are then rehearsed before the consecration, Eccles. Hierarch. cap. III. yet, speaking of burying the dead Cap. VII. he mentioneth prayer for the remission of their sins. For, supposing no punishment inflicted upon a∣ny that departeth in the state of Grace; notwithstanding it is reason to suppose, that the soule remaineth affected with comfort for the present, and a cheere∣full expectation of her future account, or the contrary, according to the love of goodnesse which shee contracted here. Wherefore, if the Saints of God are visited, either by the immediate operation of his spirit, or the ministery of Angels, whereby, S. Austine conceiveth, they may learne what passeth here; Is it strange that ordinary Christians, departed in the state of Grace, but, imper∣fectly turned from lesse sins, should need the influence of Gods spirit, or the visitation of the Angels, to hold them up, in the desire of their accomplishments & in the expectation of their trriall to come? Is there any thing prejudiciall to the faith in that of 2. Es. IV. 35. Did not the soules of the righteous aske que∣stions of these things in their chambers, saying; How long shall I hope on this fashion? When cometh the fruite of the floore of our reward. Is it not agreeable to reason, and to faith, that they should be dissatisfied of their present comfort, and of the terrible tryall to come, after the rate of that affection they had for the world, when they parted with it? And yet at rest from the temptations of it▪ and secure of being defeated of ending in Gods Grace; And yet not under any punishment inflicted by God, but onely under the consequence of that dispositi∣on which they leave the world with. I do alledg here, as for the interest of this mine opinion, the example of S. Ambrose praying for the Emperors Gratiane Valentinian, and Theodosius, and for his brother Satyrus, as likewise Gregory Nazianzene for his brother Caesarius, whome neverthelesse they suppose to be in happinesse. Their words you may see there p. 188. To which, he that will take the paines may adde all that Blndel hath collected in his second book of the Sibyls Cap. XLI. of Epitaphes which pray for them whom they describe in happinesse. For, in short, where there is hope, that the deceased is among Gods Saints, there is there doubt, on the other side, that he may have need of light and peace and refreshment. And therefore the supposed Dionysius, Eccl. Hierarch. Cap. VII. where he relateth the custome of praying for the remissi∣on of sins, in behalfe of the dead, relateth the singing of psalmes of thanks-gi∣ving at funeralls. And, S. Austine telleth how Euodius begun the CI. Psal. when his mother was dead; yet, in consideration of the danger which every soule that dies is subject to, prayeth for her, as he had commanded. Confess. IX. 12. In fine, though custom made not the dfference every where visible, between Prayers for Saints and prayers for ordinary Christians; yet was the common Faith of the Church a sufficient ground for both, whatsoever descant, private construction might make upon the plainsong of it, Tertullian, expecting the raigne of Christians upon earth for a thowsand yeares, and thinking those that should rise first most advantaged, tooke the delay of rising againe for paying the utmost farthing, and to have part with them that rise first, fit to be prayed for, for our friends that are dead; de Amina Cap. LVIII. de Monog. Cap. X. But this the Church is not chargeable with. That there was a conceit among some licentious Christians, that the paines of the damned might either cease or be abated by the prayers of the living, you shall find by the answer so often quoted p. 226▪ 232. and that All Souls day had the beginning from such a con∣ceite. But, though men openly wicked may dye in communion with the Church, yet, the Church supposeth no man damned that dies in communion with the Church; and therefore, the Church is not chargeable with prayers for the damned. It is a knowne rule of the Church, that the offerings of
those that dyed not in communion with the Church should not be received; that the offerings of those that dye in communion with the Church could not be refused. That this Rule is more ancient then the Heresy of Marcion, and others before Marcion, that baptized others for those that were dead, as you have seene, (that is, as ancient as the Apostles) appears; Because, the reason why they baptized others in their stead must be, because all those that were baptized were prayed for at the Eucharist, and onely those; as you see by S. Au∣stine, and the Canon of the Masse quoted just afore. If then, men openly wick∣ed dyed in communion with the Church, it was because the Laws of the Church were not executed; which, had they beene executed, they should not have dyed in communion with the Church, And, because this inexecution may be for the common good of the Church; it was not offensive, that such were prayed for among other members of the Church. For, there is possibility for the salvation of those, for whose salvation, there is no presumption that is rea∣sonable And there had been just offence for the kindred and friends of such dead, had they been refused the common right of all members of the Church. Therefore S. Austine saies, though they that dye in this case receive no help, yet, they that remaine alive receive some comfort and satisfaction, in the memory of their relations, being owned by the prayers of the Church, for Christians. I will not here allege, that the Church of England teacheth to pray for the dead; where the Litanie praies for deliverance in the hour of death and in the day of judgement: Or, when we pray after the communion; that, by the merits and death of Christ, and through faith in his blood, we and all the whole Church may obtaine remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his passion. But, it is manifest, that in the service appointed in the time of Edward the VI. prayer is made for the dead, both before the Communion, and at the Buriall, to the same purpose as I maintaine. It is manifest also, that it was changed in Queen Elizabeths time, to content the Puritans, who, now it ap∣peares, could not be content with lesse then breaking of the Church in peeces. And therefore, since unity hath not beene obtayned by parting with the Law of the Catholike Church, in mine opinion, for the love of it, I conti∣nue the resolution to bound Reformation by the rule of the Catholike Church. Allowing, that it may be matter of Reformation, to restore the prayers which are made for the dead, to the originall sense of the whole Church; but maintayn∣ing that, to take away all prayer for the dead, is not paring off abuses but cutt∣ing to the quick. For, I must now adde, that all this showes, the praiers of the Church of Rome for the delivering of soules out of Purgatory paines, to have no ground in the Tradition of the Church; there being no such place as Purgatory a∣mong those store-houses, which are designed for those that depart in the state of Grace, till the day of judgement; no paine appointed to make satisfaction for the debt of temporall punishment, remayning when the sin is remitted; no translating of soules so purged, from purgatory to heaven and the happynesse of it. The delay of the resurrection, may be a penalty, if you take into it, the consideration of that estate in which the soule may be detayned, being such, as that affection to the drosse of the world, which it departeth with, inforceth. But what use is there of torment, when the race is done? When neither a∣mendment of the party on whom it is inflicted, nor of others that see the ex∣ample, can be expected; to make God torment them whom he is reconciled to, for the satisfaction of his vindicative justice, is to make his vindicative justice delight in the evill of his creature, when no reformation is to be expected by it; Which, in the government of the world, is cruelty, not justice. If the law allow an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; it could never stand with Christi∣anity, under the law, to take it, where it repaires not a mans losse; though the magistrate was to give it, being required. Civil Law may allow revenge, to satis∣fie passion; but the magistrate grants reparation, to satisfie commutative just∣ice, which, the party may demand for meere revenge. That there is no ground
for such punishment, in the tradition of the Church, I refer you to the title of Purgatory in the answer to the Iesuits challenge, for evidence. And it is in∣deed a thing, which the disputing of our controversies hath made to appeare; That there was from the beginning, no question of any punishment, for them that dye in Gods Grace; That S. Austine began to make some question of it, upon some disputes which he met with. That S. Gregory first professed an opi∣nion of it, granted upon no scripture, no nor Tradition of faith, but upon apari∣tions and revelations. That there is great appearance, that Venerable Bede, ha∣ving received it from S. Gregorys Scholars, who planted Christianity here, added much to it by his credulity in such maters. And yet, that they had yet assigned no quarter in the Verge of Hell for this purpose, but onely believed it of cer∣taine soules, in some places of this earth; untill the Schoole hammered out a debt of punishment, to which souls, acquited both of the guilt and staine of sin, may remaine lyable. The extending of indulgence to the voyding of this, (how properly soever it may be counted purging of soules) made the position a ma∣ter of great jelousy, for the interest of profit, which our common Christianity abhorreth. And, indulgence indeed of Canonicall penance, I have showed, hath the first ground in S. Pauls example, and necessary use in the Church. But, when redeeming of penance was come into practice in the Church, it was granted upon considerations with Christianity, and the safety of poore soules allowed not; Of paying a rate, of taking the Crosse against Infidels, of moderne Jubiles. But, that there should be a stock of merit in the Church, upon account of works of supererogation done by the Saints, which theire owne reward answereth not; and that the Church, in grant∣ing indulgence of penance, may allow it to his account that receives indulgence; is a conceite, as injurious to the merits of Christ, (the consideration of all par∣don) and to the Covenant of Grace (the condition whereof it abateth) so, that hath no evidence from any rule or practice of the ancient Church. But, that they should be thought to be of force to redeeme soules out of Purgatory▪ and that, taxing the time which they grant, and the like, for which neither there is nor can be any ground; The best that is said, or can be said, in defense of them who publish them to poore people, by whom they are frequented, is; that they get themselves mony, the account whereof, being almes, they charge them∣selves with: And, that people are, by this meanes, imployed in the works of devotion, which, if not available to the effect which they imagine, are how so∣ever good for their soules health. As for the translating of soules to heaven before the day of judgement, it is so diametrally contrary to all antiquity, that the very naming of it takes away all pretense for Traditon, on behalfe of Purgatory. It is acknowledged indeed, that a number of the ancient Fathers, during the flourishing times of the Church, doe believe, that the fire which the world is to be burnt up with, as it shall involve the wicked, and cary them to be everlastingly tormented in the sink of the world; so it shall touch and scorch even the Saints themselves, to try if their works be such as Gods vengeance can take hold of, and to purge away that drosse which the love of the world they dyed with, importeth. This is by divers called Origens Purgatory, because they conceive, his credit might move S. Hilary, S. Basil S. Ambrose, Gregory Nyssene and Nazanizain S. Jerome S. Austine and S. Chry. with divers others to follow it. But Blondel, having observed, that it is found in the Sibyles verses, will needs have them all to have taken it up from thence. Which, as I have no reason to yeild to, having showed already, that the credit of that book was not the foundation of other particular opinions, which had vogue in the Church; So do I not find those famous Doctors so affected to Origen, (whose writings, concerning the exposition of the scrip∣tures, they were necessarily obliged to frequent) as to admit an opinion so neere concerning the faith upon this recommendation on whom they declare so much jelousy, in mater of Faith. For my part, as I find it very agreeable to the words of S. Paul, when he saith, that they whose works are burnt up shall escape
themselves, but as through fire; So how mens works should be tryed, or burnt up by that fire; I find it not easy to be understood. And therefore without ta∣king upon me to censure so great persons, for innovating in the Church, or to maintaine that, in which there is no concurrence of any Scripture with any consent of the whole Church, I leave the truth of this to judge∣ment, as secure, that it will not concern the common Faith. But this I say peremptorily, that, admitting it, there remaines no pretense for Purgatory in the Tradition of the Church, unlesse it be by equivocati∣on of words. For, this, coming to passe at the day of judgement, admitteth no release before; And without release before Purgatory fire goes quite out; No Indulgences, no Jubilies, no stock of merit, to be dispensed by the Church, to such workes of devotion as it limiteth, can be any of any request, if they take not effect afore the day of judgement. Take away the opinion of translating souls from the Verge of hell, which Purgatory, to the sight of God, and the Clergy of the Church of Rome shall no more eat the sins of the people, as the Prophet complaines of the Priests under the Law. For, while the people are perswaded, that their sins are cured by the sentence of absolution once pronounced, Penance serving onely to extinguish the debt of temporall punishment remaining, and that to be ransomed by the services which they pay for in the name of their friends which are dead, the Clergy live by those sins of which the people dy, because they are not duly cu∣red. For, the lusts for which men sin not being cured, by that hardship of Pe∣nance which the case requireth, to change attrition into contrition; the guilt of sin remaines upon the head of him in whose heart the love of sin remaines alive, notwithstanding the keyes of the Church, mistaking in that case. Besides: take away the opinion of translating soules from hell to heaven, since the coming of Christ, and there will remaine no ground for the translating of the Fathers souls from the verge of hell, which is Limbus Patrum, to the sight of God, by the descent of our Lord into hell, and his rising from the dead againe. There will be no cause, why that reason which I tender, for that vanity of immaginations (rather then opinions or belief) in the Fathers, which that which all agree in is intangled with, should not be admitted. For, the translating of Christian soules from Purgatory to heaven not being believed, why should the transla∣ting the Fathers souls remaine? Why should not the simple Faith, in which all Christians agree, revive, and take the place of Tradition in the Church, which indeed it hath; that between death and the day of judgement, the good are in joy the bad in paine, both incomplete, till both be fulfilled, after both shall have received their finall doome?
CHAP. XXIX. The ground upon which Ceremonies are to be used in the service of the Church; Instances out of the Scriptures and Tradition of the Apostles. Of the equivo∣cation of the word Sacrament, in the Fathers. The reason of a Sacrament in Baptisme and the Eucharist. In extreme Ʋnction. In Marriage. In Con∣firmation, Ordination, and Penance. NOW, to come to the reason, for which Ceremonies are to be used in the publick service of God; I must here rest in that which I have rendred in my Book of the service of God at the assemblies of the Church, being satisfied, that it pointeth at the very ground for the use of them, from the beginning, a∣mong Gods people. Man is compounded of soule and body, and the worship of God, and prayer to God, is an act of the soule, which the body, by the sen∣ses thereof, may diverte the mind from, but cannot help forwards it, till by the motion and gesture of the body, the soul be ingaged to attend on that which the mind proposeth. Therefore the people of God, in the Scripture, pray al∣waies, either standing or kneeling, unlesse some speciall cause move them to prostrate themselves. That their ordinary posture was standing, appeares by Mat. VI. 5. Mark XI. 25. Luke XVIII. 11. Neh. IX. 5. Jerem. XV. 1. XVIII. 19. Job XXX. 20. And they have reason, who derive the Stations of the primitive Christians, and the use of not kneeling on Lords dayes, and, between Easter and Whitsontide, from their custome. But therefore they kneel∣ed in Lent, and 'Daniel kneeled when he fasted, IX. 20. and Moses fell pro∣strate before God, Deut. IX. 18, 25. but Esdras upon his knees Esd. IX. 5. X. 1. as Daniel also VII. 11. to what purpose, but to cast down the mind by the posture of the body, that, being sensible of his wants, a man may attend upon God with deep devotion and reverence? The Publicane durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, Luke XVIII. 13. which showes, that otherwise they did lift up their eyes, and spread their hands to heaven, as Lam. III. 41. 1 Kings VIII. 54. 1 Tim. II. 8. But, the Publicane smote upon his brest, because he exacted Penance of himselfe. He was a foole for his paines, if that be Refor∣mation which is pretended, to claime familiarity with Almighty God, by talk∣ing with him negligently, to signify that we are sure of him, having Faith that we are predestinate to life, as of the number of those for whom Christ died, exclusively to the rest of mankind. Or, if it be Reformation to sit and censure with how fit and pertinent conceptions, in how proper and choice terms a man expresses his necessities, and the necessities of his people, to God. But, praying to God is something else than all this; and, not onely the ancient people of God, but those who have no sense of religion but that which nature forceth them to, show us by their practice, that lowlinesse of the body stirreth as well as testfieth reverence in the minde to God in his service. All this holdeth, taking a man by himselfe as a single Christiane. But supposing the society of a Church, and an assembly of Gods people for his service, there is more to be said. The people of God spoke much by visible signes, not all by words. Jeremy might have said to them of Jerusalem, take example by the Rechabites, who drink no wine upon the order of their Patriarch; But that was not e∣nough: He must bringe them to the Temple, and set wine before them, that, having formally refused it, he might thereupon protest to his people. The same Jeremy might have told the Jewes, as Saint Paul doth the Romanes, that men are as clay in the Potters hands, without going down to the Potters, and seeing him spoile a vessell that he was making, that he might thereupon take his rise and say, that God was framing evil against them whom he had made. Jer. XVIII. 1-5. without buying an earthen vessell, and breaking it before
the ancients of the People and of the Priests, to tell them, that God would break them likewise; Jer. XIX. 1, 11, 12. when he makes all that businesse on purpose, he showes, what force visible signes have to make impression up∣on the minde, of that which words signify, neverthelesse. The Law would never have appointed to sit still on the Sabbath in remembrance of the creation of the world, or the deliverance from Egypt; to carry a bundle of branches in the hand, and to dwell in booths, in remembrance of the voiage through the wildernesse, otherwise. And, is not this reason fit to be applied to the assemblies of Christians? Witnesse the Prophet Joel. Why must they weep and mourne with their fasting? why must the children and sucklings assemble? why must the joy of the bride chamber be superseded, but to make impression of sorrow upon particulars, from that which the publick expresseth? Joel II. 13-16. The people of Niniveh, and the King thereof, put on sackcloth, and sat in ashes, nor man, nor beast must tast foode, or drinke water, at the preaching of Jonas III. 5. 6. 7. On the contrary, at the bringing of the Arke into the City of David, Chron. XIII. 8. XV. 28. They have seen thy goings O God, even the goings of my God, my King, into the sanctuary. The singers went before, those that played on instruments followed, amongst them were the damsels playing on timbrells. And the solemnity which the wall of Jerusalem was dedicated with, you may read in Nehem. XII. 27-43. The Festival of our Lords Resurrection presupposeth the Fast of the Passion; makes all the Lords dayes of the year festivall, by renewing weekly that joy which it solemnizeth. The Fast which goeth before it. by the institution of the Apostles, (agreeing in it, because not agreeing when it should end) in Tertullians time was inlarged to those dayes, on which the Bridegroome was not missing, but, by just use of the Churches Power, is inlarged to fourty dayes. Shall it be superstitious for the Church to professe solemn Penance and mourning▪ for that time which gained the Ninivites that grace which the Gospel tendereth the Gentiles, that repent according to their example? If it be Reformation to abolish all ceremonies, let it be Reformation for Gods people to understand any difference between an humiliation and a thanksgiving. Saint Paul disputeth hard, that the women of Corinth ought to be vailed, the men unvailed; Not for any consideration of reverence to God, which the uncovering of the head did not signify, in those times: But to signify the humility and modesty of the sex; which, had he spoken of serving God in private, he need not have stood upon, and therefore, in regard to the Church. Which if it be true, if consideration ought to be had of the Church in celebrating the service of God at the assemblies thereof, then it is requisite, that when the World is come into the Church, and all assemble, those ceremo∣nies should be used, which were not requisite when the numbers were small; and the assemblies thereof thinne. That the Ministers of the Church should performe the service thereof in their ordinary aparrel, when they ministred it in grottes and caves, to a few, I marvaile not, but count it reasonable; That when all assemble, wheat and chaffe, good fish and bad, all should be summon∣ed to that apprehension of the work in hand which our common Christianity inforceth, by the habit in which it is ministred, it seemeth to me very unreason∣able that any man should marvaile. Imposition of hands is necessarily, an act of authority. Booz may say to the reapers, The Lord be with you; And they answer him; The Lord blesse thee. Ruth IV. 4. they may blesse him as well as he them, And as the Priest saith to the people, the Lord be with you; so may they to him, and with thy Spirit; where there is nothing but matter of common cha∣rity in band. But if Abraham pay Melchisedeck Tithes, acknowledging his superiority. and Melchisedeck thereupon blesse Abraham, then the saying of the Apostle Heb. VII. 7. without question, the lesse is blessed by the better; takes place. Of this kinde is Jacobs blessing his Nephews, by laying his hands on their heads, Moses his blessing of Joshua, the Priests blessing of the people. The Israelites, laying hands on the Levites, Numb. VIII. 10. seems rather to signify the charging of the sinnes of the Congregation upon them, that by▪
them they might be expiated, according to the Law. But our Lord layes hands on the little children whom he blesses, and his Apostles lay hands on them whom they cure, Mark XVI. 18. as Naaman thought that Elizeus would have laid hands on him, praying for him. So our Lord lifts up his hands over his disciples to blesse them, because he could not lay hands on them all. The Apostles laying hands on the seven, Acts VI. 6. and the imposing of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Tim. IV. 14. signifieth the authority that inchargeth them with their office. And it is strange, that any man pretending learning, can attribute the ordinations made by Paul and Barnabas Acts XIV. 23. to the votes of the people, signified by holding up their hands; The act of con∣stituting them being expresly ascribed to Paul and Barnabas; And therefore, by imposition of their hands, not by holding up the peoples hands. Imposi∣tion of hands therefore, as it is used by the Church, succeeding the Apostles in that use, signifieth that authority which the Church blesseth, or prayeth for blessing, in behalf of those whom she presumeth to be qualified for the blessing, by so blessing, which she prays for at Gods hands. I am not to forget the signe of the Crosse, though a cere∣mony, which, I cannot say the Church hath either precept or precedent for in the Scripture; having, prescribed that there is no presumption that it cometh not from the Apostles, because no mention of it in Scripture. Justine the Martyr mentioning the use of it, Tertulliane and Saint Basil testifying that it was common to all Christians, all times, all parts of the Church whereof there is remembrance, using it; Chuse whether you will have Saint Paul (when he saith; In whom ye were sealed by the holy spirit of promise; Ephes. I. 13. and againe, by whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption, Ephes. IV. 30.) to inti∣mate that the holy Ghost was given by Baptisme, which was solemnized by signing with the signe of the Crosse; Or, that the Church took occasion, up∣on those words, to appoint that Ceremony to be used in baptizing; it will neverthelesse remaine grounded, that the use of it on all occasions, in all times, over all parts of the Church, is to be ascribed to the Apostles. And certainly, there are many occasions for a Christian to have recourse to God for his grace, upon protestation of his Christianity, which is the condition upon which all grace of God becomes due, when there is neither time nor opportunity to re∣collect his minde unto a formall addresse by praying to God; All which this ceremony fitly signifieth. What then, if it be used by those, who bethinke not themselves at all of that Christianity, by which alone we may expect any be∣nefit of Christs Crosse? Who, may seem to hold their Christianity needlesse, promising, themselves the benefit of it, by the opus operatum, of making a signe of the Crosse? Does this hinder any man to use it as it ought to be used? does it prejudice him that so uses it? I will not say that there cannot, nor did not consist any Reformation in laying this ceremony aside. But I will say, as of Prayers for the dead; We know well enough whom there was a desire to content, when this ceremony in the Eucharist, was laid aside under Queen Elizabeth, having been prescribed under Edward VI. Which, seeing it hath not served the turne, but that the unity of the Church is dissolved, and so much more demanded of them that would be thought Reformed, (if yet, any man man can say, what is demanded) I think my self obliged to maintaine in this point as in all the rest; That the Reformation of the Church consists not in abolishing, but in renewing and restoring the orders of the Catholick Church, and the right intent of the same. He that will take the paines to adde hereto that which I have said in the place quoted afore, shall comprehend the reasons upon which I remaine satisfied in this whole point; seeing there is no cause why I, should, either recede from any part, of it, or, repeate it here againe. That which remaineth for this place is, the consideration of the nature and number of the Sacraments; which being essentially ceremonies of Gods service, the right resolution of the controversy concerning it must needs consist in di∣stinguishing the grounds, upon which, and the intents, to which they are insti∣tuted;
the difference whereof must make some properly Sacraments, the rest, either no Sacraments at all, or in a severall sense, and so, to a severall purpose. And truly, of all the Controversies which the Reformation hath occasioned, I see not lesse reason for either side to stand upon their terms, then in this; which stands upon the term of a Sacrament, being not found, in the Scriptures, attributed either to seven or to two. For, being taken up by the Church; that is to say, by those Writers whom the Church alloweth and honoureth; what reason can deny the Church liberty to attribute it to any thing, which the pow∣er given the Church inableth it to appoint and to use, for the obtaining of Gods blessing upon Christians? Why should not any action, appointed by the Church, to obtaine Gods sanctifying grace, by virtue of any promise which the Gospel containeth, be counted a Sacrament? At least, supposing it to con∣sist in a ceremony fit to signify the blessing which it pretendeth to procure. For, it is manifest, that Baptisme also, and the Eucharist, are ceremonies signi∣fying visibly that invisible grace, wherewith God sanctifieth Christians. But there will be therefore no consequence, that Baptisme and the Eucharist should be counted Sacraments for the same reason, and in the same nature and kind, for which any thing else is or can be counted a Sacrament; No, not though they may all, in their proper sense, be truly called Sacraments of the Church, because the dispensing of them all is trusted with the Church. For Baptisme, by the premises, enters a man into the Covenant of Grace, as the visi∣ble solemnity whereby it is contracted with the Church, in behalfe of God; which, unlesse in case of peremptory necessity, cannot be invi∣sibly contracted. So, it intitleth to all the promises which the Gospel preten∣deth. And so also doth the Eucharist, being the visible ceremony which God hath appointed, for the renewing of it, and of our profession to stand in it, and to expect the promises which the Gospel pretendeth, upon supposition of the condition which it requireth, not otherwise. And truly, the flesh and bloud of Christ, mystically received by our bodies, necessarily importeth his spirit recei∣ved by our soules, supposing them qualified as the Gospel requireth; and in, and by the Spirit, whatsoever is requisite to inable a Christian to performe his race here, or to assure him of his reward in the world to come. And yet the necessity thereof not so undispensable, but that supposing a man cannot obtaine the communion thereof from the Church, but by violating that Christianity which it sealeth, neither can a man obtaine it by the Sacrament, nor, without the Sacrament need he faile of it; that is standing to his Christianity as well in all other things, as, in not transgressing his Christianity, for communion in the Eucharist, with the Church. And this is the case of those which are unjustly excommunicate; Seeing, in matters indifferent, he that yeilds not to the Church, that is, to them who have the just power to conclude the Church, (when they judge it for the common good, for him to do that, which otherwise he is not obliged to do) must needs seem justly excommunicable. So, these two Sacraments, have the promise of grace absolutely so called, that is, of all the grace which the Gospel promiseth; which, it is to be acknowledged and maintained, that no other of those actions, that are or may be called Sacra∣ments of the Church, doth or can doe, upon the like terms as they doe. For of a truth, it is granted, that both these Sacraments are actions, and consist in the action, whereby they are either prepared or used, though with so much difference between the two. For Baptisme is, of necessity, an action that passes with the doing of it; Whereas, in the Eucharist, there is one thing done in the preparing, another in the using of it; insomuch that the effect of conse∣crating it, (which, I suppose here to be signified, in the Scriptures, as well as the most ancient of the Fathers, by the name of Eucharistia, or Thanksgiving) remaines upon the thing consecrated; so that the bread and the wine over which God was praised and thanked, are metonymically called the Eucharist. And yet, in regard the consecration in reason, tends to the use of receiving it, and that the Church is not trusted, or inabled to do it with effect, but to that in∣tent;
the totall of both is necessarily understood by the name of that Sacra∣ment. For, supposing the ancient Church might have cause to allow, the use of receiving this Sacrament, to them who were not present in body, though in spirit at the celebrating of it; (which I, for my part, in point of charity find my self bound to suppose, even when I am not able to alledge any reason why my self would have done the same in the same case) So long as, by reasonable construction, which the practice of the Church alloweth, or groundeth, the con∣secration tendeth to the use of receiving, it is reasonably called the Sacrament, or the Eucharist, in order to that use. If it be consecrated to any other intent, either expressed, or inforced by construction of reason, upon the practise of the Church; such practice bordering upon sacriledge, in the abuse of the Sacra∣ment, the Church hath nothing to do to answer for it. Nor is it my meaning that the Sacrament of Baptisme or the Eucharist doth or can consist in the out∣ward action of washing of the body, or of praying over the elements, and re∣citing the Institution of our Lord. It is true, the very bodily action were able in a great part, to interpret the intent of doing it, to those who are already Chri∣stians, and know what Christianity requireth. But, seeing that can never be e∣nough, much lesse allwayes; It is necessary, that the intent be declared, by cer∣tain words signifiying it. But these words, with the bodily action which they interpret, will, by this discourse, concurre to make but one part of the Sacra∣ment; which, containing the solemnizing of the Covenant of Grace, will ne∣cessarily containe that which all this signifieth, of invisible and spirituall grace, conveighed to those who are qualified for it, by that which is said and done, in virtue of Gods promise. He that will speak properly of these two Sacraments, must make the matter of them to consist in one of these two parts; The form of them being (not the signification, which is the same in all ceremonies, but) the promise, which tieth to them the whole effect of the Covenant of Grace; to which purpose, it were well if the world would understand them to be seals of it. This createth a vast difference between these two, and any of the rest, which are called Sacraments; Which, whether the Councile of Trent sufficiently ex∣presse, by providing an Anathema for those who shall say, that the seven Sa∣craments are so equall one to the other, that none is more worthy then ano∣ther; Sess. VII. Can. III. or not; let them look to it, I dispute not. Thus much we see, a difference is hereby acknowledged. But the difference is vast in this regard, that, whereas both these Sacraments take effect in consideration of every particular mans Christianity, and the promises annexed to that end, the rest, all of them, take effect in consideration of the Communion of the Church, and that which it is able to contribute towards the effect of Grace; Which necessarily consists in that which the Church is able to contribute, to∣ward the effecting of that disposition which, qualifieth for it. So, whereas these two immediately bring forth Gods grace, as instruments of his promise, by his appointment; the rest must obtaine it by the meanes of Gods Church, and the blessing annexed to communion with it. He that believeth not Gods Church, in the nature of a Society, grounded upon profession of the true faith, and consisting in that communion, which separateth it not from the whole; may promise himself the benefit of his Baptisme, and of the Eucharist, (whomso∣ever he communicateth with) professing himself a Christiane. He who be∣lieveth every Church to be a part of the whole Church, as he must acknowledge it requisite to the effect of Baptisme and the Eucharist, that they be ministred neither by Hereticks nor Schismaticks; So must he attribute the effect of the rest to the foundation of the Church, the Prayers whereof, God, by founding it, hath promised to hear, being made according to that Christianity which the foundation thereof supposeth. Let us consider, whether extreme Unction may be, or must be counted a Sa∣crament upon these termes, or not; for, if that, what question will remaine of the rest? I conceive, I have observed that which is very pertinent to the conside∣ration of all the rest, in showing that they are the solemnities, wherewith some acts of that publick authority is exercised, which the Church hath, in respect of
the members of it. Onely, in the Unction of the sick, I have not found any act of authority, distinct from that power of the Keyes, whereby, in extremity, all are admitted to the communion of the Eucharist, in hope of Gods mercy; acknowledging the debt of that Penance remaining, if they survive, which must qualify them for it in the the judgement of the Church. And, the promise of for∣giveness of sins annexed to it, I have found to suppose that contrition which un∣dertaketh the same, in case a man survive. Which notwithstanding, whosoever acknowledges the Church, cannot think the prayers of the Church needlesse in such an exigent. But as for the ceremony of anointing with oyle, I have found it in the premises, to concern the recovery of bodily health, by the practice of all ages, that are found to have used it; Though not pretending miracu∣lous graces, of curing diseases, extant in the primitive times; but onely that confidence, which Gods generall promise to the Church groundeth, of hearing the prayers thereof even for temporall blessings, so farre as the exception to it which Christianity maketh, shall allow. It was thought fit to lay aside this ceremony, at the Reformation, least the Church should seem to pretend a pro∣mise, the effect whereof, being temporall and visible, could not be made to ap∣pear; Which might seem a disparagement to our common Christianity. But there have not wanted Doctors of the Reformation, Bucer by name, that have acknowledged; nor will any man of a peaceable judgement make question; that the ceremony might have been retained, at the visitation of the sick; Which, he that would have the Church lay aside, because the Church of Rome useth this ceremony at it, he would have the Church be no Church, because the Church of Rome is one. For, as the office of the Church can never be more ne∣cessary, then in that extremity, to procure that disposition qualifying for par∣don, which then, it is not too late to procure; So can no ceremony be filter then annointing with oil, to signify that health of body, which the Church chearfully prayeth for, on behalf of them whom she promiseth remission of sinne; That health of minde, which the present agony so peremptorily re∣quireth. Supposing then the constitution of the Church such, that the ministe∣ry thereof must needs be thought sufficient meanes to procure salvation for the members of it; And then, supposing the Church, so constituted, injoyne pray∣er to be made for the sicke, to whose reconcilement the keyes thereof are ap∣plied, anointing them with oyl, to signify that health of body and mind which is prayed for; So farre am I from dividing the Church in that regard, that I acknowledge, it may be very well counted one of the Sacraments of the Church, in that case; To wit. as a ceremony appointed by the Church, signi∣fying that health, which the Church, rightly using the Power which it is trust∣ed with, appointeth to be prayed for in that case. To prove Marriage to be a Sacrament, it is well known how the text of S. Paul is alledged Ephes. V. 32. Sacramentum hoc magnum est; This is a great mystery, but I mean, concerning Christ and the Church. But, Saint Paul saith not, that the mariage of Christians is a sacrament, but, that the mariage of Adam and Eve was a great mystery; As indeed it was, if the Apostle say true, that it figured the marriage of our Lord Christ with his Church, and that therefore the woman was taken out of the man, as Christians are the bimbs of Christ, and therefore wives are to be subject to their husbands, as the Church to Christ. True it is, that, seing mariage in Paradise was made an inseparable conjunction of one with one, with an intent, that it should figure the inseparable conjunction be∣tween our L. Christ and the congregation of them, whom, he foreseeth, that they shall persevere; in that regard, the marriage of Christians also, being, by our Lord, reformed to the first institution of Paradise, cannot chuse but signify the same, though now in being; Whereas, the marriage of Adam was a mystery for signifying the same to be. But supposing all this, and not supposing an Order in the Church, for the blessing of marriage, as a solemnity prescribed by the Church; I know not whether there could be cause to reckon marriage a∣mong the Sacraments of the Church, all the rest which pretend to tha quality, being offices of the Church, to be performed with some solemnity. Whereas, supposing something peculiar to the marriage of Christians, in regard whereof,
it is to be celebrated with the solemne Blessing of the Church; there is no cause, why, under the equivocation premised, it may not be counted among the Sacraments of the Church. For, is there any question to be made, that Christians, submitting themselves to marry according to the Law of Christ, with an intent, not onely to keep faith to one another, according to that which is between Christ and his Church, but to breed children for the Church; And so, submitting unto the Church, and, those limits, wherewith the Church boundeth the exercise of Gods Law, for maintaining of unity in the Church; may promise themselves the effect of that Blessing which the Church joynes them with? Supposing them qualified for the common blessings of Christi∣ans, and the Church formed by God, with a promise of his blessings; What doubt can be made, that the Blessing shall have effect, which the Church joynes them with? But, what assurance can be had of the effect of that Blessing, without it, supposing the Church, and, supposing the blessing of marriage appointed by the Church? I have showed the ground, whereupon, the al∣lowance of mrriage among Christians is necessarily part of the interest of the Church? I have showed, that, in Ordination, in Confirmation, in Pe∣nance, (as well as in Baptisme, and in the Eucharist) the Church exerciseth some power and authority, which she is trusted with by God. The blessing of mariage, what is it, but the marke of that authority, in allowing the mari∣ages of Christians, which the Church thereby exerciseth? If Ignatius and Tertullian require the consent of the Church, to the mariages of Christians; it must needes be inferred from thence, that this consent was declared, by the blessing of the Church; as the Power of ordaining, and the Power of absol∣ving is exercised with blessing, that is, praying for those that are ordained or absolved. Tertullian saith further, that mariage was confirmed by an Eu∣charist, and sealed which blessing. And Clemens Alexandr. Paedag. III. 1. complaining of her that wore not her owne haire, that the Priest, laying hands on her, blessed not her, but some bodies haire besides; What blessing should he speak of but the blessing of mariage? The Epistle of Syricius to Himerius Bishop of Tarracona mentions it, and so doth the IV. Synode of Car∣thage Can. XIII. likewise Innocent I. Pope Epist. IIX. ad Prelum and S. Basil in Hexaem. Hom. VII. nor can any exception be made to the generality of it. But, if there could, there would, neverthelesse, ly no maner of exception against the Power of the Church, in appointing of it, or the reason why the Church should appoint it, supposing the premises. And, the experience of so much abuse as hath been committed of late yeares; (the same man or woman marying two brothers or sisters successively, the one party marying, the other being alive, men marying other mens wives, through the neglect of lawfull impediments, for example) the experience, I say, of abuses that have succeeded, by leaving people free to marry without the blessing of the Church, is enough to demonstrate the necessity thereof, as, supposing the al∣lowance of the mariage. And therefore, the solemnity of blessing mariage, intimating a supposition, that it is intended for an inseparable conjunction of one with one, as is that of our Lord Christ with his Church; And that, with due submission to the Rules of the Church, from the prayers whereof, the blessing is expected; may well be called the Sacrament of mariage, as con∣taining a ceremony signifying that spirituall Grace, of living like Christians in the state of wedlock, for which it signifyeth the parties to be quali∣fied; and, tending to obtaine the same, by virtue of that promise, which the foundation of the Church warranteth the effect of her prayers with. Consider now, that the Sacrament of Baptisme, though it qualifieth for the promises of the Gospell, yet, supposing the unity of the Church, out of which the Spirit of God breatheth not; That every Church is the congrega∣tion of Christians, that is contained in that place which is the cheife seate of that Church, and the territories of it, subject to the Bishop and Clergy of the same; That, whosoever is necessarily to minister Baptisme, is not allwayes able to make him whome he baptizeth a member of the Church; as, in case of
Heresy and Schisme, the Baptisme whereof, the Church alloweth to stand good, but without effect of Christs promise. For, he that considers these things will find reason to grant, that, the consent of the Bishop being requisite to make any man a member of his Church, according to such termes, as, the Rules of the whole Church shall limit; the allowance of every mans Baptisme, to that effect, should be solemnized by his Blessing, so as, the effect thereof to become voide, in case of the utter neglect of it. This is the reason that S. Jerom, ad∣vers. Luciferianos, renders, for the solemnity of Confirmations; from the unity of the Church and the person of the Bishop, in which, and by which every Christian is a member of the whole Church, because a member of his Church, whome the whole Church acknowledgeth Pastor of the same. And this the reason, why it was never counted peremtorily necessary for all, as S. Hierome acknowledges, that in villages, where the Bishops occasions called him not to come, Christians lived and died without it; Because the testimony of all those, who seeke the Bishops Blessing, in acknowledgement of their Christianity, (the profession whereof they declare themselves to stand to, by seeking the same, and he, by giving it, to allow) and of theire commu∣nion with the Church; (which, by the same meanes, they claime, and he owneth) is a presumption on behalfe of the rest, who have not the like oppor∣tunity to seek it, that neither they pretend towards the Church, nor he, on behalf of the Church, intends towards them otherwise. The ground of this construction, is manifest by the practice of the Church, in reconciling those Hereticks and Schismaticks, whose Baptisme the Church allowed to stand good, to the Church, by Confirmation, with imposition of hands. For this suppo∣seth, that Baptisme, which the Church did not repeate, as allowing it mini∣stred in due forme, to have been without effect so long as they continued with∣out the Church; And to revive, and take effect, againe, by removing that bar of separation from the Church, which their reconcilement voideth. If the Church of some times and some places have added to Imposition of hands, a further ceremony of Chisme consisting of oil and Balsame, to signify by the anointing thereof, that sweet smell, which the Spirit of the Messias in Esay re∣senteth, why should it be thought, that this addition in the solemnity must needs take away from the efficacy of it? Is it not enough, that it may take away from it, in them, who, being zealous for the ceremony, are carelesse of the sub∣stance? That this is acknowledged, by returning to the Apostolical simplicity of Imposition of hands. Seing then, that the grace of standing to the common Christianity, is to be expected from the blessing of the Church, upon them who have recourse to this solemnity, with a disposition qualifying for the promises of the Gospel, in the unity of the Church; it will be no disperage∣ment to the Sacrament of Baptisme, that Confirmation should be reckoned among the Sacraments of the Church, being a ceremony no way empty of that promise of sanctifying Grace, which, by the foundation of the Church, belongs to the prayers thereof; and yet, the said promise no way subsisting, but upon supposition of that Covenant of Grace, which the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme inacteth. As for the matter of Ordination, the words of Saint Paul stick close; 1 Tim. IV. 14. Neglect not the grace that is in thee, being given thee through prophesie, by the imposition of the hands of the presbytery; At least taking in Saint Paul againe, 1 Cor. IV. 7. For who distinguisheth thee? Or, What hast thou that thou receivest not? But, if thou hast received, why dost thou boast as not having received? Which, I have showed, being spoken of the Grace of an Apostle, is drawn into consequence on all hands, concerning the grace of a Christian. And therefore it will not serve the turne to say, that Saint Paul speaketh of some of those graces that are called gratis datae, that some for the use of the Church, not for the salvation of him that hath them. For Saint Paul when he calleth those graces the manifestation of the Spirit, signifieth, that they were given by God to manifest his presence in the Church, by the visible operations of them. And therefore ordinarily, they presupposed, in him that had them, the presence of the holy Ghost, to the effect of saving grace▪
The cases of Balaam and Caiaphas, or Saul, or those that prophesied in Christs name, I have showed already, how farre they containe an exception to this. In the case of Timothy, ordained to that work which Saint Paul, by his Epistles, instructeth him, how to discharge; what shall we conceive to be the effect of imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, supposing him thereupon, indowed with a grace of doing miracles, or speaking strange languages, but without a∣ny gift of saving grace, to direct the use of the same to the salvation of his peo∣ple? What else, but that which a sword is in a mad mans hand, or knowledge eloquence, or understanding in him that should set himself to raise himself a sect of followers, into heresie, or schisme? Which, should God allow Timothy, upon Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, allowing it, that Christian people might have confidence in so great a Pastor, in whom they saw such ma∣nifestation of Gods Spirit, might he not reasonably be said, to allow him means to seduce Christian people? I will not therefore contend, but the Grace that was given Timothy by Prophesy, signifieth some visible manifestation of Gods Spirit in him, concerning whom, there had Prophesies gone afore in the Church of how great eminence he should be in it; But so, as to suppose that saving grace, wherein, it manifested God to be in Timothy; which saving grace, though not wanting in him, when he came to receive imposition of hands, (because he who receive it, being no true Christan, shall never receive that effect by it) yet might, by the effect thereof, be extended, applied, or determined to the right use of whatsoever miraculous grace he might thereby receive, in the ser∣vice of Gods Church. For, to him that hath by nature, or by Gods blessing upon his honest indeavours, an ability to preach, to dispute, to resolve in Chri∣stianity, and hath not, by Gods saving grace, the intent to use it well, what doth such a gift bring, but ability to do mischief? Therefore the gift given Timothy by imposition of hands, being that which was prayed for in behalf of him, by those who laid hands on him, is the grace to behave himself well in the function which thereby he receiveth. Which being obtained by the prayers of the Church, what reason leaveth it, why the prayers of the Church should not still obtaine the like, setting aside the difference between them that pray, or, him for whom they pray? And certainly, the effect of all prayers depends upon the same conditions, be it never so much the ordinance of God which they desire him to blesse. Here is then, I meane in Ordination, an ordinance of God, solemnized with the visible cremony of imposition of hands, signify∣ing the overshadowing of Gods protection, or of his Spirit, which it pretend∣eth to procure, upon the promise of Gods presence with his Church, when it prays to him. Which, if it be therefore reckoned among the Sacraments of the Church; as the property of the term will certainly bear it, so can it be no disparagement to the Sacraments of Baptisme and the Eucharist, as if it came in ranck with them. For, the grace which it procureth, as it is limited to a par∣ticular effect, of ministring to the Church the ordinances of God, according to that trust which he reposeth in the office; So is the grace which God ap∣pointeth to be convayed to his people, by the ministry of every office, no lesse to be obtained by that outward profession, under which the order of the Church obliges them to minister the same; (whatsoever a mans inward intention, that is not visible, may be) then if he really did intend to do his best for the service of God, and the salvation of his people. I speak now, so farre as the order of the Church goes. For otherwise, it cannot be doubted, that a mans personall abilities may give a great deal of life to the publick order of the Church, and adde much, in prosecution of the true intent, and in order to the due effect of it. All which, the Grace to indeavour the faithfull discharge of each office, and the blessing of God upon such indeavours, which the blessing of the Church, with imposition of hands, prayes for, containeth, and effecteth. But of all powers of the Church, and the offices which they produce, there is none that cometh so nigh the promises of the Gospel, as that which consists in binding the sinnes of those, that visibly transgresse their Christianity, upon them, and in loosing them upon visible Penance. For, this restoreth to a capa∣city
for the gifts of the Holy Ghost, forfeited by transgressing the Covenant of our Baptisme, and by admitting to communion in the Eucharist, immediately re∣neweth the same. And truly, the whole worke of it is nothing else but the satisfying of the Church, that the man hath appeased the wrath, and regained the favour of God; that is, satisfied God, in the language of the ancient Church, in consideration of the satisfaction of our Lord Christ, accepting his Penance for satisfaction, which, of it selfe, it is not. And, in regard of this great, vertue and effect of penance, I marvail not, that in the reformation, Melancthon is found to have reckoned it a third Sacrament after Baptisme & the Eucharist. For, the name of Sacrament seemeth most duely to belong to the acts of those Offices, which conduce most to the attaining, or, to the maintaining of the state of Gods Grace. And truly it cannot be denyed, that the solemnity of Penance, in the ancient Church, was such as might wel serve to signifie, the recovering of that Grace, the ground which Christians have, for the helpe whereof, it so e∣ffectually intimateth. So, though a mans own repentance in private hath the same promise of Grace, yet the solemnity of Performing penance in the Church seemeth requisite to the nature and quality of the Sacrament, in what∣soever sense it shall be attributed to it. And this solemnity, all reason will allow, must needs have been of great effect to procure, and settle, in the peni∣tent, that disposition for pardon, which it seemeth to professe. This solem∣nity being so much abated in private penance, that nothing of it remaines, saving the ; notwithstanding, so long as it remaines an office of the Church, which limiteth the forme and the rules according to which it is done, with due hope of effect, there is no reason why the nature of a Sacrament should be therefore questionable. When it is given out, and simple Christians are so governed, as if they were obliged to believe, that attrintion is changed into contrition, by vertue of the Keyes of the Church passing upon it; that is, that he, who is not qualified for pardon, when he confesses, is, by receiving the sentence of absolution, qualified for pardon, so that neither staine nor guilt of sin remaines, but the debt of temporall punishment▪ (whereas, the time of Canonical penance grounded a presumption, that the change was wrought) then may there seeme to be cause of questioning, whether penance be a Sacra∣ment, that is, an holy office of the Church, in which it is ministred, under such an unhallowed opinion as that. In the meane time, neither is the promise of Grace annexed to the solemnity thereof, (in which there hath succeeded so vast a change, as I have signified) by Gods choice of any visible creature, in which it is exercised as in Baptisme and the Eucharist; but, by that common reason, for which, it is a solemnity fit for the Church to execute it with; nor is the promise of grace annexed to the office of the Churth any otherwise, then as it becomes the meanes to retrive the condition of baptisme, qualifying for the promise by the Covenant of Grace. In fine, the name and notion of a Sacrament, as it hath been duly used by the Church, and writers allowed by the Church, extendeth to all holy actions, done by vertue of the Office which God hath trusted his Church with, in hope of obtayning the grace which he promiseth. Baptisme and the Eucharist are actions appointed by God, in certaine creatures, utterly impertinent to the effect of Grace, setting aside his appointment; But, apt to signifie all the Grace which the Gospell promiseth, by vertue of that correspondence which holds between things visible and snsible, and things intelligible and invisible; Both antecedent, for their institution, to the foundation of the Church; the Society whereof subscri∣beth, upon condition of the first, and for communion in the second. The rest are actions appointed to be solemnized in the Church, by the Apostles, not alwaies, & every where precisely with the same ceremonies, but such, as alwaies may rea∣sonably serve to signifie the graces, which it praies for, on the behalfe of them who receive them; The hope of that Grace being grounded upon Gods generall promise, of hearing the prayers of his Church, which the constitution thereof involveth. Nor am I solicitous to make that construction; which may satisfie the decrees of the Councils of Florence and Trent; who have first taken upon
them to decree under Anathama, the conceite of the Schoole, in reducing them to the number of seven; But, seeing the particulars so qualified by ancient writers in the Church, and the number agreed upon by the Greeke Church, as well as the Latines; I have acknowledged that sense of their sayings, which the primive order of the Chatholike Church inforceth. For, though I count it a great a buse to maintaine simple Christians in an opinion, that the outward works of them, not supposing the ground upon which, the intent to which, the disposition with which they are done, secures the salvation of them to whom they are ministred; Which opinion the formall ministring of them seemeth to maintaine; Yet is it a far greater abuse, to place the reformation of the Church in abolishing the solemnities, rather then in reducing the right understanding, of the ground and intent of those offices, which they serve to solemnize. CHAP. XXX. To worship Christ in the Eucharist, though believing transubstantiation, is not Idolatry. Ground for the honour of Saints and Martyrs. The Saints and the Angels pray for us. Three sorts of prayers to Saints: The first, agreeable with Christianity: The last may be Idolatry: The second a step to it. Of the Reliques of the Saints Bodies. What the second Commandement prohibiteth or alloweth. The second Councile of Nicea doth not decree Idolatry; And yet there is no decree in the Church for the worshiping of Images. ANd now I come to that resolution which I have made way for, by premi∣sing these conclusions, for assumptions to inferr it; onely, by the way, I have resolved against those prayers which the Church of Rome prescri∣beth, to deliver the soules of the dead from Purgatory paines. I say then, first, that the adoration of the Eucharist, which the Church of Rome prescribeth, is not necessarily Idolatry. I say not what it may be accidentally, by that intention which some men may conceale, and may make it Idolatry as to God; I speak upon supposition of that intention, which the profession of the Church formeth, and which alone is to my present purpose. I suppose them to beleive, that those creatures of God, which are the elements of that sacrament, are no more there after the consecration; having ceased to be, that there might be roome for the body and blood of our Lord to come into theire stead. I sup∣pose, that the body and blood of Christ may be adored, wheresoever they are; and must be adored by a good Christian, where the custome of the Church, which a Christian is obliged to communicate with, requires it. For, that which wee see is enough for to certifie us, that, peremptorily to refuse any custome of the Church, is a step to division, and the dissolution of it; which is the greatest evill that can befall Christianity, next to the peremptory profession of some thing contrary to that truth wherein christianity consists, and which the being of the Church presupposeth But, I suppose further, that the body and blood of Christ is not adored, nor to be adored by Christians, neither for it self, nor for any indowment residing in it, which it may have received, by being personally united with the God head of Christ: But onely in considerati∣on of the said God-head, to which it remaines inseparably united, wheresoever it becomes. For, by that meanes, whosoever proposeth not to himselfe the consideration of the body and blood of Christ, as it is of it selfe, and in it self, a meer creature (which, he that doth not on purpose, cannot do) cannot but con∣sider it, as he believs it to be, being a Christian; And, considering it as it is, honor it as it is inseperably united to the God-head, in which & by which it subsisteth
in which therefore, that honour resteth, and to which it▪ tendeth. So, the God-head of Christ is the thing that is honoured, and the reason why it is ho∣noured, both: The body and blood of Christ, though it be necessarily ho∣nored, because necessarily united to that which is honoured; yet is it onely the thing that is honored, and not the reason why it is honoured, speaking of the honor proper to God alone. I suppose further, that it is the duty of e∣every christian to honour our Lord Christ, as God subsisting in humane flesh; whether by professing him such, or by praying to him as such, or by using any bodily gesture, which, by the custome of them that frequent it, may serve to sig∣nifie that indeed he takes him for such; which gesture, is outwardly, that worship of the heart▪ which inwardly commandes it. This honour then being the duty of an affirmative precept, which, according to the received rule, ties alwaies, though it cannot tye a man to doe the duty alwaies, because then he should doe nothing else; What remaines, but a just occasion, to make it re∣quisite, and presently to take hold and oblige. And, is not the presence thereof in the Sacrament of the Eucharist a just occasion, presently to expresse by the bodily act of adoration, that inward honour which we alwaies cary towards our Lord Christ as God? Grant that there may be question, whether it be a just occasion or not; certainly, supposing it come to a custom in the church presently to do that which is alwaies due to be done, you suppose the question determined. This is that which I stand upon; the matter being such as it is, supposing the custom of the church to have determined it, it shal be so far from an act of Idolatry, that it shal be the duty of a good Christian. Therefore, not supposing the Church to have determined it, though, for some occasions, (whereof more are possible, then it is possible for me to imagine) it may be∣come offensive, and not presently due; yet can it never become an act of I∣dolatry so long as Christianity is that which it is, and he that does it professes himselfe a Christian. Here then you see, I am utterly disobliged to dispute, whether or no, in the ancient Church, Christians were exhorted, and incouraged to, and really did worship our Lord Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For, having con∣cluded my intent, that it had not been Idolatry had it been done; I might leave the consequence of it to debate. But not to balk the freedom which hath caryed me to publish all this, I doe believe, that it was so practised and done in the ancient church; which I maintaine from the beginning to have been the true church of Christ, obliging all to conforme to it, in all things within the po∣wer of it. I know the consequence to be this, that there is no just cause why it should not be don at present, but that cause, which justifies the reforming of some part of the Church without the whole; Which if it were taken away, that it might be done againe, and ought not to be, of it selfe alone, any cause of distance. For, I doe acknowledge, the testimonies that are produced out of S. Ambrose de Spiritu Sancto III. 12. S. Austine in Psalme XCVIII. and Epist. CXX. cap. XXVII. S. Chrysostome Homil. XXIIII. in 1. ad Corinth. Theodoret Dial. II. S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. in S. Gorgoniam, S. Jerom Epist. ad Theophilum Epist. Alexandriae, Origen in diversa loca Evang. Hom. V. Where he teacheth to say; at the receiving the sacrament; Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roofe; Which to say, is to do that, which I con∣clude. Nor doe I need more to conclude it. And what reason can I have not to conclude it? Have I supposed; the elements, which are Gods creatures, in which the Sacrament is celebrated, to be abolished; or any thing else concer∣ning the flesh and bloud of Christ, or the presence thereof in the Eucharist; in giving a reason why the Church may doe it, which the Church did not be∣lieve? If I have, I disclame it as soone as it may appeare to me for such. Nay, I doe expressely warne all opinions, that they imagine not to themselves, the Eucharist so meere and simple a signe of the thing fignified, that the celebrati∣on thereof should not be a competent occasion, for the executing of that wor∣ship, which is alwaies due to our Lord Christ in carnate.
I confesse, it is not necessarily the same thing to worship Christ in the Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist, as to worship the sacrament of the Eucharist; Yet in that sense, which reason of it selfe justifieth, it is. For, the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by reason of the nature thereof, is neither the visible kind, nor the invisible Grace of Christs body and blood, but the union of both, by vir∣tue of the promise; In regard whereof, the one going along with the other, whatsoever be the distance of their nature, both concur to that which we call the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by the worke of God, to which he is morally ingaged, by the promise which the institution thereof containeth. If this be rightly understood, to worship the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is to worship Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But I will not therefore warrant, that they, who maintain the worshipping of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, doe not understand the visible kind, or, as themselves thinke, the visible proper∣tyes thereof, by that name, Which if they shall declare themselves to under∣stand, then is the question far otherwise, and to be resolved upon the same termes, as the question concerning the worshiping of images shall, by and by, be resolved; That though the Sacrament of the Eucharist may be the occasion to determine the circumstance of the worshipping of Christ, yet is it selfe no way capable of any worship that may be counted religious, because religion injoy∣neth it. Cardinall Bellarmine, de Euch. IV. 29. would have it said, that the signe is worshipped materially, but the body and blood of Christ formally, in the Eucharist; Which are termes, that signifie nothing. For, it is impossi∣ble to distinguish in God, the thing that is worshiped▪ from the reason for which it is worshipped; so that the thing may be understood, without under∣standing it to be the reason why it is worshipped. Therefore, the signe in the Eucharist, seemes onely to determine why, that worship which is alwaies every where due, is here now ten dred. Indeed, when the Councile of Trent pronounceth him anathema, that believes not, the elements to be abolished, and cease to be in it being consecrated; I cannot deny, that, their obliging all to believe that, which no man can have that cause to believe, for which he belives the Christian faith, hath beene a very valuable reason, though not the onely reason to move the Church of England to supersede that ceremony; (hardly in the minds of Christians so bred to it, to be parted from it) contenting it selfe to injoine the receiving of it kneeling, which he that refuseth to do, seems not to acknowledge the being of a sacrament, requiring the tender of the thing signified by it and with it. And, I conceive further, that, the carying of the Sacrament in procession, and, upon such occasions, as signifies no order to∣wards the receiving of it, nor any such intent, upon supposition whereof the Sacrament is a Sacrament; hath added much waight to that reason. For, if the use of the sacrament were the reason to make the occasion fit, the abuse thereof must needs render it unfit. But, for that which remaines, whether those who thinke the body and blood of Christ present, instead of the elements, which are there no more, be Idolators for worshipping the elements which re∣main present, where they think they are not, is a question no way to be resolved, till it be granted, that, supposing them present, it is no Idolatry. For, if the fals opinion of their absence make men idolaters, then are they not idolaters which have it not. Consider then, that, were the body and blood of Christ so present, as to be in stead of the substance of bread and wine, the consideration in which any Christian (holding what the church of Rome teaches,) should worship it, would be no other then that for which it should be worshipped by him who believes it not so present; as, in my opinion, the ancient Church did believe. Both must worship the body and blood of Christ because incarnate, and there∣fore, as the body and blood of Christ is inseparable from the consideration of his God-head, which every Christian intends to worship. And, how can then a mans mistake, in thinking the elements to be away, which indeed are there, make him guilty of honouring those creaturs as God; which we know, if he thought that they were there, he must needs take for creatures, and therefore could not honour for God? I doe believe it hath been said, by great Doctors of the
Church of Rome, that they must needs think themselves flat Idolaters, if they could think▪ that the elements are not abolished. That showes what confi∣dence, they would have the world apprehend, that they hold their opinion with; But, not that the consequence is true, unlesse that which I have said be reprovable. For, what reason can be given, why that bodily gesture, which professedly signifieth the honour of God tendred to Christ spiritually present in the Eucharist, should be Idolatry, because the bread and wine are believed to remaine there; Which, according to their opinion, supposing them to be abo∣lished, their accidents onely remaining, is no idolatry, but the worship of our Lord Christ for God? In the next place, as concerning prayer to Saints, I must suppose, that the termes of prayer, invocation, calling upon, and whatsoever else we can use, are or may be in despite of our hearts equivocal; that is, we may be constrained, unlesse we use that diligence, which common discretion counts superfluous, to use the same words, in signifyng requests made to God and to man. Which are not equivocall according to that equivocation which comes by meere chance; but, by that for which there is a reasonable ground, in that eminence, which out conceptions, (and therefore our words, which signifie them) expresse unto us. For, all the apprehensions that we have of God, & all things intelligible, coming from things sensile, we can have no proper conceite of Gods excellence, and the eminence thereof above his creatures; which necessarily appeares to us under attributes common to his creatures, removing that imperfection, which, in them, they are joyned with. This is the reason, why, all signes of honour, in word or deed, may be equivocall when they need not be counted so, being joyned with signes, either of other words, or deeds, which may serve to de∣termine the capacity of them. Adoration, worship, respect, reverence, or howsoever you translate the Latine cultus, are of this kind, as I said afore. Ingressus scenam populum saltator adorat; coming upon the stage to dance, he adores or worships the people; or as an othersaies, jactat basia, he throwes them kisses; He does reverence to the spectators by kissing his hand, and saluting them with it. So prayer, in∣vocation, calling upon God, is not so proper to God, but that, whether you will or not, every petition to a Prince, or a Court of justice is necessarily a prayer, and he that makes it invocates, or calls upon that Prince or that Court, for fa∣vour or for justice. Now, the militant Church necessarily hath communion with the triumphant; believing, that all those who are departed in Gods Grace are at rest, and secure of being parted from him for the future; though those who have neglected the content of this world the most for his service, and are in the best of those mansions which are provided for them till the day of judgement (whom here we call properly Saints) injoy the neerest accesse to his presence. To dispute, whether we are bonnd to honour them or not, were to dispute whether we are to be Christians, and to believe this, or not. Whe∣ther this honour be Religious or civill, nothing but equivocation of words makes disputable, and the cause of that equivocation, the want of words; vulgar use not having provided words, properly to signifie conceptions which came not from common sence. If we call it Religion, it is manifest, that all religi∣on is that reverence which the conscience of our obligation to God rendreth. If civil, the inconvenience is more grosse, though lesse dangerous. For, how can we owe civill respect where there is no relation of members of the same ci∣ty, or Common wealth? Plainely, their excellence, and the relation we have to them being intelligible onely by Christianity, must borrowe a name from that which vulgar language attributes to God, or to men our superiours. I need say nothing in particular of Angels, whom if we believe to be Gods ministers imployed instructing his children upon earth, we must needs own their honour, though the intercourse between us be invisible. It were easy to pick up say∣ings of the Fathers, by which religious honour is proper to Christ, and others, in which, that honour, that reverence, which religion injoines is tendred Saints and Angels. And all to be imputed to nothing but want of proper termes for that honour which religion injoyneth, in respect of God, and that relation
which God hath setled betweene the Church militant and triumphant; being reasonably called Religious, provided that the distance be not confounded be∣tween the religious honour of God, and, that honour of the creature, which the religious honour of God injoines, being neither civill nor humane, but such as a creature is capable of, for religions sake, and that relation which it setleth. I must come to particulars, that I may be understood. He that could wish, that the memories of the Martyrs, and other Saints who lived so, as to assure the Church they would have beene Martyrs, had they been called to it, had not beene honoured, as it is plaine they were honured by Christians, must find in his heart, by consequence, to wish, that Christianity had not prevai∣led. For, this honour, depending on nothing but the assurance of their hap∣pinesse, in them that remained alive, was that which moved unbelievers, to bethinke themselves of the reason they had to be Christians. What were then those honours? Reverence in preserving the remaines of their bodies, and burying them, celebrating the remembrance of their agonies every yeare, assembling themselves at their monuments, making the daies of their death Festivals, the places of their buriall, Churches, building and consecrating Churches to the service of God in remembrance of them; I will adde further, (for the custome seemeth to come from undefiled Christianity,) burying the remains of their bodies under the stones upon which the Eucharist was celebra∣ted. What was there in all this but Christianity? That the circumstances of Gods service, which no law of God had limited, the time, the place, the occasion of assembling for the service of God; (alwaies acceptable to God) should be determined by such glorious accidents for Christianity, as the depar∣ture of those who had thus concluded their race. What can be so properly counted the raigne of the Saints and Martyrs with Christ, which S. Iohn foretell∣eth, Apoc. XX. as this honour, when it came to trample Paganisme under feet, after the conversion of Constantine? Certainely, nothing can be named, so correspondent to that honour which is prophesied for them that suffered for Gods law, under Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. XII. Is not all this honour pro∣perly derivative from the honour of God and our Lord Christ, and relative to his service? For, that is the worke for which Christians assemble, and for those assemblies the Church stands, as I have often said; The honour of the Saints, but the occasion, circumstance, or furniture for it. Neither is it to be doubted, that the Saints in happinesse pray for the Church militant, and that they have knowledge thereof, if they goe not out like sparkles, and are kindled againe when they resume their bodies, which I have showen, our common Christianity allowes not. For, is it possible, to i∣magine that, knowing any thing, (that is, knowing God and themselves) they should not know that God hath a Church in the world, upon the consumati∣on whereof their consummation dependeth? Or is it possible, that, knowing this, and being disposed towards this Church, as they ought to be disposed to∣wards it, in respect to God, they should not intercede with God for the consum∣mation of it, and the meanes thereof which is all we can desire? I will not use the text of Jeremy XI. 1. and Ezek. XIV. 13-19. because it is manifest, that Moses and Samuel, that Noe, Daniel and Job are named in them, but to put the case, that if those men were alive, and made intercession for their people, they should not prevaile. Which is not to say that, which I have showed, that the Old Testament speakes not out plaine, that, being alive, they doe intercede. Therefore they make no consequence. I will not use the text of the Gospell Luke XVI. 9. Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mamon, that, when yee faile, they may receive you into everlasting Tabernacles, Though S. Austine de Civit. I. 27. makes a doubt whether it be by the intercession of his friends, that such a man is received; Because he makes no doubt, that it is in consideration of the charity by which he made them his friends, that he is re∣ceived, And therefore, in that consideration it must be, that they are said to receive him, not in consideration of their prayers; Of which therefore this
text saith nothing. But I must needs use the text of the Apoc. V. 8. VIII. 3. whereby it appeareth as much, that the Church triumphant prayeth for the Church militant, as that the saints of the Church triumphant are alive. And I wil use these texts of the Old Testament, where Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and David are in consideration, & alleged to God in behalf of his people Gen. XXVI 5, 24. Ex. XXXII. 13. Deut. IX. 27. 1. Kings XI. 12, 32, 33, 34. XV. 4. 2. Kings VIII. 19. XIX. 34. XX. 6. Es. XXXVII. 35. 1. Kings XVIII. 36 1 Chron. XXIX, 28. For, as our Saviour argueth well, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are alive and shall rise againe, because, God is not the God of the dead; So is the consequence as good, that, what God doth for their sakes, he doth it for their mediation or intercession; unlesse he meane to set that on their score, which they desire not at his hands. The Angels of little children alwaies see the Fathers face in heaven Math. XVIII. 10. And there is joy in the presence of Gods Angels, over one sinner that repenteth Luke XV. 10. And David saith, that, the Angell of the Lord pitcheth his tent round about them that feare him and delivereth them, Psalme XXV. 8. And they are all ministring spirits, sent forth to attend upon them that shall be heires of salvation? Heb. I. 14. and have they not that affection for those whom God so affecteth, as to provide them such attendance, not to mediate with their desires to God, the effect of that goodnesse which he is so affectionate to bestow upon us? An imagination so barbarous cannot possesse any man, till he think himselfe beloved of God, for hating those that honour Saints and Angels above measure. Let them looke to the measure, and let them looke how they hate them that observe it not. Let them not ground their measure upon a supposition of as little affe∣ction in the Saints and Angels for us, as in themselves for the Saints and Angels; unlesse it be, because such a supposition may deserve to deprive them of the be∣nefit of such relations. For, as for the Church, S. Cyprian doubts not, when he desires, that those who shall happen to depart first be mindfull of them that remaine, in their prayers to God Epist. I. And the Saints in heaven, that are secure of their owne salvation, he saith are solicitous for us, in his booke de mortalitate. S. Jerome saith the same of Heliodorus, Epist. I. nor is any thing to be faulted, of that which he writes against Vigilantius to that purpose. S. Austine supposeth that Nebridius prayed for him being dead, Confess. IX. 3. and expects benefit, from S. Cypryans prayers, de Bapt. V. 7, 17. He said afore, that, we are to be commended by the prayers of the Martyrs, and de sanctis Serm. XLVI. Debent Martyres aliquid in nobis recognoscere de suis virtutibus, ut pro nobis dignentur domino supplicare. The Martyrs must take notice of some∣thing of their owne vertues in us, that they may vouchsafe to become petitioners to God for us. And againe, contra Faustum XX. 21. the reason why they celebrated the memories of the Saints, he assignes, that they might be partners in their merits, and be helped by their prayers. Both which Leo in S. Lam. considers, as well the helpe as the example of the Saints, and S. Gregory, Epist. VII. 57. Indict. II. Rogo omnipotentem Deum ut sua te gratia protegat, & beati Petri Apostolorum principis intercessione a malis omnibus illi sum servet. I beseech Almighty God to protect thee with his grace, and through the intercession of S. Pe∣ter Chiese of the Apostles, keep thee unharmed by any evill. It were to no pur∣pose to show what I allow by bringing more, for this cannot be disallowed, al∣lowing the premises. But, this being supposed, whatsoever may be disputed, whether Saints or Angels in this regard may be counted, Mediators, intercess∣ors or Advocates between God and us will be meere contentions about words holding to the termes hitherto supposed. For, the intercession of our Lord Christ being grounded upon the worke of redemption, the effects of it must be accor∣ding; To make all mankind acceptable to God, under the condition which the Gospell declareth; To obtain for every man those helps of Grace, by which he may, or by which he is effectually resolved to undergoe the condition re∣quisite. He that knowes the God-heade of Christ to be the ground, in consi∣deration whereof, the obedience of Christ is acceptable by God to this effect; and yet will needs say, that Saints or Angels are our Mediators, Intercessors,
or Advocates to the same effect; there is no cause why he should be excused of Idolatry for his paines. But withall, he cannot be excused of contradicting himselfe as grossely; as he that maintaines those Saints or Angels to be that one true God, whom he acknowledges not to be that God, but his creatures. If there be reason to presume, that they who acknow∣ledge Saints or Angels their Mediators, Intercessors or advocates to God intend to commit Idolatry, by contradicting themselves thus grossely, there may be reason to thinke, that they count them their Mediators, Intercessors or Ad∣vocates to God, to that effect, to which Christ alone is our Mediator, Inter∣cessor or Advocate. But if, whosoever is accepted to pray for an other, is necessarily, by so doing, his Mediator, Intecessor or Advocate, to him with whom he is admitted to deal on his behalfe by his prayers; then will it be necessary to limite the worke of mediation to that effect, which may be allowed to the inter∣cession of the Saints or Angels for us, if we will have them to be to purpose. Certainely, neither could Iob intercede for his friends, nor Samuel for the Is∣raelites, nor Abraham for Abimelech, or Pharao, nor any of Gods Prophets for any that had, or were to have recourse to them for that purpose, but they must be by so doing, Mediators, intercessors, and Advocates, for them with God. For neither can the mediation of Saints or Angels, nor of any prophet or other, that can be persumed to have favour with God be to any effect, but that which the termes of that reconciliation which our Lord Christ hath pur∣chased for us doe settle or allow. But he that saith the Saints and Angels pray for us, saith not that we are to pray to Saints or Angels; nor can be say it without Idolatry, intending, that we are to do that to them, which they do to God for us; On the other side, though that which we doe to them, and that which they doe to God be both called praying, yet it wil be very difficult for him that really and actually apprehendeth all Saints and Angels to be Gods creatures, to render both the same honour, though, supposing, not granting, the same Christianity to injoyn both. But, to come to particulars, I will distinguish three sorts of prayers to Saints, wheher taught or allowed to be taught, in the Church of Rome. The first is of those that are made to God, but to desire his blessings by and through the merits and in∣tercession of his Saints. I cannot give so fit an example, as out of the Canon of the Masse, which all the Westerne Churches of that communion do now use. There it is said; communicantes & memoriam venerantes omnium Sanctorum tuo∣rum quorum meritis precibusque concedas, ut in omnibus protectionis tuae munia∣mur auxilio. Communicating in and reverencing the memory of such and such, and of all thy Saints, by whose merit and prayer, grant that in all things, we may be guarded by thy protection and helpe. There is also a short prayer for the Priest to say, when he comes to the Altar, as he findes opportunity; Oramus te Do∣mine, per merita sanctorum tuorum, quorum reliquia hic sunt, & omnium sancto∣rum, ut indulgere digneris omnia peccata mea. We pray thee Lord, by the merits of the Saints whose reliques are here, and all Saints, that thou wouldest vouchsafe to release me all my sins. And on the first Sunday in Advent, mentioning the Blessed Virgin, they pray; Ʋt qui vere eam matrem Dei credimus, ejus apud te intercessionibus adjuvemur: That we who believe her truely the mother of God may be helped by her intercessions with thee. The second is that, which their Litanies containe, which, though I doe not undertake to know how they are used, or how they ought to be used by particular Christians, (that is, how far voluntary, how far obligatory) yet the forme of them is manifest, that whereas you have in them sometimes, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy upon us; You have much oft∣ner the Blessed Virgine repeated again, and againe under a number of her attri∣butes; you have also all the Saints and Angels, or such as the present occasion pretends for the object of the devotion which a man tenders, named and spo∣ken to, with, Ora pronobis, that is Pray for us; The blessed virgine some saie with te rogamus audi nos; We beseech thee to heare us. One thing I must not forget to observe, that the prayers which follow those Litanies, are almost al∣waies of the first kind; That is to say, addressed directly to God, but menti∣oning
the intercession of Saints or Angels, for the meanes to obtain our prayers at his hands. The third is, when they desire immediately, of them, the same blessings, spirituall and temporall, which all Christians desire of God. There is a Psalter to be seen, with the Name of God changed every where into the Name of the blessed Virgine. There is a book of devotion in French with this title; Moyen de bien seruir, prier, & adorer la Vierge Marie; The way well to serve, pray to, and adore the blessed Virgine. There are divers forms of pray∣er, as well as excessive speeches concerning her especially, and other Saints, quo∣ted in the Answer to the Jesuites Challenge, pag. 330-345. Of those then, the first kind seems to me utterly agreeable with Christianity; importing onely the exercise of that Communion▪ which all members of Gods Church hold with all members of it, ordained by God, for the meanes to obtaine for one ano∣ther the Grace which the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ hath purchased for us, without difference, whether dead or alive; Because we stand assured, that they have the same affection for us, dead or alive, so farre as they know us and our estate, and are obliged to desire and esteem their prayers for us, as for all the members of Christs mysticall body. Neither is it in reason conceivable, that all Christians from the beginning, should make them the occasion of their devotions as I said, out of any consideration but this. For, as concerning the terme of merit perpetually frequented in these prayers; it hath been alwawes maintained by those of the Reformation, that it is not used by the Latine Fa∣thers in any other sense then that which they allow. Therefore the Canon of the Masse, and probably other prayers which are still in use, being more ancient then the greatest part of the Latine Fathers; there is no reason to make any dif∣fficulty of admitting it in that sense, the ground whereof I have maintained in the second Book. The third, taking them at the foot of the leter, and valuing the intent of those that use them, by nothing but the words of them, are meer Idolatries; as desiring of the creature that which God onely gives, which is the worship of the creature for the Creator, God blessed for evermore. And, were we bound to make the acts of them that teach these prayers the acts of the Church, because it tolerates them and maintaines them in it in stead of casting them out, it would be hard to free that Church from Idolatrie; which whoso admitteth, can by no meanes grant it to be a Church, the being whereof supposeth the worship of one God, exclusive to any thing else. But the words of them are capable of the same limitation that I gave to the words of our Lord when I said, that they whom Christians do good to here, may be said to re∣ceive them into everlasting habitations, because God does it in consideration of them, and of the good done them. And so, when Irenaeus calls the Virgine Mary the advocate of Eve V. 19. he that considers his words there, and III. 33. shall find that he saith it not because she prayed for her, but because she be∣lieved the Angels message, and submitted to Gods will, and so became the meanes of saving all, though by our Lord Christ, who pleadeth even for her as well as for Eve. Ground enough there is for such a construction; even the belief of one God alone, that stands in the head of our Creed, which we have no reason to thinke, the Church allowes them secretly to renounce, whom she al∣loweth to make these prayers. And therefore no ground to construe them so, as if the Church, by allowing them, did renounce the ground of all her Christia∣nity. But not ground enough to satisfie a reasonable man, that all that make them do hold that infinite distance between God and his saints and Angels, of whom they demand the same effects, which if they hold not, they are Idola∣ters as the Heathen were; who being convinced of one Godhead, as the Fa∣thers challenge to their faces, divided it into one principall, and divers, that by his gift are such. How shall I presume, that simple Christians, in the devoti∣ons of their hearts, understand that distance of God from his creatures, which their words signify not? which the wisest of their teachres will be much trou∣bled to say, by what figure of speech they can allow it? Especially if it be considered, how little reason or interest in religion there can be, to advance
the reverence of Christian people towards the Saints or Angels, so farre above the reason and ground, which ought to be the spring-head of it. For, so farre are we from any Tradition of the Catholicke Church for this, that the admoni∣tion of Epiphanius to the Collyridians takes-hold of it, Haer. LXXIX, For, they also would have been Christians, being a sort of women in Arabia, who, in imitation of the Eucharist, offered to the Virgine Mary, and communicated. Therefore Epiphanius reproves them by the Custome of the Church, that no such thing was ever done in the Church, as well as by the ground of Christi∣anity, that Christians worship onely one God. This admonition then takes hold, though not of the Church, yet of the prayers which it alloweth, signify∣ing the same with their oblations. So doth the admonition of Saint Ambrose in Rom. I. to them who reserve nothing to God, that they give not to his ser∣vants. So doth that of Saint Augustine, de vera Rel. Cap. LV. that our religi∣on is not to consist in worshipping the dead; And, that an Angel forbad S. John to worship him, but onely God, whose fellow-servants they were. So doth the argument of S. Gregory Nyssene contra Eunom. IV. and Athanasius contra Arian▪ III. concluding our Lord to be God, because he is worshipped, which Cornelius was forbid by Saint Peter, Saint John by the Angel, to do to them, saith Atha∣nasius. In fine, so dangerous is the case, that whoso communicateth in it, is no way reasonably assured, that he communicateth not in the worship of Idols. Onely, the Church of England having acknowledged the Church of Rome a true Church, though corrupt, ever since the Reformation; I am obliged so to interpret the prayers thereof, as to acknowledge the corruption so great, that the prayers which it alloweth may be Idolatries, if they be made in that sense which they may properly signify: But not, that they are necessarily Idola∣tries. For, if they were necessarily Idolatries, then were the Church of Rome, necessarily, no Church; The being of Christianity presupposing the worship of one true God. And though, to confute the Heretickes, the stile of moderne devotions leaves nothing to God which is not attributed to and desired of his Saints; Yet it cannot be denied, they may be the words of them who believe, that God alone can give that which they de∣sire. The second sort, it is confessed, had the beginning in the flourishing times of the Church after Constantine; The lights of the Greek and Latine Church, Basil, Nazianzene, Nyssene, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, Chryso∣stome, Cyrils both, Theodoret, Fulgentius, Gregory the Great, Leo, more, or rather all after that time, have all of them spoken to the Saints departed, and desired their assistance. But neither is this enough to make a Tradition of the Church. For the Church had been CCC. years before it began. Irenaeus is mistaken, when he is alledged for it, as I said even now. Cardinall Bellarmine alleges out of Eusebius, de Praeparat. XIII. 10. Vota ipsis facimus. We make our prayers to them. But the Greek beares onely, We make our prayers to God at their monuments. Athanasius de sanctissima deipara, whom he quotes, is certainly of a later date then Athanasius. Out of S. Hillary I see nothing brought, nor remember any thing to be brought to that purpose. In fine, af∣ter Constantine, when the Festivalls of the Saints, being publickly celebrated, oc∣casioned the confluence of Gentiles as well as Christians, and innumerable things were done, which seemed miracles done by God, to attest the honour done them, and the truth of Christianity which it supposed; I acknowledge, those great lights did think fit to addresse themselves to them, as petitioners▪ but so at the first, as those that were no wayes assured by our common Christi∣anity, that their petitions arrived at their knowledge. You have seen Saint Augustine acknowledge, that they must come by such meanes, as God is no way tied to furnish. Gregory Nazianzene speakes to Gorgonia, in his Oration upon her, and to Constantius, in his first oration against Juliane, but under a doubtfull condition, if they were sensible of what he spake. Enough to distin∣guish praying to God from any addresse to a creature, though religion be the ground of it. And when the apparitions about their monuments were
held unquestionable, yet was it questioned, whether the same sou could be pre∣sent at once in places of so much distance, or Angels appear like them, as you may see in the answer aforesaid, pag. 391. 394. Nay, Hugo de S. Victore in Cassander, Epist. XIX. hath inabled him to hold, that the Litanies do not suppose that the Saints hear them, and therefore are expounded by some to sig∣nify conditionall desires, if God grant them to come to their knowledge. But of that I speak not yet, onely as it inables me to conclude, that this kind of prayer is not Idolatry. This necessarily followes from the premises; Because a man cannot take that Saint or Angel for God, whose prayers he desires; But manifestly showes, that his desire is grounded upon the relation which he thinkes he hath to him, by our Lord Christ, and by his Church. Neverthe∣lesse, though it be not Idolatry, the consequence and production of it not be∣ing distinguishable from Idolatry, the Church must needes stand obliged to give it those bounds, that may prevent such mischeif, as that which shall make it no Church. For, though the degrees are not visible by which the abuse is come to this height, yet, I conceive, it appeares, by Walafridus Strabus de Re∣bus Ecclesiasticis cap. XXVIII. that before S. Jerome, the Saints had no roome in the Litanies, which answer; Pray for us; after every Saints name. There he telleth, that S. Jerome first translated Eusebius his Martyrologe (containing what Saints died on what dayes of the year) at the request of Chromatius and Heliodorus Bishops, upon occasion of that commendation which the Emperor Theodosius had given Gregory Bishop of Cordova, for commemorating every day at the Eucharist, the saints of the day. And afore this, he affirmeth, the Saints names had no room in the Letanies. And Chemnitius hath given us the tran∣script of an ancient Letanie out of a written Copy belonging to the Abbey of Corbey upon the Wesor, which calleth upon the Saints; Sancte Petre, Sancte Paule, &c. but so, that the suffrage is; Exaudi Christe; O Christ hear us, or them for us; which is the effect of the first sort of Prayer, and an evident argu∣ment that the formes now in force took possession by degrees. For the Leta∣tanies are properly , Lord have mercy upon us, as the Liturgies of Saint Basil and Saint Chrisostome call them. By that forme of service which the Constitutions of the Apostles relate, where the Deacon indites to the people what they are to pray for, in behalf of all estates in the Church, and their neces∣sities; you shall see the people answer onely, , Lord have mercy. That is their part. Thence came the name of Letanies, whether such devoti∣ons were used in Processions, or otherwise. That, in the Letanies of Saint Gre∣gory, whereof we read in his life, I. 41. 42. The Saints were spoken to, the people answering, Ora pro nobis, pray for us; it is easy to believe. For, of Charles the Great and Walafridus his time there is no question to be made. That the same was done in Saint Basils Letanies, whereof Epist. LXIII. or in those which Mamertus Bishop of Vienna instituted, (as we find by Sidonius Epist. V. 14. VII. 1. which have since been called Rogations) there is no manner of appearance; And the innovaion of Petrus Fullo, the Eutychian Bishop of Antiochia, after the Councile of Chalcedon, which Nicephorus relates Eccles. Hist. XV. 28. in bringing the Blessed Virgine into the prayers of the Church, is enough to assure us there is no Tradition of the Apostles for it. A difference very considerable. For, grant the monuments of Saints and Martyrs the places for Christians to meet at, for Gods service in publicke, for their private devo∣tions, by primitive Christianity; All this while the service of God is the work, the honour of the Saints, determines onely the time and place of it. Processi∣ons celebrated with Letanies were assemblies for Gods service, to turn away his plagues, and the like; And, when the Saints come into them, their ho∣nor becomes part of the work for which Christians assemble. Suppose a sim∣ple soul can distinguish between Ora pro nobis, and Domine miserere; between Pray for us, and Lord have mercy upon us; How shall I be assured, that it di∣stinguishes between the honour that Pagans gave the lesse gods, under Jupiter the Father of gods, and that which himself gives the Saints, under the God of those Saints? And is it enough, that the Church injoynes not, nor teaches
Idolatry? Is it not further bound to secure us against it? I know not whether it can be said, that Processions, and Letanies, are voluntary devo∣tions, which the people are not answerable for if they neglect. They were first brought in, and since frequented, at the instance of Prelates, and their Clergy; and, if they be amisse, the people are snared by their meanes; that is by the Church, if the Church bear them out in it. And by these three sorts of Prayers it appears, that without giving bounds to private conceits, there is meanes to stop mens course from that extreamity, which, whether it be reall Idolatry or not, nothing can assure us. Upon these terms I stand. I have heard those relations, upon credit not to be questioned, which make their de∣votions to Saints hardly distinguishable from the Idolatries of Pagans. That they who preferred them, could not, or did not distinguish, I say not. In fine, they demonstrate manifold more affection for the Blessed Virgine, or some particular Saints, then for our Lord. That they call not upon Saints to pray for them but to help them; That they neither expresse, nor can be presumed to meane, by praying for them, but by granting their prayers; In fine, that they demonstrate inward subjection of the heart, wherein Idolatrie consists: I cannot disbelieve those who relate what they see done. What may be the reason why to them, rather then to God? It was a meanes to bring the world to be Christians, that it was preswaded, that God protected Christians, by the intercession of those Saints, whose Festivalls they solemnized. But it brought them to be Christians, with that love of the world, and the present commodi∣ties of it, which Christianity pretends to leave without the Church, among the Pagans. Should they resigne these affections to their Christianity, they would have immediate recourse to God: whom having to friend, they know they need neither be troubled for plague, nor toothach, nor any thing which the Crosse of Christ consists with. While they cannot assure themselves that they do, no marvaile if they would have such Christianity, as may give them hope of that, by the Saints, which God assures them not by it. I grant it no Idolatrie, that is, not necessarily any Idolatrie, to pray to Saints to pray for us. The very matter implies an equivocation in the word praying, which no∣thing hinders the heart to distinguish. But is it fit for the Church to maintaine it, because it is necessarily no Idolatry? I grant, Ora pro nobis, in the Letanies, might be taken for the ejaculation of a desire which a man knowes not whether it is heard or not; (as some instance in a leter, which a man would write, though uncertaine whether it shall come to hand or not) and I could wish, that the people were taught so much, by the form; as a powerfull meanes to preserve the distance between God and his creature alive in their esteem. I count it not fit for a private person to say, what might be condescended to, for the reunion of the Church stopping the way upon those mischiefs, which the flourishing times of the Church have not prevented. While all bounds are refused, all ex∣treamities maintained, I alledge it, for one of the most considerable titles for reformation without the consent of the whole. As for the remaines of the Saints bodies, and the honour of them, having said this of their Souls, whereof their bodies had been the instruments, I shall need to say but a little. Gennadius I will not forget, De Eccles. dogmat Cap. LXXIII. Sanctorum corpora, & praecipue beatorum Martyrum reliquias, acsi Christi membra sincerissime honoranda: & Basilicas eorum nominibus appellatas, velut loca sancta divino cultui mancipata, affctu piissimo, & devotione fidelssi∣ma adeundas credimus. Si quis contra hanc sententiam venerit, non Christianus, sed Eunomianus & Vigilantianus est. We believe, that we are most sincerely to honour the corpses of the Saints, specially the reliques of the Martyres, as of the members of Christ; And to come to the Churches called by their names, with most pious affection, and most faithfull devotion. If any man do against this sentence, he is no Christiane, but a follower of Eunomius and Vigilantius. At the first, the places of their buriall, and times of their triumphs, determined the circum∣stances of Gods service. Afterwards, when more Churches were requisite, then there were Saints, to bury their remaines where the Eucharist was celebra∣ted.
seemes an honor proper for the purpose. Nay, though S. Jerome confesse that those pore women, which lighted candles in houour of them, had the zeale of God not according to knowledg; (supposing both Jewes and Gentiles had a custome to light candles, on all occasions which they would honourably cele∣brate) why should it seeme a ceremony unfit to expresse mens esteeme of Gods Grace in them? If Vigilantius could not downe with this, I have no∣thing to doe with Vigilantius. But there were abuses even before that time. Lucilla, reproved by Cacilianus, Deacon of Carthage, for kissing the reliques of some questionable Martyre before the Eucharist, by her mony and faction raised the schisme of the Donatist, upon his being chosen Bishop. Optatus I. S. Austin knew many Christians that worshipped tombes and pictures de moribus Eccles. Cath. cap. XXXIV. Vigilantius might desire, onely that bounds might be put to prevent abuses, and in that, might be borne out by those Prelates whom S. Jerom taxes. In that, I doe not find Vigilantius condemned by the Church. And, those bounds were easily determined, if prayer to Saints did not transgresse the bounds of revealed truth. For, were nothing done that should suppose that they heare the prayers that are made them, there should be no consi∣derable occasion, to transgresse the bounds of honour due unto their re∣liques. As for the worshipping of images, of necessity, the word  or carved Image in the second commandement must either stand for any similitude, & so the making or having of any maner of image will be forbidden by the precept; Or, for the similitude of any imaginary Godhead; And so no image but those are forbidden by it. According to that former sense, the making of the brazen ser∣pent & the Cherubins over the Arke is a dispensation of God in his own positive law, which is easily understood. But, Solomon making the Buls, the Lions, Eagles & Cherubins in his temple will be no lesse, and wil require a revelation to warrant it. According to the later, making of images, will be no more prohibited the Jewes, then other nations, by the Law. But, God having constituted a power in the Nation to limit the Law, and so to make a hedge for it, as the Jewes speake; that which they forbid, will be, by that meanes, prohibited by the Law. And so, there might be such an image in Davids house, as we read of 1. Sam. XIX. 12. that is such an one as was not so prohibited. And, by the sme reason, the tribute money might have Caesars picture on it, which other∣wise must be against the Law. And when Josephus saies, that Solomon incurred blame y making images of living creatures in the Temple, it will appear, that their constitutions, in his time forbad the making of such. Tertullian contra Marc II. 22. manifestly affirms the making of the Brazen Serpent & Cherubines not to have been against the Law, because not made for Idoles, alleging the words of the precept; Thou shalt not worship them nor serve them; For a restri∣ction limiting the generality of a carved image. And this opinion I doubt not to be true; and that there is no third to be named. For, if it be said that the meaning of the precept is; Thou shalt make no Image that may give occasion to worship it; No supposing a conceit of more Gods then one, an image is not a thing that can make a man thinke so; supposing the conceite of a God be∣sides the true God, without an image, a man will worship the same. Now, ei∣ther God by saying; Thou shalt make no image that may give occasion to wor∣ship it; refers it to every man to judge, whether the image that he may make gives occasion to worship it or not; And then, he leaves it to every man to make any image, which he judges to give none: Or, he refe it to the power which he appointeth to oblige the nation, in that behalfe, to judge; Which is that which I say. And therefore, seeing no man is left to himselfe, to judge in that which God hath appointed a power to determine, of necessity, this sense is the same which I maintaine. The consequence whereof is, that it is in the power of the Church to judge whether images are to be had, and that in Churches, or not. For, the power that concludes the Church being the same with the power that concludes the Synagogue, as the Synagogue and the Church are both one and the same people of God, under the Law and the
Gospell▪ It is not possible to limit this power under the Gospell, not to place images in Churches, by vertue of this Law, which provides nothing concerning Churches. The case would come to be the same, if we should suppose the precept to prohibit the making of an Image. For then, the matter would ne∣cessarily evidence that it was positive, and given onely the people of the Jewes, for that estate which the Law introduced; Seeing, not onely that which is ceremoniall, but also that which is positive, in Moses Law, necessarily ceaseth to oblige Christians. The reason why the Law provideth not to the contrary, is that which I have alleged, why Christians are not tyed to parte with wives or husbnds that are Idolaters, as the Jewes were, out of S. Austine; That, whilst the blessings of the world were the promises, which God conditioned to give them that should keepe his Lawes, the prosperity of this world might move Israelites according to the lesh, to fall from their own to their husbands or their wives Gods▪ the worshippers whereof they saw prosper in the world. Not so those who had undertaken his Crosse, and thereupon, if faithfully, had received his spirit which the Gospell bringeth. For so, why should the Church think, that having Images should seduce those that are such, to think them the seates of some God head, which supposeth a conceite of more Gods then one? And upon this supposition proceedeth all that is written n the pro∣phesies of Esay and Jeremy, in the book of Baruch, under the person of Jeremy, and in the rest of the prophets, in scorne of the Images of the Gentiles; To wit, that they imagined some Deity contayned and inclosed in them, which were indeed meere wood and stone. The question that remaines is but onely this; whether this power of the Church hath been duely executed, and within the bounds of our common Christianity, or not. For, to pretend that the Apostles themselves have put it in use, by prescribing, that images be had, and in Churches, would be to contradict all that appeares in the point by the records of the Church. For, though I be obliged to say, that there was never any constitution of the Apostles, injoyning the whole Church, not to bring any image into any Church; because all the Church, that is considerable, hath sometimes done it; yet will it easily appeare there is no act of the whole Church, binding all to have them in Churches. The council of Elivira, Can. XXXVI. Placuit pictu∣ras in Ecclesiis esse non debere, ne quod clitur in parietibus pingatur. It seemed good that there be no pictures in the Churches; least that which is worshiped be pictured on the wales. The Epistle of Epiphanius to Iohn Bishop of Jerusalem is extant in S. Jerome, relating how, finding somthing of our Lord Christ pain∣ted upon a vaile in a Church of his Diocesse, he gave order to teare it, which, being out of his Diocese, he could not have don, had he not thought it against Gods Law; and therfore no law of the Church. And Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VII. 18. relating the statue of our Lord curing the woman that had the issue of blood, at Caesaea Philipi, faith, it is no marvaile, that Gentils con∣verted to the aith, should honour our Lord, and his Apostles (for he saith, he had sen images of Peter and Paul as well as of our Lord, , preserved from their time) as the Gentiles used to honour their Saviors or benefactors. But, had it been against Gods Law, would not the Apostles have told them so; would they not have believed the Apostles▪ whom they beleved before they were Christians? The picture of the good shepheard upon the Chalices of the Church, which Tertullian appeales to de Pudicit. cap. VII. easily shows, that they used not his Picture, who used an Embleme of Christ for a Picture. And you heard S. Austine say, that he knew many worshippers of Pictures and Tombes among Christians. The true ground and effect of these passages, is hard for me to evidence here in a few words. I believe S. Austine saw some dow▪ baked Christians doe that at the tombes of Christians, which, when they were idolaters they did at the tombes of their friends, where part of their Idolatries, don were to their Ghosts. For, by that which followes he complains, that he saw that excesse of meate and drinke upon the graves of Christians, which, it is no marvaile if the Idolatries of the Gentiles allowed. So that it is no such marvaile,
that such Christians should worship Pictures, as did the Gentiles. The Ca∣non is one of the hardest pieces of antiquity that I know. The most probable seemes to be this. That it followes the reason alleged in Deuteronomy, against any image for God, because they saw no shape of God. So▪ the word cultus seemes strictly to signifie that honour which Christianity tenders immediately to God, not that which it may injoine to his creature. And their reason will be this, because the God▪ head cannot be painted, therefore no Pictures in Churches. I doe believe there was somthing of the quarrell betweene Iohn of Jerusalem and Epiphanius about Origen (upon which, Theophilus of Alexan∣dria heaved S. Chrosystome out of the Sea of Constantinople) in that act of tear∣ing the vaile; But, I believe Epiphanius acted according to his opinion in it, and an opinion that he owned to all the world, what ever the rest of the Church did; (for we see not that proceeding against Iohn of Jerusalem, as against S. Chrosystome) Eusebius might thinke those statues of our Lord and his cure, those pictures of S. Peter and S. Paul more ancient then indeed they were. But, neither doth he charge any Idolatry upon them, nor is there any questi∣on in the case, but of having pictures in private, not in the Church. That after this time, Churches were everywhere trimmed with the stories of the Saints, and the Passions of the Martyrs, I need not repeat much to prove; the con∣troversy in the East, about the worshipping of them, is evidence enough, that the use of them went forward, but with such contradiction, that some held them Idoles and broke them in peeces, (who were there upon called Ico∣noclast,) others worshipped them; who after many attempts of the contrary party, prevailed at length in a Council at Nicaea thence called the VII. General Council, with the concurrence of the Pope. That the decree of the Councill injoines no Idolatry, notwithstanding what∣soever prejudice to the contrary, I must maintaine as unquestionable, suppo∣sing the premises. So far is it, from leaving any roome for the imagination of any false God▪ head, to be represented by the images, which it allowes, that it expressely distinguisheth, that honour done the image of our Lord Christ to be equvcally called worship, that is, to be onely so called, but not to signifie the esteeme of God; (which, he that believes the Holy Trinity, can no way attibute to the image of our Lord) supposing, not granting, that it were law∣full to honoure the image of our Lord, not with any gesture or word signify∣ing any God head inclosed in it, (which the idolatries of the heathen did sig∣nifie▪) but, that it is the picture of that man who also is God; (which, he who believes the Trinity, and puts off his hat and bowes the knee to the image of our Lord must needs signifie) I say this shall be no dolatry, because (whe∣ther the worship of the image or of him whose image it is) necessarily it is no worship of God, but proceeds from an esteem, that the image is a contempti∣ble creature, but that the man whom it signifies is God. I say upon these termes, it is not possible that it should be Idolatry, to worship this image. Be∣cause, though the words or the gesture which are used may signifie the honour due to▪ God alone, yet the profession under which they are used necessarily li∣mits them to the honour of that which is not held to be God, namely the image t is to be granted, that, whosoever it was that writ the book against Image under the name of Charles the great did understand the council to injoine▪ the worship of God to be give the image of our Lord; For, of any othr image of God there was no question in that Councile) But it is not to be denied, that it was a meere mistake▪ and that the Councile acknowledging, that submissi∣on of the heart, which the excellence of God onely challenges, proper to the Holy Tinity, maintaines, a signification of that esteeme, to be paid to the I∣mage of our Lord. For the words of the Councile, I refer you to Estius in III. Sentent. distinct. IX. ss. II. and III. where you shall see, besides the honour▪ due to God alone, and the honour due to his Saints, the Council injoines a kind of honour for the images of either, respectively signifying the esteeme we have for God, and of his Saints. I know there is much noise of Latria, to sig∣nifie the honour due to God alone, and Dulia that which belongs to his Saint. And I am satisfied that there is no ground for the difference, either in the
originall reason or use of the words, But, as nothing hinders them to be ta∣ken as words of art use to be taken, to signifie peculiar conceptions in Christi∣anity; so, if dulia be understood as S. Austine understandes it cntra Faustum XX. 21. for that love and communion which we imbrace the saints that are a∣lve with, there is no fear of Idolatry in honouring the Saints departed with du∣lia. But, the honour we give the images, is not the honour we give the principal, but onely by the equivocating of terms, according to the decree of the Council. Therefore that honour of images which the decree maintaineth, is no Idolatry. But, he that saies it is no idolatry which they injoine, does not therefore justifie or commend them for injoyningit. It were a pittifull commendation for the Church, that it is not Idolatry which the decree thereof injoynes. It is therefore no evidence, that the decree obliges, because it injoines no idolatry. You saw how neere the honour of Saints, in the prayers which come from this decree, came to Idolatry. And, though those that counted Images idoles in the East, stood for the honour of the Saints, yet it is certaine, and visible, that the au∣thors of the decree did intend to advance the honour of the Saints thereby, and effect it. What is that effect? That the Saints are prayed to by Christians, in such forme, and with such termes, as doe not distinguish whether they hold them Gods or creatures. Grant they agree with their profession, and you must construe them to the due difference; suppose they understand not the com∣mon profession, or the consequence of▪ it, who warants them no Idolaters? It is alleged out of S. Basil de Spiritu Sancto cap. XVIII. that the honour of the Image passeth to the principall. He speaketh of the honour of the Sonne, that it is the honour of the Father, whose image the Son is And so it is indeed. The honour of the Father and of the Son is both one and the same. To say that the image of our Lord is to be honoured as he is, is perfect idolatry. But he who believes the Son to be of the fathers substance, and his picture to be his picture, cannot say so, if he be in his wits. Either he commits Idolatry, or he contradicts himselfe; That may and must be said. It is easy to see how many Divines of the Church of Rome, make images honourable with the honour of their principall; The images of our Lord, by consequence with latria the ho∣nour proper to God. When this is said, it must be cured by distinguishing though not properly, yet improperly; though not by it self, yet accidentally, re∣ducible to that honour which the principall is worshipped with; that is, the image of Christ, as God. Yet you are not to use these termes to the people, least they prove Idolaters, or have cause to think their teachers such. So Cardinall Bellarmine de Imaginibus II. 23, 24, 25. There is a cure for Idolatry in the distinction, supposing him to contradict himself. For what greater contradicti∣on then that the honour, that may be reduced to the honour of God, should be the honour of God; seeing that it is not the honour of God, which is not pro∣per to God, as consisting in the esteeme of him above all things? So, for the adoration of the Crosse, the signe of the Crosse which I spoke of before, is one∣ly a ceremony, which, being from the beginning, frequented by Christians up∣on all occasions, the Church had reason to make use of, in the solemnizing of the greatest actions of Gods publike service; particularly, those whereby the authority of the Church is convayed and exercised. The Crosse whereon our Lord Christ was crucified is a relique, though not parte of his body, yet for coming so nere to his body, deserving to be honoured. Other Crosses are the images of that. The Schoole Doctors question, what honour it is which the true Crosse of Christ demands. And the head of them, Thomas Aquina, an∣swers the honour proper to God, by the name of latria: Either as re∣presenting the figure of Christ crucified, or as washed with his blood. If the Crosse of Christ must be worshipped with the honour proper to God, because washed with our Saviours bloud, then must it have received divine vertue from his bloud; Is not this construction reasonable? And what made the Idoles of the Hethen idoles, but an opinion of divine vertue residing in them▪ by being set up for the exercise of their religion that supposed many Gods? I grant the construction is necessary, though not reasonable. For, I find it
construed otherwise. To make a difference between the true Crosse of Christ which is honoured for a relique, and other Crosses, which are honoured as the pictures of it, and signes putting us in mind of Christ on the Crosse. So, the words of Thomas Aquinas may be reasonably taken to teach Idolatry. If they be not necessarily so to be taken, yet, as he teacheth to honour it with Latria, either he teacheth Idolatry or contradicteth himself, for the same reason as in Images. What the effect of these excessive positions hath been, is easie to see. They clothe their images, they paint them, they guild them the finest they may. They think themselves holy for touching, kissing, and caressing them, as children do their babies. They touch their bo∣dies with them, and think themselves hallowed by the meanes. They put a cotton on the end of a stick, and touch first the images, then, the eyes, the lips, and the noses of them that come, and that in their surplisses. Thus are they induced to pray directly to the Saints for their carnall concupiscences, as did the heathen idolaters; to vow to give themselves to them, to put themselves under their protection and defence, to set them up in their privacies, yea, in lcivious postures, and the habits of their mistresses, as promising themselves protection from them in their debauches. In fine, by this meanes, they are come to make images of God; not pictures of his apparitions in the Scrip∣ture, but of the Father, and of the holy Trinity. A thing so expresly forbid∣den by the Law. For, the Arke of the Covenant had on it, indeed, the figures that signified Angels, the Throne of God; it self signifying Christ, in whom God is propitious to mankind. Therefore they were to worship towards the Ark. But the majesty of God was, hereby, understood to be like nothing visi∣ble, they were onely taught where to find him propitious. Now, setting up their images, and injoyning images to be worshipped, the construction is so reasonable, that they honour the image with the honour due to God alone, that it is not possible to make any other reasonable construction of that which they doe. Against the II. Councile of Nicaea all this, and without any order of the present Church of Rome; but so, that, were not men sensible by whom they were authorized, it were as easily disowned, on the one side, as it were hard on the other side, to perswade men to do it. Here it will be said, these are probable reasons, such as, in moral matters, may alwayes be made on both sides; (for what is there concerning humane affairs, that is not disputable?) But, the decree of the Church being once interposed, by the second Councile of Nicaea, it behoveth all Sons of the Church, to de∣part from their own reasons, because the unity of the Church, as a Body, can by no meanes be maintained, unlesse inferiours yeild to the judgement of supe∣riours. An objection which I must owne, because I have acknowledged the argument of it hitherto, and have no where been straightened by it. But I say therefore that the Power of the Church hath never been exercised by a volun∣tary consent, in any decree injoyning the worship of Images. For the having of Images in Churches, I acknowledge, there is a clear and unquestionable con∣sent of the Church visible; though, as I said afore, there appeared dissatisfacti∣on in some parts, which appeares to be voided, by the subsequent consent of the whole. And I finde sufficient and clear reason for it; the adorning of Churches for the solemnity of Gods service; the instruction of the simple, that cannot reade in any booke, by the pictures of things related in the Bible, and the acts and sufferings of the Saints and Martyrs; the admonishing of all, whether learned or unlearned, of that which they knew before; the stirring up of devotion towards God, by being admonished, whether of things related in the Scriptures, or in the relations concerning the Saints, and Martyrs, which the Church justifieth. In a matter subject to the power of the Church, as I have showed this to be, the light of common reason attesting these considerati∣ons, more ought not to be demanded. And therefore, though the Homilya∣gainst perill of Idolatry, contain a wholsome doctrine, in this particular, I must have leave to think it failes; as it evidently doth in others. But all those reasons are utterly impertinent to the worshipping of Images. For, suppose the Image
of our Lord, or his Crosse, may reasonably determine the circumstance of place, where a man may pray to God, as I said of the holy Eucharist; the wor∣ship so tendered will be manifestly the worship of God, and have no further to do with the image, then a furniture or instrument, not which a man serves, but whereby he serves God. And therefore Saint Gregory, supposing, and, as it seems, taking no notice of him that prayes before the image of Christ upon the Crosse, in his Epistle to Secundinus; In another Epistle to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles forbiddeth all worshipping of Images, as making them subjects capable of any worship that may be called religious, as proceeding from or in∣joyned by that virtue. For, the honour of the image passeth not upon the prin∣cipall, any otherwise, in this case, then, as the presence thereof may be a signe to shew why we worship the principall where it is. Which, the images of Saints are not fit to signify, because their principals the Saints are not capable of it. But, setting aside all dispute what ought to be done; because the question is, what the Church hath decreed, that it ought to be done, I say, the decree of the second Councile of Nicaea, obligeth not the Church at present, because it ne∣ver had the force of a sentence. I have said in due place, that all decrees of Coun∣ciles are but prejudices, no sentences. The reason whereof is as necessary as evi∣dent, supposing the premises. For, the consent of the whole is that which gives any decree the force of a decree, as you saw, by the instance of the Council of Sardica. The consent of the representatives in a Council is a presumption of the consent of the whole, but it is not the formall consent of it. No Council ever was composed of representatives, proportionable, in number of votes, to the weight of each part to the whole. The ground of a presumption making the calling of Councils worth the while, is, because, whatsoever may come in con∣sideration is supposed to have been wayed there, and the expresse consent had of the present, against which the absent cannot weigh. In the II. Councile of Nicaea, the Popes Legates consented; and I granted afore, the West was wont to receive the conclusions from Rome, but not tied so to do, in case the matter re∣quired further examination, as in this case. For, within a while after, a Council of Charles the Greats Dominions (then the farre greatest part of the Western Church) assembled at Francford, condemnes the Council of Nicaea, allowes the having of images in Churches, as S. Gregory had done, and in like maner, condemnes all worshipping of them. Here was a fair stop to the recal∣ling of the Church of Romes concurrence to it. Which, though it was not ef∣fected, yet under Ludovicus Pius son of Charles the Great, an Embassy  comes from the Easterne Emperor, with a leter yet extant, signifying many orrible abuses, which the decree had produced, and desiring his concurrence, and the concurrence of the Church under him, to stop the current of them. A Treaty being had hereupon, by the Prelates of his dominion, the resolution-is yet ex∣tant in the negative, under the name of the Synod of Paris, grounded upon con∣sent with the Fathers. By this, and by divers particulars laid forth by the Archbishop of Spalate 7. de Republ. Eccles. XII. 59. 71. it appeares, that the worship of images, never came in force by virtue of this Conncile of Nicea. And amongst them, it is not to be forgotten, that the acts thereof were not known in the West; as appeareth by the extravagancies of Thomas Aquinas, and the Schoole Doctors that followed him, in determining, that images, and the true Crosse of Christ are to be worshipped with the same honour as their principals; The image of Christ therefore, and his true Crosse, with the ho∣nour due to God alone, though in reference to God. Had the Acts of the Councile been known in the West, (as they would have been, had it been ad∣mitted) these men would never have gone about to bring in an opinion, so ex∣travagant from the doctrine of the Councile. Which shewes plainly, that it is the See of Rome, that hath imployed the whole interest thereof, right or wrong, to give that force to the decree, which, of it self it had not. You have besides, a work of Jonas Bishop of Orleans, against Claudius Bishop of Turin, you have the testimony of Walafridus Strabo, allowing images, but disallowing all wor∣ship of them. Nay, in the time of Fredrick Barbarussa, Nicetas, relating how
he took Philippopolis, notes, that the Armenians stirred not for the taking of the City, having confidence in the Almans, as agreeing with them in religion, because neither of them worshipped images. De Imperio Isaaci Angeli. II. Therefore, in removing the force of this decree, it is not the authority of the whole Church, but the will of the See of Rome, that is transgressed. And, that power of the See of Rome by which this is done, is not that regular preeminence thereof over other Churches, which cannot decree any thing in the matter of a generall Councile, but, by a generall Councile, either expresly assembled, or included in the consent of those Churches whereof it consists. But of that no∣thing is or can be alledged. It remaines therefore, that it is come to effect by that infinite power thereof, which the whole Church acknowledgeth not, and therefore, in effect, by the meanes which it imployeth, to justify such a pre∣tense. I say no more of the ceremonies of Gods service. I maintaine no further ef∣fect of them, then the ground for them warrants. The composition of our nature makes them fit and necessary meanes to procure that attention of mind, that devotion of Spirit, which God is to be served with, even in private, much more at the publicke and solemn assemblies of the Church. Whatsoever is ap∣pointed by the Church, for the circumstance, furniture, solemnity or ceremony of Gods service, by virtue of the trust reposed in it, is thereby to be accounted holy, and so used, and respected. The memories of Gods Saints and Martyrs are fit occasions to determine the time and place and other circumstances of it: And the honour done them in recording their acts and sufferings, (with the conversation of our Lord upon earth) whether out of the Scriptures, or other∣wise, a fit meanes to render his solemne service recommendable, for the reve∣rence which it is performed with. If, in stead of circumstances, and instruments the Saints of God, or Images, or any creature of God whatsoever become the object of that worship, for which Churches were built, or for which Christi∣ans assemble; by that meanes, there may be roome to let in that Idolatry at the back door, which Christianity shutteth out at the great gate. Whether or no it be a fault in Christians, that they cannot do violence to their senses, and count those things holy, as instruments of Gods service, because so they should be, which they are convinced, in common reason, that they are used to his dis∣service; I dispute not now. But without dispute, woe to them by whom offen∣ces come; And, they who prosecute offences given without measure, are they by whom offences come. The charge of superstition is a goodly pretense for abolishing ceremonies. But when, not onely the reverence of Gods service, but also the offices of it are abolished withall, then is there cause to say, that the service of God it selfe seeems superstitious. To fit and sleep out a sermon, or censure a prayer, is more for a mans ease, then to fall down on his knees, to humble his soul at Gods footstool, and to withdraw his minde from the curi∣osity of knowledge or language, to the sense of Gods majesty and his own mi∣sery. It is then for our ease, but not for Gods service, that the ceremonies thereof should be counted superstitious.
CHAP. XXXI. The ground for a Monasticall life in the Scriptures; And in the practice of the primitive Church. The Church getteth no peculiar interest in them who pro∣fesse it, by their professing of it. The nature and intent of it renders it subordi∣nate to the Clergy. How farre the single life of the Clergy hath been a Law to the Church. Inexecution of the Canons for it. Nullity of the proceed∣dings of the Church of Rome in it. The interest of the People in the acts of the Church; And in the use of the Scriptures. I Cannot make an end, by distinguishing the bounds of Ecclesiasticall and Secular power in Church matters, till I have resolved, whether or no the body of it, the materials of which it consists, be sufficiently distinguished by the estates of Clergy and People; Or whether there be a third estate of Mon∣kery, constituted by Gods Law, intitling the Church to a right in those who professe it, upon the ground of Christianity, and in order to the effect of it. For, the resolution hereof opens the ground, as well of that reverence which the people owe the Clergy, as of that instruction and good example which the Clergy owe the people, the neglect whereof is that which forfeiteth the very being of the Church, that is the unity of it. I am not now to dispute whether it be lawfull for a Christian to vow to God the vow of continence or not, having proved in the second book that it is; And showed, in what sense the perfecti∣on of a Christian may be understood to consist in the professing and perform∣ing of it. The case of Ananias and Sapphira hath been drawn into conse∣quence, not onely by Saint Basil, as I showed you in the first book, but also by Saint Gregory of Rome, Epist. I. 33. quoted by Gratiane XVII. Quaest. I. Cap. III. though, acknowledging, that community of goods was a part of the profession of the Christians then at Jerusalem, it cannot be said, that they who professed this community of goods did professe that which is strictly called Monkery. For, they letted not to continue married, all Monks professing continence. But I have, besides, made it to appear, that all were not tied, then at Jerusalem, to give up all their goods to the stock of the Church, but onely what the common Christianity should prompt every man to contribute to the subsistence of the Church and Christianity; which, what it required, was visible. But I do not therefore yield, that the argument is not of force, so far as the case (and therefore the reason drawn from it) takes place. All Christians conse∣crate themselves to the service of God, by being Baptized and made Christians. By that they stand obliged, to consecrate their goods to the subsistence of his Church, as the necessities thereof become visible. If it appear to be part of this Christianity to consecrate a mans self to God further, by professing such a course of life, as he thinks may give him best meanes and opportunity, of dis∣charging the common profession of Christians; (though all Christians are not tied to professe the same) shall he not stand bound to make it good, upon the same ground, for which Ananias and Sapphira are condemned, in withdraw∣ing that which they professed to consecrate to God? But Saint Pauls instru∣ction, to refuse the younger widdows, hath no answer; Because, when they grow wanton against Christ, they will marry; Having damnation, as having set their first faith at nought. 1 Tim. V. 11, 12. For what can that first faith be, but their promise ingaged to the Church, whereby they dedicate themselves to the service thereof, in the state of widows? Under the Old Testament, it is no mistake of the Jewes to believe that all Gods people were, ordinarily, under the precept of increase and multiply; re∣quiring of them, the state of marriage. Saint Angustine and other Fathers of the Church, have found markes of it in the Old Testament. It is not there∣fore
to be imagined, that there is either precept or precedent for the state of Monkes, in the Old Testament. Nor yet to be denied, that Nazarites, especi∣ally from the mothers womb, that those women who kept guard at the Taber∣nacle, Exod. XXXVIII. 5. 1 Sam. II. 22. (as Anna the daughter of Phanuel, that departed not from the Temple, serving God with fasting and prayer day and night, Luke II. 37.) that the Rechabites are instances and precedents of some principles and ingredients of their profession, even under the Old Testament. For, if man and wife should now dedicate themselves to attend upon the poor, sick, and helplesse in hospitals, or the like, they would be no lesse. The Prophets, though under no perpetuall tye, lived in a kind of Community with their disciples; not for that knowledge of the Law which the Rulers of the peo∣ple professed, (whom they were ordinarily in difference with, and often times persecuted to death by them) but for those rudiments of Christianity, which, by their meanes, were kept alive under the Law. The Rechabites, being of the race of the Kenites, which, it seems, upon Moses invitation to Jethro, tooke part with the Israelites, in the Land of Promise, under the condition of wor∣shipping onely the true God; knowing, what all strangers are subject to, living under the dominion and protection of strangers, received a Law from their predecessors, not to have further to do in the world, then their subsistence, by the simplest sort of life, by being shepherds, required. And, being com∣mended for obeying their Rule, by the Prophet Jeremy, from Gods mouth, have much justified them, who, under Christianity, do voluntarily put them∣selves under the like Rule, out of a pretense, the better to discharge their Chri∣stianity by that meanes. During the time of our Lord, there was a third sect of people among the Jewes, whom we find no mention of in the Scriptures of the New Testament, because they lived retyred out of the world, some married, others in single life, both under a most strict observation of their Rule, which you have in Josephus, under the name of Essanes. It is well enough known, that Eusebius finding a relation written by Philo the Jew, of that manner of life which they used in Egypt, hard by Alexandria, hath reported them for Christians; and how this report hath been disowned of late yeares, as a meer mistake of Eusebius, or an ungrounded conjecture. I, who have showed, that it is possible Philo himself may have been a Christian, must not reject the opinion of those, who think they might really be Christians, converted by the first arrivall of Christianity in Aegypt. For, in the case which I spoke of, there is no cause, why they might not be both Jewes and Christians, the sepa∣ration of the Church from the Synagogue not being yet formed; and, when it was formed, continue Christians, forsaking the Synagogue. And truly the mention of Virgines, as of a peculiar order visible in the Church, is so ancient in the writings of Tertulliane, Methodius, (whose Book of Virginity is publish∣ed of late) and Saint Cypriane, that it must needs be impossible to find any beginning for it. For Tertulliane writing his Book, De velandis Virginibus, to prove that Order not exempt from Saint Pauls injunction, that women vail their faces at divine service; appeales to the custome of the Church at Corinth, to which Saint Paul writ it, as having alwayes observed it in Virgines. And therefore the same Saint Paul, directing him who had resolved to keep his daughter a Virgine. 1 Cor. VII 37. seems to suppose, this resolution to im∣ply that education, whereby she might be inabled so to continue. For, it is true, the profession is difficult, but not impossible for him to go commendably through with, that by Gods grace, undertakes it with that zeal which the end requires. I do much admire the resolution of Gennadius, De 'Dogmat. Eccles. cap. LXIV. that it is not the meer love of a continent estate which Christiani∣ty esteems, unlesse it be chosen as the meanes and opportunity of serving God with the more freedome; otherwise, signifying rather the declining of mariage, then the love of Chastity. For. so it is indeed, he that chuses a continent estate, to avoid the difficulties of mariage, seems rather to tempt God, and to expose himself to many desertions, waving the remedy which he hath provided. But he who trusts to Gods assistance, for the accomplishment of that intention
which Christianity commendeth, though it command not, may assure himselfe of it, not destituting his prayers, of the indeavours which he may and is to contribute. This being the case of particular persons, that withdraw themselves from the world to make their salvation the more assured, the interesse which accrues to the Church, in them that do so, seems to be no more, then may be grounded upon the profession of such a purpose. For, so long as it is secret, between God and the soul, the Church can have nothing to do in it. But being once professed, and known to take hold; the transgression thereof, becoming noto∣rious, is a sinne which owes an account to the Church. Not that the manner of this profession, is any way provided for, but by the custome of the Church. For, he that should actually and visibly declare, such an intention, by really en∣tering upon the course, and living according to it, would become necessarily liable to that account, for the transgressing of it, which the solemnity renders due. And therefore that solemnity reduceth it self to the nature of those ce∣remonies, whereby, actions of great consequence, wherein the authority of the Church is exercised, ought in reason to get reverence. For by that meanes, the parties concerned receive a due impression of the charge they un∣dertake, when God and his Church become rather parties, then witnesses to it. In the mean time, they remaine in the Church, what they were before, private Christians, onely professing such a course of life, onely ingaged to God in it; under the knowledge of his Church. And, when those that have spent their time in this kind of life, out of their experience and knowledge under∣take to direct others, the way of governing themselves in it, when others, joyn∣ing themselves to them, undertake to order their life according to such directi∣ons; neither hath the Church any thing to do in the matter of them, further, then to take account, that they be according to Christianity; nor do the par∣ties enter into any new obligation, but that of performing that profession which is become notorious. The consequence whereof is this; that the pro∣fession being ransgressed, by an act that creates a new state, (as that of mariage, the bond whereof is insoluble) the obligation which is violated being to God, and not to the Church, the Church shall have no power to free him from the obligation contracted, whatsoever censure the transgression of his profession may require. John Cassians, who lived in the Monasteries of Aegypt, wherein this exercise seems to have received first that forme, with other parts, according to their capacities, imitated; mightily justifies the Apostolicall originall of the profes∣sion, by the antiquitie of their Monasteries, and the Traditions by which they lived, received from age to age, without expresse beginning. But above all, the three severall formes of them, extant in Aegypt, during his time, seems to demonstrate, by what degrees it came to that height. The first of them, called in his time Sarabaitae, professing no communion with others, but at each mans discretion, seems to him a defection from the common profession; But sig∣nifies, that, at the first, the profession did stand without living in comon, though it could not stand▪ so long, without▪ abuse. To avoid which abuse first Convents began, then Anchorites left them to live alone in the wildernesse. You may see what he writeth, De Instit Mn. II. 3, 5. Collat. XVIII. 3-7. The orders of their Convents, which he describes, as also Saint Basils instructions, make the work of their life to be the service of God▪ by prayer and fasting, with the praises of God; But so, that labouring with their hands in some bodily work, and living in so much abstinence, they were able to contribute the greatest part of their gaine, for almes to the poor; Though not at their own discretion, but at the discretion of their superiours, to whose guidance they had once given up them∣selves. How farre this is distant from any form of this profession extant in the West, is easie enough to imagine. For, all this while, they remaine meer Laies, without all pretense of that superiority over the people in the Church, which the Clergy signifieth; That superiority, which they have one over another, standing onely upon that voluntary consent and profession, the solemnizing
whereof signifieth, that it is approved by the Church. Nor is there any thing of indowment in all this, their profession, to give almes of their labours, ren∣dring them uncapable of any such. But it must not be denied, that the Mona∣steries of the West, have been the meanes to preserve that learning which was preserved alive during the time; at least the knowledge of the Scriptures, and other records of the Church, upon which the knowledge of the Scriptures depends. And certainly, the knowledge of the Scriptures is more dangerous then a sword in a mad mans hand, unlesse it be joyned with that humility which onely Christianity teacheth. A thing more rare, in them that think themselves guilty of learning, then pearles or diamonds. A thing so difficult for them to attaine, that it ought to be counted a sufficient price, for all the exercise a man can bestow in this profession, all his life long. That sobriety of mind, that gra∣vity of manners, that watchfullnesse over a mans thoughts and passions, which is absolutely requisite for the discharge, as of all Christians, so, especially, of them that are liable to the temptation of spirituall pride; for knowledge in mat∣ters of God, is a competent reward for all that retirement from the world, which this profession can require. This being the designe of Monasteries▪ it cannot be denied, that the goods which they may be indowed with are conse∣crated to the service of God, as estated upon his Church. But not therefore upon the Church of Rome. The pretense of allowing the Rule of Monasticall Orders, (which ought indeed to be approved of by the Church) and of re∣ducing them into severall bodies, under one Government, in severall domini∣ons, and the Churches of them; (a thing no way concerning the foundation of the Church, or any right thereof derived from the same) hath been the means for the Church of Rome, to exempt them from the government of their Ordi∣naries, and to reduce them to an immediate dependence upon it, by whose Charter each Order subsisteth. But there is no manner of ground in the pro∣fession for this; nor was it so originally, but is come to be so, by the swelling of the Regular Power of that See, to that height, which the pretense of Infal∣libility speaketh. For why should not every Church, or every Synode, to which any Church belongs, and the respective heads of the same, be capable of visiting, regulating, or correcting whatsoever may concerne the common Christianity, in bodies of meer Lay people, (as I have showed all Monaeris or Convents of Monkes originally to be) subsisting within the respective Dio∣cesse of every Church? Unlesse the case of a Monke falls out to be a cause that concerns the whole Church, as that of Pelagius; For then there will be no marvaile, that it should resort to the same triall, that determines the like causes of other Christians. And upon these terms, though the Church of England hath no Monasteries, as not essentiall to the constitution of the Church, but advantagious for the maintainance of that retirement from the world, in the reasons of our actions, wherein our common Christianity consisteth, by that visible retirement, wherein this profession consisteth; (For, the constitution thereof succeeding that horrible act of abolishing the Monasteries, under Hen∣ry VIII. it is no marvaile, if it were difficult to agree in a forme, which the Reformation might allow and cherish) yet is no son of the Church of En∣gland bound to disown the whole Church, in maintaining Monasticall life, as agreeable with Christianity, and expedient to the intent of it. They that understand the intent of Monasticall life to be contemplation, do not seem to consult with the Primitive custome and practice of it in the Church. For, when bodily labour was by the Rule, to succeed in the intervals of Gods service, and, as soon as it was done; I cannot conceive how a man should ima∣gine a more active life. That the activity thereof is exercised, not in any busi∣nesse tending to advantage a man in this world, but to keep him imploied, so as to live free to serve God; maketh it not the lesse active, though not to the ordinary purpose. The case is the same, supposing that in stead of bodily la∣bour, men give themselves up to studies of the mind, for exercise of their time in the intervals of Gods service. The whole intent of it may be comprized in two cases. Either a man hath forfeited his Christianity, with the promises due,
to it, and desires to regaine the grace, and to appease the wrath of God; in one word, to make satisfaction for his sinne, in the language of the ancient Church; Or, he desires to prevent and avoid such forfeitures; and knowing his own, and seeing other mens infirmities, and the danger to which they render him liable, resolves to attend upon nothing else; as, not confident of passing through the rocks and billows of the world, without making that shipwrack. S. Jerome is an eminent example of the former case. His writings are, most an end, the fruits of his retirement to that purpose. Onely that, being a Priest afore, and tied to the service of his Church▪ he must be dismissed by his Bishop. Genna∣dius showes upon what ground, De dogm. Eccl. cap. LIII. Sed & secreta satisfacti∣one solvi mortalia crimina non negamus, sed ut mutato prius seculari habitu, & confesso religionis studio, per vitae correctionem, & jugi, imo perpetuo luctu, mise∣rante Deo, veniam consequamur: Ita duntaxat, ut contraria his quae poenitet agat, & Eucharistiā omnibus Dominicis dibus supplex & submissus us{que} ad mortē per∣cipiat. But we deny not that mortal sins are loosed by satisfaction in secret, though so, that a man obtaine pardon by the mercy of God, changing first the habit of the world, and professing the study of religion, by amendment of life, and continuall, or rather perpetuall mourning. Onely on these terms, that he do the contrary to that which he repents of, and humbly like a suppliant receive the Eucharist every Lords day till his death. By this custome, so generall, that Gennadius makes the ground of it a position of the Church, we may see, by the way, that the ancient Church ne∣ver took the power of the keyes to be necessary to the remission of all sins after Baptisme; Seeing, of those sinnes, upon which the Power of the Keys had pas∣sed by Penance, there can no doubt remaine, whether remitted or not; That a man should change his state of life to assure it. In the meane, time the other case is contained in this. For, he who retires from the world to bewaile his sinnes, does it with an intent to provide, that he may not commit the like for the future; And that is also the intent of all those, that propose this life to themselves, or have it proposed to them by their parents, for the future. How this estate of life may be counted a state of perfection; Not as if the perfecti∣on of a Christian did consist in any observation of an indifferent nature, but in the complete observing of that which our Baptisme professeth; I have show∣ed in the Second Book. The objection which here is to be made to it, is of waight. For, the perfection of Christianity consisting in charity, as S. Paul teacheth, and that charity, in this state of life, being confined to a mans self, and those little offices which a man hath occasion to exercise towards a little Convent; (for, what consideration is to be had of the almes which the worke of their hands, where that was in use, might contribute to the necessities of the poor?) it seems, that the ordinary state of those that have ingaged in the world is of more perfection then Monasticall life, as furnishing greater opor∣tunities, for the exercising of that charity, wherein our Christianity cheifely consisteth. To which I answer, that, though the occasions of the world minister more opportunity of exercising charity, to them whome a man con∣verses with; Yet, the ingagements which a man that liveth in the world hath, by his estate and profession, even according to Christianity, make it more difficult for him to follow the reason of charity, (supposing that it were easy for him to discerne it, in every thing) then for those who have retired themselves from such ingagements. And though, the profession of Monasticall life not being vulgare, and therefore being difficult, many were seene to fall short of it, even when the intention of undertaking it was innocent, and the condition simple; and falling short of it, become farre worse then those who faile of their Christianity, in the ordinary state of Christians; Yet, there is in the state it selfe, not incombred with accessory corruptions, grounded for a persumption in reason, that those who live in it come nearer that which our Baptisme professeth, by the means thereof, then others can doe. And this answer serves, comparing private persons, with private persons, in the one and in the other estate. But comparing private persons in this estate, with publick persons in the Church, which are the Clergy; whose profession doth,
and ought to disingage them of those obligations to the world, which I al∣leg for the presumption, why the Laity having opportunity doe not attaine the reason of charity, in the intent of their actions; I acknowledge their estate is of it self simple & absolutely the state of perfection in the Chu▪ though mor difficult to discharge, then that of Mona. life, whatsoever perfection it pretend∣eth. For, the profession thereof, being the solemn dedicating & consecrating of a mans selfe to God, for and in the ministry and service of his Church, contai∣neth in it selfe, and ought to expresse unto the world, the disclaiming of all ma∣ner of ingagements, inconsistent with it, so far as the foundation of the Church alloweth. That limitation I except, because I have provided else where, that the foundation of the Church presupposeth civil governement, for an ordi∣nance of God; and therefore, no quality standing by the foundation of the Church can exempt any man from the service of his Country. So, the privi∣ledges of the clergy it is granted, stand by the civill Lawes of Christian pow∣ers; though oblged as not to persecute for Christianity, so, not to hinder Christians from dedicating themselves to the service of the Church; Who up∣on those termes, being so dedicated, can not be subject to those services of their Country, which all are necessarily subject to, upon any pretence to discontinue their attendance upon the service of the Church. But, this exception being made, for the rest, that ingagement to the Church, which the undertaking of holy Orders constituteth, remaines absolute; supposing a disposition and re∣solution, in him that undertakes the estate, to behave himselfe with that sim∣plicity, innocence▪ humility, charitablenesse, and sobriety of judgement, in the midst of the world, which he undertakes to converse with, which Monasticall life professeth towards a mans selfe, and those few from whom we cannot re∣ire. This the constitution of the Church and the reason of it, this the exam∣ples of the Apostles, and their companions, and substitutes, in the Scriptures of the▪ New Test▪ (as partly, of the Prophets and their disciples under the Old) evidenceth no lesse, then the Canons of the Church, or the customes thereof more anciently in being, then expressely inacted by any common decree of it. Whereupon it followes, by vertue of the premises, that the state of Mona∣sticall life, is of its owne nature subordinate to the state of the Clargy, tending as a meanes, by private exercise, to fit men to the discharge of themselves to∣wards the world, which the Clergy obligeth every man to converse with, in that manner which Monasticall life professeth. Of this there is sufficient evi∣dence, by those many examples that are extant, in the records of the ancient Church, of such as have been taken from Monasticall life, to be promoted to the service of the Church. Which course expressing no dispensation in the profession of Monasticall life, formerly made necessary, intimateth a reasonable ground for ths constuction; That the Church allowing men to dispose of themselves to the exercise of monasticall life intended not to part with that inte∣rest which it hath in every particular Christian, to oblige those to the service thereof, by promoting them to Holy Orders, whomsoever she findeth fittest for it. And that, the allowance of Monasticall life, is in order to this intent and purpose. A thing still more visible, by all those institutions and foundations whereby Monastties have been made and accounted seminaries of the Church, and the Clergy of it. This being said▪ you see how great aquestion remaines, whether the Clergy be bound to the continence of single life or not to wit, Bishops, Priests, & Deacons▪ For the Deacons office hath indeed beene divided into severall orders of infe∣rior Clergy, sub▪ deacons readers, dore▪ keepers, waiters, and that for the ne∣cessity of the Church in that estate which was before Constantine; So that the consuion of them cannot be imputed to any corruption that might follow up∣on the temporall prosperity of the Church. But of these inferior Orders there is no question. For, as concerning Deacons you have a Canon of the Council at Aricyra, (the Canons whereof were afterwards part of the Canons of the whole Church) allowing them, not to marry being Deacons, but to be made Deacons being marryed. And an other of the councill▪ of Elvira in Spaine, (ancienter then the Councill of Nicaea▪ injoyning upon Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons and
Sub-deacones to abstaire from their wives, under paine of their Clergy. At the council of Nicaea, it was in debate to doe the same, and the Council was moved by Paphnutius a Bishop of great merit in Egypt, himselfe alwaies a sin∣gle man, to rest in the rule presently in force; which was; preferring those, who being single, should loose their ministries if they maried to all decrees of the Clergey especially Priests and Bishops, to make use never the lesse of those, who were married or professed an intent of marryage, when there was ground by the rest of their qualities, of confidence in them, for the discharge of their office. For this; as it agrees with the Canon of Ancyra, and the forme of it, so it ass∣ures us that the Council of Elvira could not have taken in hand to impose so great a burthen, had not the precedent practice of the Church, by unwritten custome, before the Canon, disposed the Church to receive it. And there∣fore, I will in this point, which hath beene the subject of many volumes, and, in which it would be endlesse to examine the Canons the precedents, the au∣thorities that concerne it, discharge my selfe chiefly upon Epiphanius, whose words in the LIX. Haeresy of the Novatians, are these, . Moreover neither doth the Church admit him that is the husband of one wife, yet living and get∣ting Children, Deacon or Priest or Bishop or sub deacon: Vnlesse he abstain from that one, or is become a Widower: Especially where the Canons of the Church are exact. But you will by all meanes say to me, that in some places, Priests, Deacons and Sub-deacons doe still get children. That is, not by the Canon, but by the slack disposition of mens minds, sometimes, and for plenties sake, when men fit to minister are not found. In the conclusion of his worke also, he reckons this for one of the Lawes of the whole Church, without mentioning this exception. Now if you goe to seeke for any rule in writing, to bind the whole Church to this, before Epi∣phanius his time, you will finde none, But a custome you will finde in force which is more then all the Law of the world in writing, whereby it will ap∣peare that the indeavour of the Church was, to be served with single men; but, when the best qualified were not such to balke the rule, for the appearance of that common good in balkeing it, for which the rule it selfe was made. And so the resolution of this pointe attesteth, first, the Corporation of the Church; when, for the good of the body, it presrcibes it selfe rules, what sort of persons to make use of, for the exercise of those offices, in the communion where∣of the surety of it standeth. Then, it eminently attests the superiority of the Bip▪ and his Clergy in every of those Churches, whereof the whole consisteth; Vnlesse men be so wilfully senselesse, as to attribute the wisdome which such dispensati∣ons required, to the rashnesse of anymultitude. Last of all, it attests the regular pre-eminence of the Church of Rome over the rest of the Westerne Churches; by the interposition whereof, visible in those times, when it had no help from the secular power to make it irregular and infinite, so great a burthen became so far owned. First then, I must free the Church from the heavy charge, of bringing in the doctrine of deviles, foretold by S. Paul, in prohibiting mariage, 1 Tim. IV. 1, 3. which I shall doe the more slightly because I have had oportunity else where to show, that he speakes of the Heresies on foot in the times of the Apostles, which made maryage the ordinance of those powers which made the world, which their doctrine distinguished from the true soveraine God. For, what hath the rule of the Church to doe with any such supposition as this?
. So Epipha. prosecutes his purpose. For the Church alwaies aiming at the most fitting, as well ordered by the H. Gh, decreed to indeavour that the service be performed without distraction from God, and spirituall necessities effected with all the most charitable conscience; I meane that it is fit, in regard of suddaine mini∣stries and necessities, that the Priests, the Deacons & the Bishops wait upon God. For, if the Holy Apostle command those of the Laity, saying; that they may attend upon Prayer for a time; 1. Cor. VII. 5. How much more commandeth he the Priest the same? Now I meane with out distraction, that he may waite upon the Priest-hood, which is performed in spirituall necessities, according to God. Here you have no mention for incapacity of the Priest hood, or any service which it injoyneth, by maryage, or any thing to disparage the estate in the sense of Gods Church. But here you have S. Jeromes argument, if S. Paul require the use of wedlock to be foborne for extraordinary devotions, then hath the Church reason, to indeavour, that they whose ordinary devotions ought to be extraordinary in comparison of the people, be such as forbeare it alwaies. Especially in regard of those offices of the Church, the occasions whereof may fall out at any time, and sudaine, Truely, were there nothing to doe, but to preach twice a week, there could no such fall out. Nor can I show you better evidence then this, that that order is not the order of Gods Church, Againe, Epiphanius in the premises, chargeth the Novatians with ignorance, in not per∣mitting the Laity to marry second wives; (which their Fathers the Monta∣nists are evidently chargeable with) Not considering that the Clergy were intended for the creame of Christians, not in knowledg, or language, but in Christianity. Therefore he that had been baptized in danger of death, not afore, and he that had done publike penance, was not admitted; No more was he that had marryed a second wife, which, when all is said, is S. Pauls meaning, 1. Tim. III. 2. For, he that had more wives, then one, was no Christian, and therefore in no capacity for the Clergy, who was not to com∣municate with the Church. And, they who think S. Chrysostome in Epist. ad Titum hom. II. expounds him, of those who being parted by divorce, should mary a second wife; must say whether afore baptisme or after; For that al∣ters the case. For, though it was a doubt in S. Jeromes time, whether he that had marryed one afore baptisme another after were under this incapacity or not; But after baptisme, it is not to be thought that the Church had so little respect of our Lords Lawes, as to admit adulterers though not as to the Roman Lawes, yet as to Gods. Athenagoras calls it  fashionable adultery, in regard to the world. For, as to the Church, adultery it was alwaies, but ne∣ver fashionable. Wherefore, S. Chrysostomes argument is to this purpose; ; How should he governe well, the Church, that kept no good will for her that was gon? For, a man is not chargeble for not keeping affection for her whom he puts away, when she is gon; but well and good, for her that is dead. And if he say that S. Paul hereby pun shes , the incontinent; and that the case hath  many blames it is plain, that civill people have alwaies had them in esteeme above others, that have staid at their first marryage. And therefore, though no civill Law forbid it as S. Chrysostome observeth, nor Christianity, yet is it no marvell▪ if the lawes of the Church, which the Apostles hereby in∣acted, set a marke upon it, which civility disesteemeth. See Grotius his annotati∣ons on the place and Luke II. 36. If we consider, that the widowes which the Church maintayned were to be such, 1. Tim. V. 9. then, that it hath al∣waies been an incapacity by the Canons of the Church; we shall not need seek any other beginning for it. S. Chrysostome in 1 ad Tim. Hom X▪ though the co∣py be not cleare, saies plaine enough, that the Apostles exacted no more then this; signifying what the Canons at that time, did require. For, I doe not pretend that the Apostles themselves, either injoyned: themselves single life, or gave over theire wives, when they went about their office; Though nothing can appeares to the contrary, the many examples of Bishops and Priests, that
gave over the use of wedlock from the time of their ministry with the consent of their wives, giving appearance, that they thought, the Apostles had done the same. It is enough, that their instructions were a ground for the Church to proceed in it, and a step towards it. That course which the Councill of Nicaea confirmed, by resting content with it, seemeth agreeable, both with justice, and that holinesse to which the Church pretendeth. But, before I come to that, I must not forget the second reason moving the Church to indeavour it, to wit, the dispensing of the Church goods according to the intent for which they are dedicated to God, in being estated upon it. For, by the ground hereof, setled in the first book, it evidently appeareth, that the Clergy are not proprietaries in the fruits of them; But, have onely full right to maintaine themselves upon them, with that moderation and abstinence, in their private expence, which continuall attendance upon Gods service▪ involved in their profession, necessarily inferteth. Otherwise it is manifest, that they are trusted by Christian people, with the dispensing of their oblations and conse∣crations to the maintenance of the poore; part of the originall consideration upon which they were estated upon the Church. Nor can any civill Law, providing contribution of the people for the necessary subsistence of the poore of every parish, ever extinguish this obligation, so long as the Church is a Church, and stands upon its owne title. That hospitality to which Church goods are, and alwaies have been accounted liable, consisting, not in secular intertainment, which bringeth on ambition of worldly expence, and costly su∣perfluities; But, in providing for the poore and strangers, and distressed, whether at home or abrode; the intent whereof redounds to the account of him that provideth the meanes, and therefore the execution thereof, to his account that dispenseth the same. For, if the intent of the Church, and all the Lawes of it demonstrate, that the Clergy are to be the first fruits of Christia∣nity; then doth the renouncing of the world, which all Christians by their Baptisme professe, in the first place take hold of them. But, that the injoy∣ing of superfluities in the world is utterly inconsistent with. Therefore, the profession of the Clergy necessarily limiteth their right in Church goods, to a spare and moderate maintenance; the trust which is upon them, by intent of pious consecrations, expressed in the originall custome and practice of the Church, taking place in point of conscience, where their owne necessities cease. Now, it is indeed become evident, by corruption prevailing in the Church, that single men, becoming trusted with Church goods, can abuse them so well to their owne riot, or to the inriching of their relations, that maried men could have don no more. But that never came to passe, til, chiefly by the coming of the world into the Church, those maners and customes, in which the eminen∣cy of the clergy above the people did and ought to consist, suffered shipwrack in the multitude of offenders; after they had beene maintained a great while, by the eminent abstinence of Prelates and inferiour Clergy, able, for authority and meanes, to have produced bad examples. Whether common reason is tyed to judge it more probable, that the moderation and abstinence which the Clergy professeth should prevaile and take effect, they living single or maried; that I suppose onely comes in consideration, when the dispute is, what course the Law of the Church should take. And therefore, the profession of that continence, which single life requireth grounding a reasonable presumption of eminence in Christianity, above those that are marryed, there was all the rea∣son in the world, why the Church should indeavour to put the governement thereof into such hands, by preferring them before others. On the other side, as all truth in morall and humane maters, is liable to many exceptions; it can∣not be denyed, that more abstinence, from riot and from riches both, more at∣tendance upon the service of God is found some times, in those that live mar∣ryed, then in those that live single. In which consideration, it may well seem harde, to conclude all them that are marryed unserviceable for the Church. The moderation therefore of the Easterne Church seemeth to proceed upon a very considerable Ground; not excluding marryed persons from a capacity of
Holy orders, but excluding persons ordayned from any capacity of mariage. For, those who were promoted to the Clergy being single, & knowing that they were not allowed mariage, what can they pretend, why they should hold their estate, not performing the condition of it? As for the promoting of those who are already maried, it is the triall of their conversation in wedlock, that may ground a presumption, as well for that conscience, which their fidelity in dis∣pensing the goods of the Church, as for that diligence, in setting aside the im∣portunities of marriage, which their attendance upon the service of the Church requireth. It was therefore to be wished, that the Westerne Church, had used the limitation, which the Nicene councill, by resting contented with, confirmed; to admit of persons maryed before orders, preferring before them those that are single. But it must be granted, that, as well in the West as in the East, though the aime was to perfer single life, yet here and there, now and then, those that were maryed were not excluded. It is not to be thought that one Spanish councill, which had no effect at all without the bounds of it, could as easily be reduced to effect in practice, as couched in writing. Especially, the Generall councill of Nicaea having waived the motion of inacting the same. But, this demonstrates the credite of the Church of Rome, in the Westerne Church, at that time that the Rescripts of Syricius & Innocent, Popes, are found the first acts, to inforce the same which that Spanish council had inacted. For, the African and other Westerne Canons, that injine the same, are, for time, after Syricius. Whereby it appeareth, though they doe not use that exception which the councill of Nicca had supposed, yet, that the rule of single life for the Clergy was so troden under foot, that it was found requisite to seeke meanes, by the Synods of severall parts, and by the concurence of the See of Rome to bring it into force. For, let no mn think that those Canons took effect so soon as they were made, which were made on purpose to restraine the mari∣ages of the Clergy; Who, for the most part, had, from the beginning lived single, but, neither before nor after could be totally restrained from mary∣age. It would be too large a worke in this place, to repeate, either the particu∣lar Canons which were made, and the discourses of the Fathers to inforce them, on the one side; or on the other side, the saying of the Fathers and other re∣cords, in point of fact, whereby the in execution of them doth appeare. Those that would be satisfied in it may see what the Arch-Bishop of Spalato hath collected, and find Epiph. his saying still take place, during the flourishing time of the Church But all this while you heare nothing of any vowe annex∣ed to the undertakeing of Holy Orders, by vertue whereof, maryage contracted under them should become voide. For, the vowe of single life, being an act that disposeth of a man, and his estate in this world, to a totall change of his courses, if he mean to observe it, what reason can admit any ground for presuming of it, when it is not expressed? And the custom of the Eastern Church, reduceth the pe∣nalty thereof unto the ceasing of that ministry, & by consequence, of that main∣tenance, which the order intitleth to; which is not the penalty of breaking a vowe. But the effects of these rules and indeavours of the Western Church was never such, as to exclude the Clergy from marryage; how much soever they might exclude maryed persons from the H. orders. When Greg. the seventh un∣dertook to bring them under a total restraint from maryage, it is manifest, that, other maner of meanes were imployed, to make that restraint forcible, then the constitution of the Church indowes it with. For, that was the time when the Church undertooke to dispose of Crownes and scepters, and to extend the spi∣rituall power thereof, to the utmost of temporall effects. And therefore it is to be granted, that, by such meanes indeed, it might and did come to effect; But in point of fact onely, not in point of right, as being a rigor, which, the practice of all parts was sufficient protestation, that the Church, in that estate, was not able to undergoe. For, the horrible and abominable effects thereof have beene so visibl, that it is not possible, the cause of them should seeme the production of that reason, which the being of any law requireth, and supposeth▪
Nor can the See of Rome justly be admitted, to charge that no bounds have been observed in releasing of it; which, it cannot be denyed, that the ancient Church, in all places did observe. For, I truely, for my part, have granted that even Lawes given by the Apostles, for the better governement of the Church, though written in the scriptures, may be dispensed in by the Church, when the present constitution of things shall make it appear to the Governours thereof that the observation of that rule which served for that state in which it was prescribed, ends to the considerable & visible harme of the Church, in the present state of it. And therefore, I will not take upon me to say, that the state of bigamy which S. Paul, I have showed, maketh an impediment to some Orders, can by no means be dispensed with. But the See of Rome, which dispenseth with it as of course, paying the ordinary fees, I conceive, cannot in justice charge the releasing of the rule of single life to all the Clergy, though, in some measure, a Law of the whole Church. And how many Canons of the whole Church, besides, are there, which must be trampled under foot, by bringing that unlimited power into effect, which now it exerciseth? I could therefore earnestly wish▪ for mine owne parte, that some reservation had beene used, in the releasing of it; that the respect due to single life, by our common Christianity▪ might have remained visible to Christian people, by the priviledge of it in the Church. Nor doe I thinke my selfe bound, by being of the reformation, to maintaine the acts by which it stands, upon other termes. But this I say that when the extremity of one party occasions the other to fall into the opposite ex∣treme, neither party seemes clearely excusable of the fault which the other commits, in betaking it selfe to the opposite extreme. And then I say further, that, when secular force was applyed to impose a burthen, which the experience of more in corrupt times had showed, that they could not bear, the issue must needs be, the treading down of Christianity, for maintaining of the edge that should sense it; And therefore, the proceedings being voide, in all reason of Law, it is no marvaile if that moderation, which the argeement of both sides might have preserved, could not take place. I am yet indebted to those of the congregations, in a short account of the right of the people in Church maters. I have acknowledged, that, during the time of the Apostles, they were present at ordinations, at inflicting of pe∣nance, at Councils; that the resolution of maters in debate passed under their knowledg; that their consent concurred to put them in force. But, I have also maintayned that the unity of the Church is the soveraine Law, to which, all other Lawes, though never so much inacted by the Apostles, never so evi∣denty couched in the scriptures, are necessarily subordinate; as tending onely to maintaine unity, by maintaining order, in the exercise of those offices, for communion wherein the Church subsisteth. That, in order hereto, every Church is a body (tending to constitute one body of all Churches) consisting of all Christians contayned in one city and the territory of it; howsoever cities and their territories may be distinguished; as, some times, meerely upon this account, and to this intent and purpose, they have been distinguished. And by this means I have prescribed, that the consent of the people of each Church was never requisite in this consideration, because they usually meet together for the service of God; ut, as part of the people of that Church, who were to be acquainted with proceedings concerning their Church, that they might have reason to rest satisfied in the same. I have provided in due place, that Lawes expressely provided by the Apostles, and recorded in the scriptures, for that state of the Church, which they saw, may and ought to be superseded by the Church in case they prove uselesse to that purpose, for which they were provided, by that change which succeeds in the state of the Church. For, how should the soveraign Law of unity take place, how should the Church conti∣nue one and the same body, from the first to the second coming of Christ, otherwise? Now, this interest of the people, in maters concerning their Church, though related in the scriptures▪ and known, by them, in point of fact, to have had the force of law during the time of the Apostles, and accoingly
in the primative Church of the ages next the Apostles; yet, cannot be said to be any where commanded, in point of right, for a Law of God, to take place in all ages. I must therefore prescribe upon this account, and doe prescribe; That when the world is come into the Church, and the whole people of Eng∣land, for example, have declared themselves Christians, it cannot be any more for the unity of the Church, that the consent of the people be required to the validity of those acts, which concerne the community of their respective Churches. For then would it be no lesse unpossible, to constitute one Church of all Churches, then it is for all Independents, to constitute a Body that may be called the Church, of all their congregations, each whereof they call a Church. And therefore, there is no cause why they should demand, the same regard to be had to each one of the people, when all the people of a City, and the bounds thereof concur to constitute the Church of a City; and when the chiefe part of Christians within the boundes of a City, assembling at once for the service of God, might also be acquainted with the proceedings of maters concerning their Church. But, all this while, I am not so simple as to grant, that the consent of the people, then required to the validity of things done in the Church, did consist in plurality of votes; having easily huffed out that ridiculous imagination, that S. Paul and Barnabas created Elders by votes of the people, testified by lifting up their hands; the action of  being attributed to themselves▪ not to the people. But, the consent of the people, I meane, in body, as the people, that is, a quality distinct from the Clergy in the Church, as their superiours and guides, in maters concerning the community of it. For, is there any example in the Scripture, that ever they went to the poll, or counted noses, in passing of maters concerning the Church, which the people were acquainted with? Is there any such example in all the practice of the primitive Church, in which it is acknowledged, the same course continu∣ed as under the Apostles? Ordinations were held in presence of the people, that, if there were cause, they, who knew every mans person might object a∣gainst those who were in nomination; if not, they might consent, by one vote of all that was called their suffrage. This being the maner, upon this occasion they might & did sometimes step before their leaders, and demand such as liked them best; But so, that, if they forgot themselves, the Clergy was bound not to admit their demand. And, in case of a Bishop, the neighbour Bishops were bound by S. Pauls instructions to Timothy, not to lay hands on any for whom they could not answer. Tertullian testifieth, that, mater of excommu∣nication was handled at the assemblies of the Church (that is, with the know∣ledge of the people) as the case of the incestuous person at Corinth, in S. Paul, is. But, neither were all maters handled before the people, if the mater of S. Pauls communicating with the Jewes were handled▪ with the Elders, before the people were acquainted with it, Acts XXI. nor is it posible to imagine, suppo∣sing a Church not to be a congregation, but, that which I have said, that the people can have satisfaction in all maters of that nature, when all the world is come into the Church. As for Councils, it is a thing ridiculous to demand, because the people concurred to the resolution of that at Jerusalem Acts XV. therefore, that the acts of Councils should passe the people. For, when the Church of Jerusalem and the whole Church were both the same thing, it was no marvaile that the people was to be satisfied, in the conclusion of it. And, by the forme of holding the Spanish Counciles, which you have at the begining of the Councils, t appeares, that there was provision made for the people, to assist, and see what was done at▪ their Councils. But, so unreasonable is it to demand, that the people consent to the acts of Councils, that it is manifest, that there can be no such thing as a Councill, according to the supposition of the congregations And therefore, in the acts of Counciles, which are the Lawes whereby the Church is to be ruled, the people can have no further sa∣tisfaction, then to see them openly debated, under the knowledge of the peo∣ple. Indeed, the interest of Soveraigne powers in Church maters, (which I allow, not onely in order to the publicke peace, but as they are members of
the Catholicke Church, and so, trusted with the protection of all that is Ca∣tholicke) in behalf of the people, gives them that power over the acts of Coun∣ciles, which by and by I shal declare. Which, though grounded upon another ac∣count, and belonging to them in an other quality, then that which the con∣stitution of the Church createth; is notwithstanding, provided by God, to secure his people of their Christianity, together with the unity of the Church. But, the suffrage of the people of every Church, that is, their acknowledgment, that they know no exception against the persons in nomination for Bishops, or other orders of the Church; as it agreeth with the proceedings of the Apostles and primative Church, so must it needs be a most powerfull meanes, to maintaine, that strict bond of love and reverence, between the Clergy and the people, in the recovery whereof the unity of the Church consisteth. And sup∣posing publick penance retrived, without which, it is in vaine to pretend Re∣formation in the Church, there can be no stronger meanes to maintaine Chri∣stianity in effect, then the satisfaction of the people, though not in the measure of penance to be injoyned, yet in the performing of it. Alwaies provided, that this interest of the people be grounded upon no other presumption, that any man is the child of God, or in the state of Grace, and indowed with Gods spirit; then that which the law of the Church, whereby he injoyes com∣munion which the Church, createth. For, this presumption must needs be stronger concerning the Clergy, by their estate, then it can be concerning the people; Because, by their estate, they are to be the choice of the people. And though, as all morall qualities are subject to many exceptions, some of the people may be better Christians then some of the Clergy; yet a legall presump∣tion, that any of them is so, must needs be destructive to the Unity of the Church. But, no disorder in religion can be so great, as to justifie the obdurate re∣solution of the Church of Rome, to withdraw the scriptures from the people. There is nothing more manifest, then, that the lamentable distractions which we are under have proceeded from the presumption of particular Christians, up on their understanding in the scriptures, proceeding to think their quality capable of reforming the Church. Onely those, that can have joy of so much mischief to our common Christianity, can thinke otherwise. But, I am not therefore induced to thinke our Christianity any other then▪ the Christianity of those, whom our Lord, whom S. Paul, and other Apostles and Prophets exhort, and incourage to the study of the scriptures; Whom, S. Chrysostome, and o∣thers of the Fathers so earnestly deale with, to make it their businesse. All the offense consists in this, that private Christians▪ observe not the bounds of that which is Catholike, when they come to read the scriptures. For, if they be not content to confine the sense of all they read, within that rule of faith, in which the whole Church agreeth, because they understand not how they stand together; If they thinke the Lawes of the whole Church can command things contrary to that, which God by scripture commandeth; It is no marvaile they should proceed, to make that which they think they see in the Scripures, though indeed they see it not, a Law to the Church. For, they think it is Gods will that ties them to it, But, if the Church be the Church, as I have showed it is, then was the Scripture never given private Christians, to make them Judges, what all Christians are bound to believe, what the Church is to injoine the Church, for the condition of communion with the Church. If any man object the inconvenience, that it appeareth not, who or where that Church is, and so, we are confined to those boundes that cannot appeare; This inconvenince is the clearest evidence, that I can produce for the Catho∣like Church. For, unlesse we grant this inconvenience to come by Gods insti∣tution and appointment, we must confesse the unity of the Church to be Gods appointment, because the dissolution thereof produceth this inconvenience. For, were the unity of the Church in being, I could easily send any man to the Catholike Church, by sending him, to his owne Church; Which, by holding communion with the whole Church, must needs stand distinguished from those
which hold it not, though under the name of Churches. And, he who re∣sorts to the Church for resolution in the Scriptures, supposes, that he is not to break from the Church for that, wherein the whole Church is not agreed. Now that the unity of the Church is broken in pieces, it remaines no more vi∣sible to common sense, what it is wherein the whole Church agrees, as the con∣dition for comunion with it. But, the meanes to make it appear againe, having disappeared, through disunion in the Church, is that discourse of reason which proceeds upon supposition of visible unity, established by God in the Church. And the meanes to make it appear againe to common sense, is the restoring of that unity in the Church, by the interruption whereof it disappeareth. Then shall the edification of particular Christians, in our common Christianity, pro∣ceed without interruption by meanes of the Scriptures; every one supposing, that his edification in the common Christianity dependeth not upon the know∣ledge of those things, wherein the Church agreeth not, but of those things wherein it agreeth. In the mean time it remaineth, that offenses proceed to be infinite, and endlesse, because men, giving no bounds to their studies in the Scriptures, imagine the edification of the Church to consist in that, wherein themselves, not regarding the consent of the Church, have placed their own edi∣fication in the Scriptures. CHAP. XXXII. How great the Power of the Church, and the effect of it is. The right of judging the causes of Christians caseth, when it is protected by the State. An Ob∣jection; If Ecclsiasticall Power were from God, Secular Power could not limit the use of it. Ground for the Interest of the State in Church matters. The in∣consequence of the argument. The concurrence of both Interests to the Law of the Church. The Interest of the State in the indowment of the Church. Con∣currence of both in matrimoniall causes, and Ordinations. Temporall penalties upon Excommunication from the State. No Soveraigne subject to the greater Excommunication, but to the lesse. The Rights of the Jewes State and of Chri∣stian Powers, in Religion, partly the same, partly not. The infinite Power of the Pope not founded upon acts of Episcopacy, but upon the Secular Powers of Christendome. AND now I may make good that which might seem an excessive word when I said it, that the Power which I demand for the Church, is no more, then the subsistence of every Corporation, constituted by Soveraine Power, re∣quireth; Onely that it stands by Gods Law, these by mans. For, what Cor∣poration subsisteth without publick persons, to governe or to execute those things wherein it communicateth? without any power to limit that which the Lawes of the foundation determine not? to admit and to shut out whom the foundation thereof qualifieth? without a stock to defray the charge of those offices, for communion wherein it subsisteth? That which renders the power of the Church considerable even in the Church, that is, by the originall con∣stitution of it, is the extent thereof, comprising all Christians. For by that meanes, in what quality a man is owned by his own Church in the same he is owned by all Christians, supposing the unity of the Church, to take place and prevaile. That which renders it considerable in the world, is the professing of Christianity by the Soveraine Powers of the World; that is, of those States which Christendome containeth. For, supposing that which hath been made to appear, that the Church, being a Society formed by the act whereby God constituteth it, dissolveth not into the state, when, by professing Christi∣anity, it becoms obliged to protect the Church; The rights and Powers there∣of, and the qualities of persons ministring the same, necessarily remaine distinct
from those, which, the State wherein it subsisteth, either involveth or produceth: And the Protection of the state signifieth further, that allowance, or that maintenance of the rights, that concurre to the acts thereof, which a Christi∣an State needs must afford that Christianity which it professeth. The Power of ministering the immediate instruments of Grace, the Sacraments of Baptisme and the Eucharist; The power of the Keyes, in exacting that profession which qualifieth for them, the meanes subordinate to the ministring of them; The power of solemnizing those Offices with the Prayers of the Church, which the Promise of Grace, implied in the foundation of the Church, attendeth; all these make the act of the Church meerly ministeriall, the blessing that atten∣deth, the meer effect of Gods grace, onely limited to the communion of his Church. When the Church determineth the times, the places, the persons, the occasions, the formes, the circumstances, the maner of celebrating any of those offices, which qualify for Communion in the service of God with the Church; of those which provide for the celebration thereof; of those where∣in it consisteth; the acts whereby it determineth that which God hath not de∣termined, done within the Sphere of Gods Law, oblige all to conformity by Gods Law; as the acts of Corporations oblige the members, by the act of the State upon which they stand. Not as if this conformity were the worship of God, but that wich prepareth and maketh way for it. The Lawes of the Apo∣stles, though recorded in Scripture, are necessarily, by the subject matter of them, of this nature. Therefore I maintaine them subject to change, upon the same account, as the Lawes of all visible Corporations are necessarily subject to change. He that should think the observing of them pleasing to God for the thing which they injoyne and determine, not for that act of Gods service, the circumstance whereof they limit; might commit superstition in observing the Lawes given by the Apostles, as well as by the Church. There may be ground for a presumption, in reason, that there is superstition in doing that, which for the nature and kind of it, may lawfully be done; when there is so much businesse about the circumstance, that there is no appearance to reason, how it can stand, and be done, in order to the principall which it pretendeth. For example; Pilgrimage to the holy Land, hath in it a pretense of extraordi∣nary devotion, to which a man sequestreth his time, from his attendance upon this world, and the advantages of it. But if in effect, the exercise of devotion appear not the principall, is there not ground in reason, for a construction, that a man hopes to bribe God, with his bodily exercise, to grant those effects of Grace, which he cannot be obliged to, but by the condition which the Gospel importeth? This is superstition, and will-worship in the badde sense, or, the vaine worship of God, by doctrines delivered by men, which our Lord and the Prophet Esay charge the Jewes with; When a man stands upon the circumstances tending to limit the order and uniformity of that worship of God in Spirit and Truth, wherein Christianity consisteth, as if the obser∣vation of them were the substance of it. And yet, that uniformity which the Lawes of the Church procure, so necessary to the maintenance of Gods service, for which it standeth, that there is no lesse superstition, in stand∣ing upon the not doing of them; Which cannot be stood upon, so farre be∣yond the sphere of their kind and nature, without appearance of an ima∣gination, that a man becomes acceptable to God by refusing them. But, to proceed to violate the unity of the Church upon such a cause, is nothing else, then, to place the worship of God as much in committing sacriledge, as in ab∣horring of Idols. This being the utmost of what the Church is able to do, by the originall constitution thereof, it will not be prejudiciall to that service of God which Christianity injoyneth, that the acts thereof should take hold upon the conscience; Because it is easily understood, by that interruption of Gods service, which the disorders of this time have made visible, how every Christian, is bound in conscience to concurre to that uniformity, which, as it procureth the service of God, so is procured by the Lawes of the Church. But this effect is invisible, between God and the conscieuce. The visible effect of the originall
power of the Church, is considerable in regard of the greatnesse of that Body which is the whole Church, and ownes the act of every Church, done within the within the true sphere, by giving effect to it. But it becomes considerable to the world, by that accessory force, which the protection of the Church by the power of the World (necessarily insuing upon the profession of Christianity, so long as the acknowledgement of one Catholick Church is a part of it) ad∣deth to the acts of the Church, by owning them for the acts of a Corporation which the State protecteth. Before I come to limit this effect, I must acknowledge one part of the Church∣right to have ceased, and become voide, by the coming of the world into the Church, and the conversion of the Romane Empire to the Faith; That is, the power of ending all sutes between Christians within the Church. Saint Paul is expresse in it; And the generality of our Saviours command; to resort to the Church, if thy brother offend thee, can never be satisfied with any other sense. The Synagogue had the same order, upon the same ground; to wit, that the offenses that fall out among Gods people might not scandalize the Gentiles. Therefore Saint James, writing his Epistle to converted Jewes, supposeth that they exercised the same power of judging between Christian and Christian, as they did being Jewes, between Jew and Jew: And exhort them, thereupon, to use it like Christians, James II. 1-13. for, this I have shewed to be his mean∣ing in another place. And Saint Cypriane teaches Quirinus in the testimonies which he produces against the Jewes out of the Scripture III. 44. Fideles inter se disceptantes non debere Gentilem Judicem experiri. In Epistola Pauli ad Corinth. I. Audet quisquam vestrum—That Christians, being in debate among themselves, are not to come to the triall of a heathen Judge. For, in the first Epi∣stle of Paul to the Corinthians you have; dare any of you—. In the Constituti∣ons of the Apostles II. 45, 46, 47. this authority is most truly attributed to the Church, by describing the manner of proceeding in it. Nor will any man of reason question, that the author of them, though not so ancient as the title under which he goes, understood the state of the Church before Constantine. There he showes, that the Church, in the use of this power, aimed at the precept of our Lord, to be reconciled to our brethren before we offer sacrifice to God Mat. V. 23, 24. For, though the offering of beasts in sacrifice to God be cea∣sed, yet the reason of the precept holds in the Eucharist, and the offering of those oblations, out of which it was consecrated for Christians. To this pur∣pose he prescribeth, that Consistories be held on the Munday, to see what dif∣ferences were on foot in the Church, that they might have the week before them to set them to right, that so they might offer at the Eucharist, on the Lords day, with a clear conscience. For, at the Eucharist they were to salute one ano∣ther with a kisse of peace, and the deacon cried aloude; ; Let no man have any thing against any man, let no man give the kisse of peace dissembling. All evidences for the practice of the Church. That which Gratiane hath alledged out of the Epistle of Clemens to James of Jeru∣salem Causa XI. Quaest. I. Cap. XXXII. is found also in the life of Saint Peter out of the book of the Popes lives, which you have in the Counciles; though, in that Copy of it which hath since been published under the name of Anastasius, it appeareth not. The words are these in the Epistle. Si qui ex fratribus negotia habent, inter se, apud cognitores seculi non judicentur; Sed apud Presbyters Ecclesiae, quicquid illud est definitur. If any of the brethren have suits, among themselves, let them not be judged before judges of the World; But whatsoever it is, let it be judged before the Priests of the Church. The life of Saint Peter saith thus; Hic Petrus B. Clementem Episcopum consecravit, cui & Cathedram vel Ecclesiam, omnem disponendam commisit, dicens; Sicut mihi gubernandi tradita est a Domino meo Jesu Christo potestas, ligandi slvendique, ita & ego tibi committo, ut ordines dispositores diversarum causarum, per quos actus non Ecclesiastici profligentur, & tu minime curis seculi deditus repe∣ri, sed solummodo orationi, & praedicationi, ad populum vacare stude. This Peter consecrated B. Clement Bishop, and committed to him the see, or, the whole
Church, to be ordered, saying; As the power of governing, or, binding and loo∣sing was delivered me by my Lord Jesus Christ, so do I also depute thee, to ordain those that may dispose of divers causes, by whom, actions that are not of the Church may be dispatched, so that thou be not found addicted to secular cares, but onely study to attend upon prayer, and preaching to the people. I know the first is for∣ged, and the second of little credit. And, he that writ the Epistle might in∣tend to create an authority, against trying the Clergy in secular Courts, which could not be the subject of any thing that Clement might write. But both au∣thors write what they might know, in their time, to have fitted the Apostles time. There is nothing more suitable to that estate which the Apostles signify, then that Clemens should appoint, who should attend upon the dispatching of suits between his people, that he might attend upon the principall of his Office. For, that all resorted not then to the Church, it is ridiculous to imagine. It is enough that there is no instance extant, of any suit between Christians tried before Gentiles, before Constantin. And this is the reason why Constantine, undertaking the protection of Christianity, made the Law that is yet extant in the Code of Theodosius de Episcopali Audientia I. that any man might ap∣peale to the Bishop, in any cause, before sentence. Is there any appearance that so vast a priviledge would ever have been either demanded or granted, had not the matter of it been in use, by the Constitution of the Church among Christi∣ans? Therefore it was no marvaile that it was limited afterwards (for it made the Church judge in all causes, in which one party would appeal to it) as it ap∣peares by Justinians Law and other constitutions afore Justiniane. For, when the Empire was become Christiane, the reason of our Lords and his Apostles Order was expired. In the mean time, the referring of causes to the Bishop▪ upon appeale, was but to referre the causes of Christians to the Bishop which belonged to his knowledge afore. And, when all were Christians, to demand that all should resort to the Bishop, had been to dissolve the Civile Govern∣ment, which the Church supposeth. The causes that were afterward heard by Bishops, of the trouble whereof Saint Augustine complaines, and which Saint Peter had cause to provide, that Clemens should not be oppressed with, resort∣ed to them either as arbitrators, by consent of parties, or as Judges delegated by the secular power, in causes limited by their acts. And now is the time to answer the objection against the being of the Church, and the Protection which is drawn from those bounds, which, the power of excommunicating, challenged by the Church, hath been and is con∣fined to, by all Christiane states. Though, having made the question generall, I find it requisite to extend also the answer to those other points, wherein I have said, the right of the Church is seen, and upon which the society thereof is founded, no lesse then upon the power of excommunicating. And then the argument will be to this effect; That, seeing no Christian can deny, that the Lawes, the Ordinations, the Censures of the Church are lawfully prohibit∣ed to take effect by the secular Powers of Christian States, therefore the right of doing those acts stands not by Gods Law, but by the sufferance and appoint∣ment of the same secular Powers, chusing whom they please to execute their own rights by. And besides this consequence, another will rise, that this is the sense of all Christendome, (to wit, where Christians are governed by Christians) that there is no such thing as any power of the Church by Gods Law; because all Christendome agrees, Soveraignes in doing, subjects in admit∣ting, that it is limitable by the Secular, which cannot limit Gods Law but its own. This being the force of that objection, which is so largly pursued, in the first book de Synedriis cap. X. my answer is; That, having showed how the decrees of the Apostles themselves, as for the mater of them, are limitable and determinable by the Church, to such circumstances, as may make them usefull to the Church, for another state then that for which they were first made; I am to grant, that the Lawes also, and other acts of the Church, may be limited by the secular power, as for the execution and exercise of them. For, as the Society of the Church, and all the acts thereof, done in virtue of Gods Charter,
by which it stands, supposing Christianity; so Christianity supposeth common∣wealths; that is to say, the government of this world, in and by those Soveraign∣ties, which subsisted when Christianity came into the world, or may lawfully come to subsist afterwards. For, not to dispute for the present, whether civill Governement subsist by the law of God, or by humane consent; seeing it can∣not be said to subsist by the same act, (that is, by the same declaration of Gods will) by which the Church, that is Christianity, subsisteth; it is manifest, that the title by which, the Church standeth must not be inconsistent with that title by which civill governement deriveth it self from the will of God: And therefore, that they may and must suppose one an other. Who ever challenges to the Church a power in all civil causes, and over all persons, to ordaine, and by force of their armes to execute, what the Church (that is, those that have right to conclude the Church) shall thinke the consideration of Christianity shall require; he, I grant, erecteth a Power destructive to the civill govnement; Which, to stand tyed to execute a decree, that may be contrary to the decree of those that governe, is necessarily inconsistent with But, that which I say is this; That the Church hath power to determine all maters, the determination whereof is requisite to mainetain the communion of Christians in the service of God, and to oblige Christians to stand to that determination, under pain of for∣feiting that communion: But no power to give execution to them by force of armes, which the Soverain power of every state onely moveth. (Supposing for the present that no armes can be moved, but originally from the soveraign, nor any thing executed by any force, which is not ultimately resolved into the pow∣er of the sword, which the Soveraige beareth, as known to common sense▪ And by consequence I say, that the Soveraign power having right to make the acts of the Church Lawes of the state, by declaring to, concur to the execution of them by the force which it moveth; must needs have right to judge whether they be such as Christian powers ought, or may concur to execute, and accor∣dingly limit the exercise of them. But, thereby I intend not to grant, that Christian powers may not exceed their bounds of right, in opposing and suppressing the effects o those acts, which may be duely don by the Church; nor to dispute this point upon suppo∣sition, that the particulars, related in that X. Chapter I de Synedriis, ought to have the esteem of precedents, as things well done, and within the limits of secular power in Church maters. For, I have already granted, that the pow∣er of the Church, (that is to say, of those that pretend it on behalfe of the Church,) hath so far transgressed the bounds, as to suffer the temporall power of the Church, in ordine▪ ad spiritualia, to be disputed and held▪ being really destructive to all civill Governement, and to act too many things, not to be justified but upon suspition of it. And therefore, I think I demand but reason, when I take leave o suppose, that sovergne powers are subject to erre, as all men are, especially in so▪ nice a point as is their owne interest in Church mat∣tes; And that these Errors may have proceeded to the hinderance of Christiani∣ty, even by such acts as were intended ▪to have the force of standing Lawes. But, what hath been well or ill done in this kind, is not my businesse here to dispute. That which I have to doe now is, in generall, to determine, in what consideration the civill power, (which the Church of England granteth to be soveraign in all causes and over all persons both Ecclesiastical & Civill in the do∣minions thereof) giveth the acts of the Church, the force of the Lawes of the state. Which I have already expressed to be two-fold: As soveraigne, to suppresse whatsoever may seeme to importe an attempt upon the right of it; whch, subsisting without the Church, i to be maintained against all incroch∣ment of whomsoever may claime in behalfe of the Church; And as Christi∣ans, because civill powr being presupposed to the being of the Church (which standeth upon supposition of the truth of Christianity) the sword of Christi∣ans stnd obliged to protect the Church against all pretenses. For, seing the society of the Church is a part of Christianity, as hath been showed; of nece∣ssity it followeth, that Christian powes stand obliged by their Christianitie, both to protect those that are lawfully possessed of right in the behalfe of the
Church of their dominions, in the exercise of it; and also to restraine them, when their acts, (whether expressely attempted or maintained by use of long time) prove prejudiciall to that common Christianity, which the being of the church presupposeth But as this necessarily presupposeth that those that claim on behalf of the Church may proceed to actions so prejudiciall to the state, as may deserve to be punished or restrained by civill & temporal penalties of all degrees; So wil it necessarily infer, that civill powers may proceed to excesses (not onely in their particular actions, but also in violating and oppressing the Church) that the Church may be obliged to proceede against them, by cutting them off from the communion of the Church; so that, therein subjects do stand, obliged, not to obey them, in violating and oppressing the Church, and to abstaine from com∣municating with them in the mysteries of Christianity, continuing neverthe∣lesse obliged to them in all the offices, which the maintenance of the state, which Christianity presupposeth, will require at the hands of good sub∣jects. This being said, I will summon the common sense of Christendom to give sentence of the truth, or likenesse to truth of this argument; All Christian Prin∣ces and States doe limit the use of Ecclesiasticall power within their owne do∣minions; Therefore they doe not believe any such thing as a Church, or any power derived from any Law of God, by which it standeth. For, it is ma∣nifest, that the powers from whose acts this argument is drawne are such, as hold communion with the Church of Rome, and acknowledg the Pope in be∣half of it. As manifest it is, that the Pope not onely challengeth to be head of the Church, in Church maters but maintaineth Friers & Canonists to chalenge for him Soveraigne power, in civill causes, over all persons, in order to Christianity. To say then that by, the acts, which they limite the use of Ecclesiastical power by they pretend, that there is no Power in the Church, but what they give it; is to say, that by those acts they contradict themselves, and proclaime their own pro∣fessing themselves Sons of the Church, not onely to be without cause, but to signifie nothing, as words without sense; Which, with what modesty it can be affirmed in the face of Christendome, I leave to Christendome to judge. Onely I will here summon the liberties of the Gallicane Church, as they are digested by that worthy Advocate of Paris P. Pithaeus to give sentence in this cause, being a peece much appealed to by the Father of this argument, as that which deserves to be accounted of prime consequence in the businesse. I desire those that will take the pains to looke into them, to tell me whether they find not these two to be the first two points of them; That the King of France is Soveraigne in his own dominions; and, that he is Protector of the Canons, Liberties and priviledges of the Church. And then, I desire them to imploy the common understanding of men, to pronounce, whether these be not the same points of secular interest in Church maters, which I have advanced; Name∣ly, as Soveraigne, to have no competitor in the right of the Crowne; and as Christian, to be borne Protector of the Catholicke and Apostolick Faith, and of the Church and of the Lawes of it, which have no being but upon sup∣position of that faith, whereof one part is the beliefe of the Catholike Church. Onely I shall take notice, that they protest, that they are called Liberties and not Priviledges, on purpose to signifie, that they are no exceptions to the com∣mon right of all Soverainities in Church maters, but essentiall points of it; Which they call the liberties of the French Church, in particular, because the Kings of France, they thinke, have maintained them better, then other Prin∣ces of Christendome have done. In consequence of this collection of Pithaeus besids the proofs of them in two great volums, we have of late a commentary of Petrus Puteanus upon these Liberties, as they are digested by Pithaeus; the busi∣nesse whereof is, first to make good, that they are of more unquestionable right in France, then they have been and are practiced also by other Princes and states of Christendome; which is answer enough to this whole argument, as it stands upon the authority of Christendome, expessed by the acts of it. Neverthelesse, I shall further alledge in this cause, the collection which Frier Paul of the order
delli Servi, hath made of the articles, accorded betweene the Pope and the state of Ʋenice, concerning the Inquisition, & the bounds of secular Power in the cognizance of those causes, wherein that court may pretend concurrence of Jurisdiction with it. I will not undertake to say, that the state of Ʋenice, maintaining the Inquisition, upon such termes as this collection or Capitular declareth, doth maintaine those persons in the use of Ecclesiasticall power, to whom, by the common right of the whole Church it belongeth. Neither will I maintaine that whatsoever those articles distinguish, and allow the Inquisi∣tion, is by virtue of the common right of the whole Church. For, who can ty him to expresse every where, what is by Ecclesiasticall right, and what of secular privilege, by free act of te state bestowed upon the Church; as all states that would be held Christians, have alwaies done? This I say, that he that shall take the paines to look into it, shall finde the bounds of secular and Ecclesiastical power so expressely distinguished, upon the reasons which I have aleged, that it shall be too late to say, that they who acknowledge a Church, and certaine rights, by Gods Lawe belonging to the foundation of it, doe contradict themselves, when they do limit the exercise of those rights; Being ready further to maintaine, that they doe nothing but right, when they li∣mit the exercise of them according to the reasons which I have advan∣ced. As for the Leviathan, who hath made himselfe so merry, with compasing a state Christian, in which the Ecclesiasticall power is distinct from the secular, with the governement of Oberon and Queene Mabbe and theire Pugs in the land of Fairies; If he speake of a state framed according to the opinion of those, that make the Pope soveraigne in all causes, and over all persons, in or∣der to Christianity, I grant he hath reason: For there is not, nor can be any such state; and it would be indeed a kingdome of confusion and darkenesse. Nay, where the Church it selfe is Soveraigne, as in the Popes dominions, show the difference of the grounds, upon which severall rights and powers are held and exercised, will be, in some points, though not in all, no lesse visible then else where. But, if he intend by consequence to say the same of all Christian states, that acknowledg an Ecclesiasticall power derived from the Law of God, and not from the secular; then, I remit to those, that shall have perused the practice of Christendome, but in those short peeces that I have named, whether they believe those states, which so governe themselves, to be the land of Fai∣ries, or his wits, that writ such things, to have beene troubled with Fai∣ries. And now in particular, to say, what the maintenance of the Church in giving Lawes to the Church requires; (that is to say in determining those maters, the determination whereof becomes necessary for the maintenance of unity in the Communion of the Church) It is easy to deduce from the premises, that every Christian is under two obligations. One, to the Church, which, as a Christian, he is bound to communicate with; The other, as belonging to that state of Government, which he believeth to be lawfully setled in his country. By the act of those, whom he believes to have right, to oblige respectively these two societies (which, if we speake onely of that part of the Church which is in one soverainty consist of the same persons, if they be all of the same Church) eve∣ry Christian is respectively obliged. For, by the premises it remaines mani∣fest, that it is the act of the Church, to determine the mater of Ecclesiasticall Law, and give it force to oblige the respective part thereof, under paine of for∣seiting the communion of the Church; But, the act of the state, either, not to hinder this effect, when and where Christianity is onely tollerated, as a cor∣poration which it alloweth; Or to make them Lawes of the state, when and where the whole state is of the same Church, as a corporation consisting of the same persons as the state. That this is from the beginning the sense of Christendom, easily appeares, supposing that which I have showed by the pre∣mises; that the Canons of the Church were not first in force, and limited to the termes which we have in writing as the acts of generall or particular
Councils, from the date of those Councils; But, by unwritten custome, de∣rived from the Orders given out by the Apostles and their successors, unto the Churches of their founding; and by the intercourse of all Churches with the authority of the Clergy and consent of the people in each, setled over the whole. This, for the time that the Church was a corporation, sometimes persecuted, sometimes tolerated by the Empire; during which time, it were ri∣diculous to question whether Councils were held or not; But neverthelesse, impossible to derive the customes of the Church from their acts. After Con∣stantine, the protection of Christianity was become so firme a law of the Empire, that Julian, though absolute Soveraigne▪ and miserably desirous to roote it out, could not have his will of it, during his short reigne. And, though generall Councils were called onely by the Emperors for the reasons aforesaid, and parti∣cular councils might be called, as oft as they pleased; yet the Canon of Nicaea, which provides for the holding of them twice a yeare, showes the acts of them to be all the acts of the Church, though with allowance of that state. And, what prejudice to any state in all this? That God should have provided a Corporation for the Church, to determine all maters determinable concerning that wherein the communion thereof consisteth; Providing the state o a right & Power, as Soveraigne, to suppresse whatsoever prejudiceth the peace or weale of the state; (no way prejudiciall to Christianity, because there is nothing in Christianity prejudiciall to any state) And, as Christian, to see the persons trusted on behalfe of the Church observe the due bounds, as well of their au∣thority, as, of the mater of their acts, wherein it is limited, either by the word of God or by greater authority within the Church. He that lookes upon the French, the Spanish, the English, the Germane Councils, will find sufficient marks, as well of the ratification of secular power, as of the determination of the Church. Thus far the businesse is cleare. For, if the Rescripts of the Popes in the West which are extant after Syricius, if the Canonicall Epistiles of some great Bishops in the East, and afterwards, the rescripts of the Patri∣arches of Constantinople make up the Canon Law, by which they were respect∣ively governed; the allowance of the state is evident enough, where the au∣thority of the Church onely acteth. But, there are in the Roman Lawes abun∣dance of acts, especially of the Emperours after Justinian, which give a forme, and not onely force to the ordering of Church maters; which is indeed to give Law to the Church, obliging the Church to execute the same. And there is a most eminent instance in France, when Charles VII. tooke occasion upon dissension between the Pope and the Councile of Basil, by a convocation of his Nobles and Clergy, to give a forme to the exercise of Ecclesiasticall Law within his dominions, by an act called the Pragmatick sanction, which tooke place in that kingom ill the Concordates between Francis the I. and Leo X. Pope. And that with such approbation, as seemes to carry the face of a protestation of the whole Church and kingdome, against the said concordates. Here is indeed, wherewith to justifie an extraordinary course of proceeding, when present dis∣order required an expedient. And the disorder in Church maters, which some alledge for the occasion▪ whereupon Charles the Great caused the French Capi∣tular to be made, tends to the same purpose. Nor doe I deny, the acts of the Easterne Emperors or other soverains, may be beneficiall to the Church, by the inexecution of the proper Lawes of the Church, and the difficulty of provi∣ding new that may be availeable. But, to provide with all, that they may be more prejudiciall, in the example of superseding the authority of the Church, then beneficiall, in the providing against present abuses. I have given you an instance, in mariages upon divorce▪ and, for the consequence of it, I claime, that no such acts be taken for precedents, but stand liable to examination upon the principles premised; though possibly, usefull for the time, and obliging the Church to use them, for the common good. Neither is it enough, to prove that God hath not instituted both these interests, in Church maters; that both may erre, and abuse their power; & oppose one another, that it may become questio∣nable what the one or the other of these powers may or ought to do & which of
those that belong to both are to follow. For answer, I hold it enough for me, resting in the generall afore established, to say; That there is appearance of reason, that secular Powers, knowing how much it concerns, both the interest of their estates, and the salvation of their own soules, that the Church under them be maintained in unity; will not interrupt the Church in the use of that right, which, duely limited, can adde nothing to their soveraignties, if they should seize it into their hands, nor take any thing from them, being maintain∣ed in their hands, who, by Gods law are to hold it. As for the Church, and those that claime under the Church, what appearance is there that they should attempt upon their Soveraigne, but disorder in State, upon difference of claime and title, which what Law preventeth? For, as for that one instance of the Bishops of Rome, and the occasion of their exempting themselves from the alle∣giance of the Empire, I am to speak anon. So that the quiet of Christendome, as for this point, will require no more, but that the common understanding of men be conducted to discover these bounds in all publick actions; publick per∣sons believing, that it is for the publick interesse, as indeed it is, to observe them in their proceedings. If that cannot be obtained, it is vaine to demand, why God hath given a Law, which, by the partialities of the world, may become uselesse, and not serve to direct particular mens proceedings with quiet; much more to argue, that there is no such Law, because it does not. For we know, both, that God gives no Lawes, but to them to whom he gives free choice to observe them or not; And also, that he hath given the Gospel and Christianity upon condition of bearing Christs Crosse, whereof, the vexations, which the partialities framed upon occasion of this Law, doe produce, is a part. Now, the indowment of the Church, being part of the subject of of Ecclesi∣asticall Law, it will be requisite here to say, how it is, and how it is not exempt from secular right. Seeing then that all Christian states and kingdomes, ac∣knowledging the Church a Corporation founded by God, and to be maintain∣ed by the first-fruits and oblations of Christians goods, have not thought it fit to leave this maintainance to the daily wil of Christians, but to make good that which they have vested in the Church, for a standing indowment, by pro∣tection of Law; it is manifest, that they have left themselves no particular right in that, which either themselves have consecrated, or allowed their subjects to consecrate to the use of the Church. But it doth not follow from hence, that they have abandoned and disclaimed that common right, which every Com∣mon wealth hath in all goods of particular persons, for the maintenance and defence of the Publick, in the necessities of it. Whereby it seemeth, that, be the gift of Ecclesiasticall goods never so large or so absolute, for the form which private mens gifts go in, the Soveraigne, by making them good, doth not abandon the right of publicke aide in them: And therefore, that the Com∣mon wealth may, notwithstanding, serve themselves of taxes imposed on Church goods. Likewise, seeing the use of Church goods is declared, by all records of the Church, as well as by the Scriptures, to tend to the maintain∣ance of the poor, which is included in the intent of maintaining Gods service in the Church; it followes, that, if Church goods be used otherwise, by those that are not proprietors, but trustees for the poor, it is in the secular power to re∣duce and restore the use of them, according to the original intent of the Church. But, to seize them into the hands of the secular power, (as if the Corporation of the Church could be dissolved by mans Law which is founded by Gods) to be imployed to the advantage of the seizers of them, is an attempt of sacrilege, up∣on Gods goods first, and, by consequence upon Gods Law, by which the Church standeth. For, the indowment of the Church may be invaded by Secular pow∣er, upon the Title of publick aide, but extended beyond any bound of it, that reason or common sense can allow: And this is sacriledge, though consistent with an opinion that they are the Churches. For it is no new thing, for men to transgresse their profession by their actions. But it may also be invaded, out of an opinion, that they are onely publick goods, and not Gods; And that
opinion supposeth, that there is no such thing as a Corporation of the Church founded by God, which hitherto Christians, by their Creed, do professe to be∣lieve. And therefore this is a sacrilege of an higher nature, tending to root out all difference of good and bad according to Christianity, that is grounded upon the constitution of the Church. Seeing then, that all Christian Kingdoms and states have thought themseves tied, to inable the Church, by their Laws, to trans∣mit those estates to posterity, which either Soveraigns or private Christians have upon supposition of Gods Law, indowed it with; (for how should all Christi∣ans agree to do that, which no Law of Christianity obliged them to do?) it will be of no force to argue, from any limitations which Christian States may have bounded the right of Tithes with, that they did not believe the Church to be a Corporation, inabled by God to hold an estate bestowed upon it, but one∣ly to be made such a one by their priviledges. For, as it appeares by the premi∣mises, that those limitations may be according to Gods Law; So, whether they be so or not, it is to be judged by the grounds upon which I proceed here. And this is the case of the right of Patronage, reserved over Churches to those that first indowed them, by consent of the Church, in remembrance of their merit. For, as it may be so limited, as to be no prejudice to the Church, and to Christianity; So, that it is every where so limited, I do not find my self tied to maintaine. Of the concurrent interests of Church and State in marriage, or matrimonial causes, I cannot say much here. Supposing the premises upon which I main∣taine it, I can undertake, thereupon, to evidence the weaknesse of this presum∣ption; That those Christian powers, which take upon them to limit the exer∣cise of Ecclesiasticall power in matrimoniall causes, do not believe any Ecclesi∣asticall power in them, as of divine right; that is to say, any Corporation of the Church indowed by God, with power to allow or disallow the marriages of Christians. Suppose then, that our Lord Christ hath introduced a new Law among Christians, of the marriage of one with one, and that indissoluble, saving upon breach of wedlock. Suppose that which I proved afore, that the Lawes of Moses are not Lawes to the Church, but arguments evidencing the Lawes of the Church, by the correspondence betweene it and the Synagogue. And therefore; Granting, that those degrees, in which marriage was pro∣hibited Jewes by the Leviticall Law, are not licensed for marriage among Chri∣stians; That it doth not follow, that no further degrees are prohibited in the Church. Suppose further, from common sense and experience of the world, that, upon any new Law, there will arise a multitude of new cases, to be decid∣ed, either by particular jurisdiction, or by a generall Law; And the power of deciding the same vested in that Corporation, which first received the Law. Suppose againe that marriage, though among Christians limited to a mutuall interest in one anothers bodies, for the preventing of concupiscence, is notwith∣standing a civile contract, supposing the same freedome from error or force in the persons that contract, that is requisite to the validity of all civil contracts: And further that it may concerne the State to limit the qualities, of persons that may contract it, so that, not being contracted within those bounds, which the State shall limit, it shall be either unlawfull or voide; It will follow then upon these suppositions, that Civile Powers may create lawfull impediments of mar∣riage, as of civile contracts; But neverthelesse, that the use of marriage is not to be deemed Lawfull, untill the allowance of the Church give them assurance, that the limitations given by our Lord, and his Apostles, to the marriages of Christians, and the determinations, which thereupon have proceded from the Lawfull power of the Church, are not violated by the same. Neither is it a∣vailable to say, as some have pretended to say, that this right of the Church falls to the State, when it professeth Christianity, and the maintainance thereof, all parties being members or subjects of it; No more then, that the society of the Church ceaseth, and is swallowed up in the Common-wealth, when the Sove∣raigne becomes Christiane. Indeed among Gentiles, whose Religion, being contrived by the devill and his ministers, was admitted by civile Powers, as an
expedient to keep their people in obedience; Among Jewes, whose religion. given by God as a condition of maintaining them in the Land of Promise, pre∣tended expresly no more, then the civile good of one people; it is no marvaile, that the determination of all things questionable concerning mariage, should last∣ly resort to the civil Powers, whose dicision might secure the People of that good which the Law tendered, if they should practice the Law of mariage according to their determinations. But Christianity being tendered to all nations, for their e∣verlasting happiness, & one Society of the Church founded of all that should re∣ceive it of all nations; and the limitations peculiar to Christianity occasioning many things to become questionable, & many times necessary to be determined for Christians, the right of determining them can no more be thought an escheat to the civil power, then the Church to the Common-wealth. If then the Laws of all Christian Kingdoms and States have allowed the Lawes of the Church thus much force and interest in maters of marriage; (how much more soever they may have allowed, then here is demanded) It will be in vaine to argue. from any Lawes of Christian States, limiting the freedome of marriage, or the exer∣cise of Ecclesiasticall power in matrimoniall causes, that they do not believe the Church to be, by Gods Law, a society, the allowance whereof, upon the pre∣mised considerations, becomes requisite to the lawfull use of marriage among Christians. For, seeing both the Church and the State are subject to mistake the boundes of their concurrent interests, in matrimoniall causes; And there∣fore, that there may be cause for the State, by the force which it is indowed with, to barre the abuse of Ecclesiasticall Power in the same, or that the State may do it without cause; It is ridiculous to inferre, that they who limit the exercise of Ecclesiasticall Power doe not believe the Church, or any lawfull Power of it in such causes, independent upon their owne. The same is to be said, touching the Ordaining of Persons to exercise the Power and right of the Church, and to minister the offices of Christianity to Christian People. No man will refuse civile powers the right of maintainig the publick peace, and their estates, by making all such acts ineffectuall, through the force which they possesse, as may be done to the disturbance of it. No man will refuse them as Christian, the interest of protecting the Church, a∣gainst all such acts as may prove prejudiciall to the common faith, or do rio∣late the common right of the Church, according to which such Ordinations are to proceed. But having proved, that those Ordinations are made, and to be made, by virtue of that Power which the Apostles have left in the Church, and which our Lord gave the Apostles, As it hath been cleared, what interest in this power, their acts will allow to those severall qualities, which they have set∣led in the Church; So it remaines manifest, that those who have the interest cannot otherwise be hindred by secular force in the exercise of it, then by the violation of that Law of God, whereby the society of the Church, and those rights whereupon it is founded, subsisteth. Not as if I did imagine, that this right hath been violated, so often as Christian Princes or States have nominated persons to be ordained, which they, for the publick peace and good of the Church, and to hinder disorderly proceeding in the Church, have thought fit to name. For we have eminent examples, even in the happy times of the Church, of Ordinations thus made, to the incomparable benefit of the Church. And why should not the reasons premised be thought sufficient to justify such proceedings? But because it is alledged by some, even that mean no harm to the Church, that the right of all parties devolveth to the State, by the professi∣on of Christianity. Which plea if it were good, there would be no reason why the Church, and all the right of it should not he thought to accrue to the State, by declaring it self Christian. Here I will remember one of the most emi∣nent actions that ever was done in Europe, against the right of the Church, which is, the Concordates between Francis I. King of France, and Leo X. Pope. The Pragmatick Sanction of Charles VII. had maintained the right of the Church in that dominion, against divers perogatives pretended by Popes; but it main∣tained the Church also in the election of Prelates, which that Prince had a de∣sire to seize into his hands. Hereupon an agreement passes, the King to make
good the prerogatives pretended by the Pope, the Pope to accept and to main∣taine the Nominations of Prelates, which the King should make. Which Con∣cordates, with what difficulty, and after how many protestations and Remon∣strances of the Clergy, of the university of Paris, and Soveraigne courts of the Kingdome, they were accepted; I leave to them that will take the paines, to peruse the relation thereof, historically deduced by Petrus Puteanus, to judge. Not forgetting what Thuanus, one of the Principall ministers of that kingdome, as prime President of the Parliament at Paris, hath said to posterity, in the first book of his Histories. That so great a Prince, after having dissolved the course of Ecclesiasticall Elections introduced into the Church by the Apostles, never prospered in any of his greatest undertakings. And if, in the contention be∣tweene the Emperors and the Popes, about Investitures, the case truly stated will evidence, that the common right of the Church was trodden under foot, as well as that of the Soveraigne; I report my self to the conscience of any man that can judge, whether it be reason to inferre; that the proceeding of Chri∣stendome acknowledges no such thing as a Church, rather then to conclude, that the particulars, whether well or ill done, (which is not my businesse here) are to be tried by the reasons premised. Now for the Power of Excommunication, whereupon the force of all acts of the Church depends, every man knowes, that, since Constantine received Christianity, he, and after him, all Christian Princes and States, do ne∣cessarily pretend the advancement of it, by temporal penalties, and priviledges of their indulgence. Among which, one is that punishment, which in other States, as well as in England, a man incurres by being Excommunicate. He that would challenge the power of doing this for the Church, from the origi∣nall right of it, must transgresse the principles premised; whereby it may ap∣peare, that the Church is not able to do any thing, of it selfe, that requireth secular force, or tendeth to alter any mans secular estate in the Common∣wealth. Neither is there any more evident character of that usurpation, which the Popes, in behalfe of the Church, have been chargeable with, then the in∣forcing of their acts with temporall penalties. But all such attempts natu∣rally resolve into the highest, whereby some Popes have pretended, that by the sentence of Excommunication, subjects are absolved of the allegiance they owe their Princes, and stand free, and may stand obliged, to take up armes against them as they shall disect. Which is so farre from standing with any pretense of mine, that I professe further to believe, that no Soveraigne is liable to the utmost excommunication, called the greater excommunication among Divines and Canonists, though limited and defined by them, upon sundry and divers sup∣positions of their own which I intend not hereby, either to admit or to dispute, because it is enough for my turne, that we agree in this; that the precept of avoi∣ding the Excommunicate is limitable, upon such considerations, as the consti∣tution and being of the Church presupposeth. As the Apostle, when he or∣ders the Corinthians not so much as to eat with one that professeth Christi∣anity, and yet lives in the sinnes he nameth 1 Cor. V. 11. meaneth the same that he expresseth and signifieth, by avoiding an Heretick Titus III. 10. & S. John, by not bidding him God speed, and our Lord, by holding him as a Heathen man or a Publicane. But, he that shall consider the vast diffe∣rence between the State of Christianity, under the Apostles, and, when the Empire, and now severall Soveraignties professe it; (remembring, that Chri∣stianity disolves not but maintaines civil Government, and every mans estate in it) must see this to be one of those Lawes, which, without limitation, become uselesse to the maintenance of the Church, and therefore must necessarily be limited, that it may be serviceable. The ordinary limitation of it by that verse of the Casuists, is well enough known; Ʋtile, lex, humile, res ignorata, necesse. But, he that will observe shall find, that all these Exceptions to the generall rule of avoiding the Excommunicate are grounded upon that one title of the necessity of this world, and the subsistence thereof, which the being of the Church presupposeth. A man converseth with the excommunicate for his
profit, to recover a debt; This is the necessity of his estate, of which he owes God an account, in behalfe of his obligations. A man or wife converses with wife or husband excommunicate, for the bond of mariage. This is that necessity, which that law, presupposed to the foundation of the Church, createth. Superiours and inferiours converse with one an other excommunicate. This is the necessity of their estate, which Christianity maintayneth. Other necessities are warrantable under the generall title of necessity. The necessity of violence or feare, why should it not have a place here, as well as that of ignorance; onely that both are generall, justifying all, and not onely this kind of actions? The necessity of giving and getting good counsaile, or almes, is all reducible to the same head. Wherefore, all these considerations resolve themselves into that generall ground which I tender; that Christianity supposes the lawfull state of the world, according to the reason of civill Government, and altereth no mans conditi∣on in it, of it selfe, but maintaineth every man in that estate in which it findeth him, (as S. Paul argueth at large 1. Corin. VII, 17-24.) being such as Chri∣stianity alloweth. By reason whereof, the avoiding of the excomunicate, (easily to be visibly performed by Christians among themselves, when their con∣versation was among many times more men that were not Christians) becomes, without limitation, impossible to be observed of them that live onely with Christians. How feasible that obligation is as the Casuists now make it, I leave it to them to maintaine, or how feasible it may be made. This I say, that all these reasons conccurre, to oblige all Christian subjects, not to forbeare the conversation of their Soveraignes. The civill Laws of every state, the ad∣vantage which the state of all subjects doth or may require from the soveraign, the ineriority wherein they are, and the necessity which all these reasons pro∣duce. For, neither can Christianity pretend to disolve the Law of the land: Nor can justice goe forwards without conversation of the subject with the sove∣raigne: And Christianity obligeth superiours and inferiors to maintaine the relations in which it overtaketh them: And finally, the necessity of these reasons createth an exception, even to the Law of the Church communion, though setled by our Lord and his Apostles. And this, as much as to say, that the greater Excommunication taketh no place against Soveraignes. And this po∣sition is so far from being new in England, that in my nonage, it was disputed at Cambridge upon an eminent occasion, at the reception of the Arch∣bishop of Spalato, by an expresse order of King James of excellent memory, as I conceive I am well informed; and thereby satisfied, that I maintaine hereby no novelty in the Church of England. But, those that distinguish not this from the act of S. Ambrose, in refusing the communion to the great Theodo∣sius, upon a horrible murther done by his expresse commandement, may doe well to consider, either with what conscience they censure such a Prelate in what they understand not, or why they condemne the whole Church, whereof all Christians are or ought to be members. For, how can the Church refuse any Christian the communion, if it refuse not the same to all Christians, even the soveraigne in that case wherein the condition of all is one and the same? And hereby also wee may see, what was the opinion of the learned Prince, King James, concerning this action of S. Ambrose, whatsoever may have been said; Who, had he made question of the lesse excommunication, consisting in excluding from the Eucharist, would never have caused it to be disputed, that the greater hath no place against Soveraigne. As concerning the Jurisdiction of the Church in the causes of Christians if the question be made, whether or no it now continue, that common wealths professe Christianity; the argument seemeth peremptory, that it doth not con∣tinue, because then, of necessity, all civill powers should resolve into the Power of the Church; because all Jurisdiction, by consequence to this priviledge, must needs resolve into the jurisdiction of the Church, all causes being the cau∣ses of Christians, and resorting therefore to the jurisdiction of the Church, and therefore no use of secular Courts, but the power of the sword must become
subordinate to execute the sentence of the Church. And therefore, seeing that, on the otherside, the reason why S. Paul forbids them to goe to sute before secular courts is this; because they were the Courts of Infidels, and that the scandals of Christians were by that meanes published before unbe∣lievers (which, it is evident was the reason, why this course was thought abomi∣nable even among the Jewes) it is manifest, that the jurisdiction of the Church, in maters that arise not upon the constitution of the Church, though inforced by S. Paul and our Lord, ceaseth, together with the title and cause of it, when secular Powers professe Christianity. Which notwithstanding, it is a thing well known, that the line of Charles the Great, in the West, revived those privileges which Constantine had granted the Church, as his act also is repeaed in their Ca∣pitulares VI. 281. which Gratiane also hath recorded XI. Quaest. cap. Quicun{que} From which beginning many sorts of causes, especialy such as charity seemed to have most interest in (which the Clergy were thought fittest to manage) have continued to be sentenced by the Ecclesiastical Court in all Christian dominions; Notwithstanding that they rise not upon the constitution of the Church, nor doe originally be long to it to sentence. And all this, not distinguishing these severall titles, hath been usually understood by the name of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or, the juisdiction of the Church. Neither is there any doubt to be made, that, not onely France, in their appeales from the abuse of Eccle∣siasticall jurisdiction, (which are there warranted of course) but also all Christian states (as England in their premunires and injunctions) have al∣waies provided to redresse the wrong that might be don by the abuse thereof. Nor doe I doubt that Spaine it selfe hath made use of such courses; as may ap∣peare, not onely y great volumes upon that subject, by Salgado de Somoza and Jeronymo de Cevallos whom I have not seene, but more lively by the let∣ters of Cardinall de Ossat, where there is so much menion of the differences between the See of Rome and the ministers of that Crowne in Italy, about the jurisdiction of the Church. But will all this serve for an argument, that there is no such thing as a Church, no such jurisdiction as that of the Church, in the opinion of Christendome, but that which stands by the act of Christian powers, because they all pretend to limit the abuse of it? When as the very name of Ec∣clesiasticall Jurisdiction, in the title of those books, & those actions, is sufficient demonstration that they acknowledge and suppose a right to jurisdiction in the Church, which they pretend so to limit, as neither the Church, nor the rest of their subjects to have cause to complaine of wrong, by the abuse of it; Whe∣ther they attaine their pretence or no remaining to be disputed, upon the principles hitherto advanced, by any man that shall have cause to enter into a∣ny treaty of the particulars. Neither is the publishing of Erastus his booke against Excommunication at London to be drawne into the like consequence, that those who allowed or pro∣cured it allowed the substance of that he maintaineth, so long as a sufficient rea∣son is to be rendred for it otherwise. For, at such time as the Presbyterian pre∣tenses were so hot under Queen Elizabeth, it is no marvaile, if it was thought to show England, how they prevailed at home. First, because he hath advan∣ced such arguments as are really effectuall against them, which are not yet▪ nor ever will be answered by them, though void of the positive truth, which ought to take place in stead of their mistakes. And besides, because, at such time as Popes did what them listed in England, it would have been to the purpose to show the English, how Macchiavell observes that they were hampred at home. And, for the like reason, when the Geneva platforme was cried up with such zeale here, it was not amisse to show the world how it was esteemed under their own noses, in the Cantons and the Palatinat. And here I cannot forbeare to take notice of the publishing of Grotius his book de Jure summarum potestatum in sa∣cris, after his death, because, that also is drawn into consequence. For, it is well enough knowne, that at his being in Egland, before the Synod at Dort, he left it with two great learned prelates of the Church of England, Lanctlot Lord Bishop of Winchester, and Iohn Lord Bishop of Norwich, to
peruse. And that, both of them agreeing in an advice that it should not be pub∣lished, he constantly observed the same till he was dead. So that, though the writing of it was his act, yet the publishing was not; But the act of those that would have it appeare, that his younger works doe not perfectly a∣gree with the sense of his riper yeares. He that, in the preface to his Anno∣tations on the Gospels, shall reade him disclaiming whatsoever the consent of the Church shall be found to refuse, will never believe that he admitted no Corporation of the Church, without which no consent thereof could have been observed. And therefore, may well allow him to change his opinion, without giving the world expresse account of it. I will adde hereupon one consideration out of the letter of late learned Hales of Eton Colledge, from the Synod at Dort, to the English Embassador at the Hague; For Grotius was then, every man knowes, one that adhered to the Holland Remonstrants. He speaketh of denying them the copie of a decree of the states, read them in the Synod December 11. This at the first, seemed to me somewhat hard, but when I considered, that those were the men, which, heretofore, in prejudice of the Church, so extreamely flattered the civill magistrate, I could not but think this usage a fit reward for such a service; And that, by a just judgement of God, themselves bad the first experience of those inconveniencies, which naturally arise out of their doctrine in this behalfe. It remaines onelly, as concerning this point, that I give account of the arti∣cle of the Church of England, which acknowledgeth the King Supreme Go∣vernour in all causes and over all persons as well Ecclesiasticall as Civill, to this effect, as having all that Right in maters of Religion, which the pious Kings of Gods ancient people, & Christian Emperors and Princes, have alwaies exercised in the Church. And the account that I am to give is, what the meaning of this collective, which hath been exercised by the Kings of Judah and Christian Princes, must be. For, I have showed, that it is not to be granted, that Christian Princes may doe that in Christianity, which the Kings of srael did under the Law. Be∣cause the Law was given to one people, for a condition of the Land of promise; the Gospell to all Nations, for the condition of everlasting happinesse. It is therefore consequently to be said; That, in as much as the reason and ground, upon which the right, which those Kings are found to exercise under the Law, holds the same under the Gospell, so far, that power, which the Church of England ascribes to the King in Church maters, is the same which those Kings are found to exercise in the scriptures: But, wherein the reason holds not the same, insomuch it is necessary to distinguish, and acknowledge a difference. It seemes to me; that, when the Law refers the determination of all things que∣stionable concerning the Law, in the last resort, to the Priests and Levits and to the Judge that shall be in those daies at Jerusalem, or the place which God should choose Deut. XVIII. 8-12. the reason, why it speaks indefinitely of Priest and Judge, is; because it intended to include the soveraigne, whether High Priest, (who, from after the Captivity, untill the coming of Herod, was chiefe of the people) or Chief Judge; whether those that are so called (who as I said afore, were manifestly soveraignes) or after them the Kings; so that by this Law, nothing could be determined without the King, either by him∣selfe or by subordinate Judges. And the reason is evident. For, the penalty of transgressing this law being death, otherwise, we must allow inferior Judges the power of the sword, without the authority of the Soveraigne. And there∣fore wee see, that, afterwards, the good King Jehosaphat manifestly gives com∣mission to these Judges at Jerusalem as well as to their inferiours, when he restores them to the exercise of theire office according to law, upon what occa∣sion soever it may seeme to have been interrupted 2. Chron. XVII. 7, 8. 9. XIX. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 And hereupon the Psalme saith CXXII. 5. There is the seat of judgement, even the seat of the house of David. But the Leviathan here∣upon argues; That, as Solomon consecrated the Temple by his own prayers, so Christian Princes may, in their owne person, consecrate Churches, and not one∣ly that, but ordaine, and celebrate the Eucharist, and Preach, and do all thigs
themselves, which their subjects may doe, who are but their ministers. The answer to which is, first; That herein he contradicts his own position, that, by the scriptures (that is, by Gods Law) the right of designing persons to be Ordained, and of doing other things of like nature, belonges to the people of every Church; But, the office of solemnizing the ordination by imposition of hands, and, in like maner, of executing other acts of like nature, to the ministers of those Churches, succeeding the Apostles. Seconly, that he is not able to show a reason why the great Turk should not, by consequence, be able to consecrate Eucharist, Preach, and do any office, wherein Christianity obligeth his Christian subjects to communicate, and they accordingly stand bound to receive them at his hands. For he challenges not this right for the Soveraigne, as Christian, but as Soveraigne. And therefore a Christian Soveraign can no more do that, which every Christian his subject cannot do of this nature, then a Soveraign that is not a Christian. Lastly, that the consequence is not true, nor can be proved, for the reason aforesaid, which if it were not, all that he inferreth, though never so grosse, would follow. Indeed, there were, as I observed, three estates established by the Law in that people. The Priests, the Judges, and the Prophets. And, because established by the Law, therefore successive. The Priests by birth, yet a Corporation by Law, as by Law indowed with the rights of their Tribe. Therefore, when it comes to settle their courses and ministeries in the Temple. I have observed in my booke of the rights of the Church, p. 230. that this is not done by David alone, but with the assistance of the principall of that Tribe. For the Judges, there is no reason why we should not believe the Tradition of the Jewes, that they were all qualified, to fit in any of their Courts, by imposition of the hands of some that had received the same from Moses and his Judges; Though this quality made them onely capable of being Judges, to which they were still a∣ctually to be chosen, by the King or by the Court. So that, when the Talmu∣dists relate, that King David ordained XXXM. on one day, they understand, that he did not this as King, but as qualified to ordaine; though as King, he might actually make Judges. But being zealous of the Law, as they describe him spending his time about the niceties of it, and having his guard of Cerethites and Pelethites (whom they understand to be Doctors all, or Scholars of the Law) they consequently make us believe, that he meant to store the nation wih persons qualified to be Judges. As for the succession of the prophets, tha depended meerely upon Gods free Grace; though a course of learning and discipline was, without question, founded by Moses and maintained by his suc∣cessors, to make them fit, by such education, for the Grace. And these, being the Schools of the prophets in the Scriptures, when the spirit of prophesy failed, became the schools of Scribes, & Doctors, and learners of the Law, out of whom Judges came. As Prophets then had their authority immediately from God, so were they the forerunners of our Saviour Christ and his Apostles, as our Saviour showeth, when he saith Mat. XXIII. 34. Behold I send unto you Pro∣phets, and Scribes, and wisemen, and of them ye shall kill and crucifie, and of them you shall scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute from city to city. For, God having appointed them, by the Law of Deut. XVIII. 18-22 to have recourse also to the prophets, which he should raise, untill the Messias should come, in whom, S. Steven challengeth, that Law to be fulfiled Acts VII. 37. if Prophets preaching by Gods commission, displeased evill rulers▪ they easily found pre∣tences to quarel the evidence of their commission, and to put them to death as false prophets; which was that which they did to our Saviour Christ and his Apostles, and those who preached Christ afterwards. These then, having commission from God alone, had in them, as I showed afore▪ the qualities, both of Priests, in offering to God that service in spirit & truth which Christian∣ity pretendeth, and of judges, in determining that which should become questi∣onable in the Church. And, as the Kings of Israel were bound by Gods Lawes, to maintaine all those qualities, in the execution of their office; So,
the Church being founded, and having subsisted three hundred years, by this power of the Apostles; Constantin, and all Christian Princes aster him, finding  in that estate, become obliged, by Gods Law, to maintaine the Church where∣of they became members by professing Christianity; in that estate and quality wherein they become member of it. And upon these termes have the Kings of England, and all other Christian Princes, the same rights in Church matters, which the godly Kings of Israel, and Christian Emperors are found to have ex∣ercised. Whereof, it shall be enough here to give the most eminent instance, that can be alledged, in the Heresy of Arius, and all the factions that were canvased in the Church, to restore it, being once suppressed by the Synode of Nicaea. Which one act of the Church, though the whole power of the Empire, in two Emperors, Constantius and Valius (though perhaps with far different intents) laboured to make voide, yet they never tooke upon them to do it immediately of themselves, but by meanes of Synods which they might work to their intent, or by the meanes of persons apposted by them, to have the power of the chief Churches. And therefore, whereas that Synode, as it was an act of the Empire, was easily recalled by the breath of either of those Emperors; as it was an act of the Church, it prevailed over all their intenti∣ons, and by the prevailing of it we continue untainted with the heresy of Ari∣us. The reason, because the right of the Church was so notorious to all Chri∣stians, that those Emperors that did not professe Christianity, when they did not persecute it, made good the acts of it; As it is to be seen in that eminent ex∣ample of Aureliane which I will repeate againe, because it is still alledged to argue▪ that Paulus Samosatenus was excommunicated by the secular power of Aureliane. But when it shall appear by Eusebius, that the Councile of Anti∣ochia, having created a new Bishop, and adjudged the possession of the Bish∣ops Palace to him, which Paulus Samosatenus defended by force; and the Em∣peror, being appealed to by the parties for execution, adjudged the possession to him whom the Bishop of Rome and Italy should account lawfull Bishop. I suppose I shall not need many words, to show any reasonable man, the very termes which I hold, in this sentence; to wit, that the matter of it was deter∣mined by the Church, the force and execution of it came from the Power of the Empire. I had purposed here to examine some of those instances produced in the first book de Synedriis cap. X. some passages of Church Writers alledged in the Oxford Doctors Paraenefis, to prove the Ecclesiasticall power meerely the effect of the secular because limitable by it. But having debated thus farre, the bounds between Gods Law and the Lawes of the Church, and found the Law of the Church to be nothing but the limitation of Gods Law, the force where∣of comes from Gods generall Law in founding the Church; I find not the least cause to distrust him that admitteth it, as one to be turned aside with pretenses of so vast consequence upon such slight appearances. I shall therefore thus turn him loose to apply the generall ground upon which I proceed, to the par∣ticulars that may be alledged out of the ancient Church. Onely one I must not leave behinde me, the contest between the Emperors and the Popes about the Investures of Churches, as carrying in it the meanes of changing the Regular Power of the Pope, which I owne, into the pretense of that infinite power which infallibility speaketh. Yet is it not my purpose to state the case in debate▪ because it would require the examining of many records in point of fact, not advancing the discovery of the right a whit more then supposing it stated. For, supposing the investiture of a Church to signifie a right of contra∣dicting an Election, or to signify a right of delivering possession▪ no man, admitting the premises, can deny, that all Princes and States that are Christi∣ane have  them a right to do both, though the terme of Investiture seem pro∣perly to signify onely the latter, as signifying the ceremony of investing some man in the rights of his Church. For if the Church be protected in the rights of it by the Lawes of the Land (as upon the premises it cannot be denied, that upon the States acknowledging the Church as founded by God it ought to be,
and must needs be protected) all the reason in the World will require, that the secular power be inabled to except against any mans person, as prejudicall to the State, and to render no account of such exception to any man, as having no superiour in that trust, to whom to render it. But, if under the title of In∣vestiture, the right of electing and consecrationg, originally resident in the Cler∣gy and People of each Church, and the Bishops of the Province, be seized into the hands of the secular power, by the force thereof constraining each party to do their own parts in admitting the nomination thereof, whether allowing it or not; whatsoever trouble any Soveraigne procure, in such a cause, is mee wrong, and in a wrong cause; The foundation of the Church setling the rights that concurre to the doing of it, upon the qualities which it self createth. But this is not therefore to say, that the Pope, or all the Church, hath any right to depose such a Prince, or to move warre against such a State, by what meanes soever it may be done; Because that is the effect of temporall power that is so∣veraigne, which the Church hath not in point of right, but usurpeth in point of fact, by so doing. He that can injoyn another man either to eject a Prince or de∣stroy a State, upon what terms soever he may dispose of it, when that is done, as he shall make the tenures of this world to depend upon Christianity, so he makes himself Soveraigne in the world, that ownes him in the doing it, upon the same title of Christianity. So the Popes had certainly a wrong cause in stirring warre, which they had no title to do. The Emperors, whether they had a right or a wrong cause (which God would punish, by suffering the Popes to move warre without a title) the state of the case must judge, though for the most part, in warres, both parties are in the wrong, insisting upon that which they have no right to insist upon, for the termes of peace. Let us consider what brought the Popes to this height of really and actually claiming temporall power over Soveraignties, (that is to be Soveraigne over Soveraignes) by moving warre to destroy Princes and States. I will suppose here the defection of the Italian forces from the Emperour Leo Isaurus, for ejecting all images out of Churches; and that he, in reprisall for it, seized the possessions of the Church of Rome in his dominions, and translated the juris∣diction Ecclesiasticall, through the same, upon his Church of Constantinople. For, in reprisall for this, Pepin, whose usurpation of the Crown of France, Pope Zachary had allowed, at the request of Pope Steven, constraining the Lmbards, to render, or to forbear those parts of the Empire, which the Emperors at Con∣stantinople were not able to maintaine any more against them; bestowed them upon the Church of Rome, under his own protection, as the case sufficiently shewes; especially, admitting the Charter of Ludovieus Pius his Grandchilde, to be but the confirmation of his Fathers and Grandfathers acts, saving the difference of that title under which they were done. For, the Charter of Ludo∣vicus Pius in Sigonins de Regno Italiae IV. manifestly reserving the Soveraignty to himself and his successors, remits both the fruits and the administration of them to the Church, charging himselfe to protect it in the same. Which burthen we must needs understand that Pepin, by his grant, did undertake, see∣ing that in point of fact, the Church could neither undertake to hold them a∣gainst the Lombard, nor against the Empire, (which, till this act, it acknowledg∣ed Soveraigne) whatsoever in point of right it might do. The act of Charles the Great, coming between these two, upon the ruine of the Lombards, that is, his own Soveraignty, in reason, must needs seem to have given the forme to the act of his son. The power of this line decaying in Italy, and, those who had attempted to succeed it, failing, it is no marvaile, if, among the States of Italy, that contracted with the Germanes to invest them in the same Soveraignty which Charles the Great and his line, as Kings of Lombardy by conquest, (or, as declared Emperor by the City of Rome, the Head whereof was then the Pope, whatsoever that declaration might signify) the Pope, in behalf of the City and Church of Rome appeared most considerable. While the Germanes, through their strength at home, were able to make good that protection which they un∣dertook, by the loyalty of them that injoyed it, things must, by consequence,
continue in this estate. But, when the removing of the Germane power from the line of Charles the great, had done the operation, of rendring them who suc∣ceeded obnoxious at home, to them by whose faction they obtained it, there was no great likelyhood, that the obedience of strangers, and Italians, accustom∣ed to changing of masters, should continue. This was the time, that Gregory VII Pope, and his successors took, when the power of the Emperours, in disposing the Churches of Germany, by the right of investiture, (whatsoever in point of right it signified) must needs render their interest envious, as well at home as at Rome, whatsoever occasions of discontent besides an Elective Crowne might produce. For, Charles the great, as our William of Malmsbury noteth, had heaped wealth and power upon the Churches, by which he planted Christiani∣ty in Germany, as placing a greater confidence of Loyalty in them, then in any estate of his subjects besides. And, the example of that credit which the usurpa∣tion of Pepin had received by the allowance of the Pope, seemed to justify any in∣surrection, either of Italians or Germanes, to which the Pope was a party. For, as to the issue of those Warres, though the Pope got no more then reducing the adverse party to composition; because he could not pretend any dominion for his Church, by conquering; yet must it needs turn to the advantage of his authority, that had the greatest stroke in moving that warre which others made. This is the story; the morall whereof became the theme for those, that undertook to preach the Popes temporall power over Soveraignties. For, successe, to them that consult not with their Christianity, is a plausible argu∣ment of right. But the Interest of the Pope in Soveraignties having swelled so farre beyond the whole capacity of the Church, the bad consequence of ne∣cessity followes, that his originall power in the Church must needs swell so farre beyond the bounds, as, of regular, to become infinite. I will not now contend, that the subjects of the Empire in Italy fell away from it, because they thought themselves free of their allegiance, by the excommunicating of the Em∣peror Leo Isaurus. There is reason enough to think, that the See of Rome cried up the worship of images, contrary to the moderation of Saint Gregory some hundred years afore, out of hope to advance their own power, by impairing the rights of their Soveraigne. But I charge no more then they pretend. And there is appearance for another plea, which is, want of protection from the Em∣pire, at such time as recourse was had to the protection of the French. But the vexation of the Germane Emperours manifestly pretended the temporall effect of the Popes excommunication in dissolving the bond of allegiance, wherein the temporal power of the Pope consisteth. The effect of which being such as it was, it is the lesse marvaile, that the rest of the Soveraignities of Christendome have entered into capitulations with the Pope, (such as the Concordates which I spoke of afore with France) whereby, to secure the government of their peo∣ple in peace on that side, they make the Popes pretense of power without bounds in Ecclesiasticall matters of law to their respective Dominions and Territories. It is strange to him that considers without prejudice, how they who imagine the Pope to be Antichrist, could make their pretense popular, that Episcopacy is the support of Antichrist▪ For, his unlimitted power in Church maters is but the regular power of all Churches united in one. It is plainly made up for the See of Rome, of feathers plucked from every Church. So that, if Episcopacy be the support of Antichrist, then do their rights maintaine his usurpation, by whom they are destroyed. Did the Soveraignities of Christendome maintaine the Churches of their respective dominions, in that right which the reguar constitution of the Church settleth upon them, (and that is it which the pro∣tection of the Church signifyeth) it would soon appeare, that he is Antichrist, if Antichrist he be to their prejudice and disadvantage. The See of Rome, having got a decree at the Councile of Trent, scornes any termes but absolute submission to it. But the end of such an intestine warre by conquest, as it would be extreamly mischievous, bearing all down before the pretense of in∣fallibility, which must then prevaile; So, findes hinderances, answerable to the
advantages, which the disunion of the adverse party ministreth. The animosi∣ties of Potentates that adhere to it have made it visible, that▪ their interest con∣sists in hindering the reunion of the Reformation to the Church of Rome. And the pretense of dissolving allegiance by the sentence of excommunication is be∣come no way considerable by the subsistence of them who regard it not. Nor, is the advantage which the favour thereof lends the armes of those Princes, who tye themselves the most strictly to the interests of it, any more considera∣ble. Whether or no it be time for them to bethink themselves, that it were better for them to injoy the unquestionable title of a true Church, and of the chief▪ Church of Christendome, which it is absolutely necessary for all Churches to hold communion with, the common Christianity being secured; then catch∣ing at the disposing of all mens Christianity, without rendring any account to the Church, (which how dangerous for their own salvation is it?) to hang the, unity of the Church meerly upon the interest of the World (which, how pre∣judiciall is it to the salvation of Gods people?) not upon the interest of Christi∣anity; themselves must judge. This I am sure; If Christian Powers main∣taine their due right and title of Protectors of Gods Church, it is the regular constitution thereof which they must maintaine. The exemption of Monasti∣call Orders and Universities from the jurisdiction of their Ordinaries, under whom they stand, and the Synods to which they resort; the reservation of cases, dispensations in Canons, provisions of Churches, and the rest of those chanels, by which power as well as wealth is drained from all Churches to Rome, must needs be stopped up, at least for the greatest part, if Christian Soveraigns did protect the Church of their dominions in the right of ending causes, that concern not the whole Church, at home. This were such a ground of confi∣dence between Soveraignes and the Clergy of their dominions, that it would be very hard to imagine any interest considerable to ingage against that interest by the prejudicing whereof neither of them could expect any advantage. And this confidence the meanes to restore and to maintain that intercourse and cor∣respondence between the Churches of severall Soveraignties, by which when all Churches (at least as many as easily outweighed the rest) were under the Romane Empire, the Unity of the Church was maintained without that recourse to temporall power which made it infinite. Nor would there remaine any just ground of jealousie between the Pope and the Councile. The calling of a generall Councile, I yeilded to the Empire, during the time that it contained the whole Church. Now that it is broken into severall Soveraignties, and the Pope and Church of Rome subject to none of them, but soveraigne of conside∣rable dominions; how should it not depend on him, with the consent of the Soveraignties whereof Christendome consisteth? How should not the con∣sent of their Churches be involved in the same? Indeed if by that originall in∣tercourse the Churches understood one another, there could arise no cause to complaine, that any vote should be unduely obtained, when it should be known afore, that it could have no further effect then the voluntary consent of those who receive it, which the free carriage of the debate must produce. What prejudice the See of Rome could imagine to any regular pre∣eminence that it may challenge, by such proceeding as this it would be difficult to evidence. As for the prejudice that matters in difference may create to the common Christianity which are at present the pretenses, why this moderation cannot seeme rightfull and necessary when the parties are sufficiently wearied with prosecuting the extreamities which they pretend, then will it appear, though too late for the preserving of the common Christianity, that the pre∣servation of the common Christianity doth indeed consist in abating the ex∣treme pretenses on both sides. I have showed my opinion, at least in grosse, how and to what point they ought to be abated; And I shall impute it to the common Christianity whatsoever offence I procure my selfe by showing it. The end of the Third Book. Laus Deo.
A CONCLUSION To all CHRISTIAN READERS. BY the premises, though I must not take upon me to determine that which the whole Church never did, nor never will, undertake to declare; what is necessary to be believed for the salvation of all Christians, as the meanes without which it is not to be had; what is necessary to the salvation one∣ly of those, who become obliged by their parti∣cular estate; Yet, I conceive my self inabled to maintaine, that, onely those things which concern a Christian as a Christian are necessary to be known for the salvation of all Christians: Those things which con∣cern a Christian as a member of a Church, becoming necessary to that salvation of every member of the Church, according as the obligation which the Communion of the Church createth, taketh place, by vir∣tue of his particular estate in the Church. For, it is not the same ob∣ligation that takes hold on the young and the old, on the ignorant and the wise, on those that have liberall education, and those that live by their hands, on Superiors and Inferiors, on the Clergy and the People; But the profession of that Christianity which our Lord Christ delivered to his Apostles to preach, when he gave them au∣thority to found his Church, being the condition, without undergo∣ing whereof, no man was to be admitted a member of the Church, by being baptized a Christian; as it is supposed to the being of the Church, so must it, of necessity, containe whatsoever the salvation of all Christians requireth. What a mans particular estate will re∣quire him to know, that, by his knowledge he may be inabled to discharge the obligation of it, becomes necessary to his salvation, by virtue of that particular estate. But, whatsoever obligation the acts and decrees of the Church can create, is necessarily of this na∣ture; taking hold upon every estate, as it stands bound to be satis∣fied, that they injoyne nothing to be believed or done, that is not necessarily, either dependent upon, or consistent with that, which the necessity of salvation requireth all to professe. It is therefore necessary for the salvation of all Christians to be∣lieve, that there is one true God, who made all things, with all man∣kind, having immortall soules, and all Angels, to indure for everlast∣ing.
That, governing all things by his perfect Providence, (which supposes the maintenance of them in acting according to their seve∣rall natures) he shall, at the end of the world, which he hath deter∣mined, bring the actions of all men and angels to judgement, and as∣signe them their respective estate for everlasting, as it shall appear, their actions have deserved, according to his Law. For, all this, it was necessary to the salvation of all those that were saved under the Law, to believe; and therefore, it is all presupposed to that where∣in Christianity properly consisteth. The people of God therefore held it, when our Lord came, neither had he any thing to reforme them in saving that pernicious opinion which the Pharisees had per∣verted it with, that the Law of Moses, whether Civile or Ceremo∣niall, was the Law by which that people was to be saved or dam∣ned. The incongruity whereof was so grosse, that the Sadduces, on the contraryside, took advantage thereupon, to deny the World to come. The corruptions therefore, which these Sects had brought in, being cleared; The Faith of Gods ancient people remaines, thus far, the Faith of his Church; If any question may remaine, concern∣ing the end of the World, whether or no, necessary then expressely to be believed, it is not considerable here. But further, in regard the coming of Christ, which brought Christianity, must be maintained necessary to the salvation of all; It is necessary to salvation to be∣lieve, that, our first parents being seduced from the obedience of God, by apostate Angels, neither themselves, nor their posterity would have been able of themselves, to recover that amity with God here, which might bring them to happinesse in the world to come. That therefore God, by his Word, diversly ministred before and under the Law, indeavored to reconcile mankinde to himselfe a∣gaine; But with so little successe, (the greatest part thereof being swallowed up in Idolatry; and, of his own people, the greater part being carried away with the hope of salvation, by outwardly keep∣ing Moses Law) that at length it appeared requisite, that the Word of God should become incarnate by the holy Ghost, of the Virgine Mary; And by his obedience to God, in preaching the termes of recon∣cilement with God, to his People, and suffering death at their hands for so doing, should voide the interest which God had allowed the apostate Angels in mankind, whom they had cast down; And by rising againe, and going up to the right hand of God, should give the holy Ghost (the fullnesse whereof dwelt in his manhood, as planted in the Word incarnate) both to reduce them to Christianity, and to inable them to persevere in it; Undertaking to give, whomso∣ever shall professe Christianity by being baptized into the Church, and live according to it, remission of sinnes here, and everlasting life in the world to come, in consideration of the obedience of Christ, provided by him for that purpose. For, by his second coming, raising all from death to life, he that was judged here afore, shall then judge the world, and, rendring them that have disobeyed God everlasting punishment, shall render everlasting happinesse to them, whose bo∣dies, the holy Ghost that dwelt in them here raiseth. This is that precious pearle, and that hid treasure, this is that grain of mustard seed, that leaven, which being purchased at the
price of all we have, and sowed in the heart, and layd up in the past of our thoughts, makes all our actions fruitfull, to the riches of everlasting happinesse. This is that little spot of truth, for the main∣taining whereof, so many bloudy fields of Controversies in Religion are and have been fought, by soules that perish, by maintaining division in the Church, to the prejudice, if not the losse, of that truth for which they fight; As the country alwaies suffers, by the warre that is made for it. All this while, it is to be remembred, that Baptisme tieth, not onely to professe this faith unto death, but, to live according to Christianity. Whether it be by virtue of Moses Law, cleared by our Lord of the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, or by the New Law of Christ, clearing the spiritual intent of the Old, it is not necessary to salvation for a Christian to know; For, Irenaeus, briefly distinguishing mater of Faith from mater of Knowledge in the Scri∣ptures, 1. 2, 4. makes all that, which concerns the reason of the dif∣ference in Gods proceeding under the Law and the Gospel, to be ma∣ter of abundant knowledge, not of necessary faith. But, it is neces∣sary for the salvation of a Christian to know, that, by being a Chri∣stian, he undertakes to suppresse, mortify, and prevent, as far as in him lies, even the first motions of concupiscence, whether in the lusts of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life; as our Lord in the Gospel hath clearly laid forth, howsoever the Law have expressed or intimated the same. And this is that warre with the devil the world and the flesh, for the keeping of Gods command∣ments, which our Baptisme undertaketh. For, there is no differ∣ence, in things to be done, concerning a private Christian as a private Christian, that seems to be any considerable ground of division in the Church. The substance of our common Christianity in that part, seems to remain without dispute. In things that are to be believed, it were well if it could be said so truly, that there is no part of the rule of Faith in dispute. In the meane time, the substance of Chri∣stianity, containing whatsoever it is necessary for the salvation of all Christians to know, whether in matter of Faith, or of maners, (whereof, to speak properly, the rule of Faith signifieth onely the first part) consisteth onely in that which concerns a particular Christian, as such, whether to be believed or to be done. But, what then shall the beliefe of one holy Catholicke and Apostolicke Church, in our Creed, signify? Onely, that there are Christians in the world? Shall a Christian be saved by believing that which all Chri∣stians see? that there is a company of men that call themselves Chri∣stians? Or, shall it therefore be necessary to the salvation of all Christians, to know, that God hath founded the whole body of the Church, consisting of all Churches, for a Society and Corporation subsisting by his Law? shall it concern the salvation of simple Chri∣stians, to understand the nature of Corporations, and to know, how visible communion in Christian Offices makes the Church such a one; believing that this comes by Gods appointment? I do not imagine any such thing. Indeed, whosoever allowes no ground of differ∣ence, between true Christians on the one side, and hereticks and schismaticks on the other side, cannot admit the belief of one Catho∣licke
Church, for an article of his Creed. For, had there never been heresie or schisme, the communion of all Christians with all Chri∣stians going forwards without interruption; the Church had been no lesse Catholicke, then now, that it is called Catholicke, to distin∣guish it from heresies and schismes, which prevailed sometimes in some places, but never spread, nor lasted with the Church. But, had there been no profession qualifying for communion with the Church; Had there been no power in the Church, to limit the Or∣der and circumstance of Communion in the Offices of Christianity; it could never have been visible, whom a Christian was to communi∣cate with, professing himself bound, by believing one Catholicke Church, to communicate with it. Because by this meanes it was vi∣sible, and because, being visible, an obligation was acknowledged, of communicating with it, the profession of this obligation was to be part of the common Christianity, which the Creed was to signify. But, when it is no more visible whom a Christian is to communicate with, by reason of division in the Church; what is it then that re∣solves, whom a Christian is to communicate with? That is, indeed, the question which this whole businesse intends to resolve. For, the Reformation having occasioned division in the Church, the parties are both visible, but, which is the true Church, remaines invisible, so long as it remaines in despute. For, though it be not invisible to that reason which proceeds aright, upon due principles, yet, that is not required of all Christians that would be saved; And therefore, if it be not visible to the common reason of all men, it is invisible. This I alledge to no further purpose, then to show, how much all parties stand obliged to procure the reunion of the Church; as answerable for the soules that may miscarry, by chusing amisse in that, which Gods ordinance makes visible, but mens disorder invisible, to common sense. For, the more difficult the way of salvation proves by this meanes, the more shall all estates stand obliged to clear it. Let us then see, wherein the difficulty of the choice consisteth; let us see, what satisfaction the parties tender common sense, that salvation is to be had, by leaving of them. The Word and the Sacra∣ments are the markes of the true Church. So say the Doctors of the Reformation, so say, perhaps, their confessions of Faith. It were too long to dispute that. But, how are these markes distin∣ctive? For, I suppose, they pretend not to make known the Re∣formed Churches to constitute the true Church, in opposition to the Church of Rome, by markes common to both? And, will any com∣mon sense allow, that the Church of Rome will grant, that they have not the word of God, or the Sacraments? which they allow the Reformed to have? If you adde, the pure preaching of the Word, and the pure ministring of the Sacraments, you advance not a foot. For, is common sense able to judge, that the Reformed way is pure, that of the Church of Rome impure? It judgeth, that they who call it so think so; Whether it be so or not, it must come under dispute. And, appealing to the Scriptures, it appeareth, that common sense is not judge in the meaning and consequence of them, upon which the resolution depends. It is therefore manifest, that the preaching of
the word, and the ministring of the Sacraments is no mark of the Church, unlesse you say something more, to limit the ground upon which they may be no lesse. What limitation I would adde, is plain by the premises. The preaching of that Word, and that mi∣nistring of the Sacraments, which the Tradition of the whole Church confineth the sense of the Scriptures to intend, is the onely mark of the Church that can be visible. For, I suppose, preaching twice a Sunday is not, if a man be left free to preach what he will, onely professing to beleeve the Bible (which, what Heresy disown∣eth?) and to make what he thinks good of it. And yet, how is the generality of people provided for otherwise, unlesse it be, be∣cause they have preachers, that are counted godly men by those, whom, what warrants to be godly men themselves? In the mean time is it not evident, that Preachers and people are overspread with a damnable heresy of Antinomians and Enthusiasts, former∣ly, when Puritanes were not divided from the Church of England, called Etonists and Grindeltons, according to severall Countries? These believe, so to be saved by the free Grace of God, by which our Lord died for the Elect, that by the revelation thereof, which is justifying Faith, all their sinnes, past, present, and to come, are re∣mitted; So that, to repent of sinne, or to contend against it, is the renouncing of Gods free Grace, and saving Faith. How much might be alledged to show, how all is now overspread with it? The Book called Animadversions upon a Petition out of Wales shall serve to speak the sense of them who call themselves the godly party, as speak∣ing to them in Body. Thus it speaks pag. 36. Look through your vail of duties, profession and ordinances, and try your heart, with what spi∣rit of love, obedience and truth you are in your work: And whether will you stand to this judgement? Or rather, that God should judge you accord∣ing to grace, to the name and nature of Christ written upon you, and in you? Sure, the great Judge will thus judge us at last, by his great judgement, or last judgement; Not by the outward conversation, nor inward intention, but finally, by his eternall Election, according to the Book of Life. This just afore, he calleth, the seed of Christ and his righteousnesse, in a Christian. And pag. 38. When we are inraged, we let fly at mens principles, being not satisfied to rebuke mens actions, opinions, and workes, but would be avenged of their Principles too; As if we would kill them at the very hart, pull them up by the Rootes, and leave them in an uncurable condition, rotten in their Prin∣ciples.—But Principles ly deeper then the heart, and are indeed Christ, who is the Principle and beginning of all things; who, though heart fail, and flesh faile, yet he abides the root of all. Shall he pretend to be a Christi∣an that professes this? Shall any pretend to be a Church, that spue it not out? Let heaven and earth judge, whether poor soules are otherwise to be secured of the Word, then by two sermons a Sunday; when the sense of the Godly is claimed to consist in a position so per∣emptorily destructive to salvation, as this. It will be said, perhaps, that now, the Ministers of the Congregations have subscribed the confession of the Assembly. But alas the covering is too short. When a Bishop in the Catholick Church, subscribed a Councile, there was just presumption that no man under his authority could be seduced from the Faith subscribed; Because no man communi∣cated
with the Catholick Church, but by communicating with him that had subscribed it. Who shall warrant that the godly who have this sense, not liable to any authority in the Church, shall stand to the subscriptions of those Ministers? or to the authority of the Assembly, pretended by the Presbyteries? If they would declare themselves tied so to do, who shall warrant, that there is not a salvo, for it, in the Confession which they subscribe? If there were not, why should any difficulty be made to spue out that position which is the seed of it; That justifying Faith consisteth in believing that a man is of the number of the Elect, for whom Christ died, excluding others? Why that which is the fruit of it; That they who transgresse the Covenant of Baptisme, come not under the state of sin and damnation, come not from under the state of Grace? Why, but, because a back-door must be left for them, that draw the true conclusion from their own premises; reserving themselves the liberty to deny the conclusion, admitting the premises? It is not then a confession of faith that will make the Word that is preached a mark of the Church, without some mark visible to common sense warranting that confession of Faith. As for the Sacraments, no Church no Sacraments. If they sup∣pose that ground upon which, that intent to which the whole Church hath used them, there is no further cause of division in the Church; (for that secures the rule of Faith) If not, they are no Sacra∣ments, but by equivocation of words; they are sacriledges, in profan∣ing Gods Ordinances. The Sacrament of Baptisme, because the ne∣cessary meanes of salvation, is admitted for good, when ministred by those who are not of the Church; but alwaies void of the effect of grace; To which it reviveth, so soone as the true Faith is professed in the unity of the Church. If a Sacrament be a visible signe of in∣visible grace, that baptisme is no baptisme, which signifieth the grace it should effect, but indeed effecteth not. Such is that Baptisme which is used, to seale a Covenant of Grace, without the condition of Christianity; a Covenant that is not the Covenant of two par∣ties, but the promise of one. Whence comes the humor of rebap∣tizing, but to be discharged of that Christianity, which the baptisme of the Church of England exacteth? Why do they refuse Baptisme in New England, to all that refuse to enter into the Covenant of Congregations? How comes it more necessary to salvation, to be of a Congregation, then to be Baptized, and made a Christian? Is it not because it is thought, that salvation is to be had, without that profession of Christianity, which the Sacrament of Baptisme sealeth? That it is not to be had without renouncing it? Upon these termes, those that are denied Baptisme by the Congregations, because they are not of the Congregations, are denied salvation as much as in them lies; but not indeed and in truth. For, the ne∣cessity of baptisme supposing a profession of the Catholicke Church, they perish not by refusing it, who will not have it by renouncing the Catholicke Church; that is, by covenanting themselves into Congregations. They that are so affected must know, that they have authority of themselves, to baptize to effect, which no Congre∣gation in New England is able to do. If the Sacrament of the Eu∣charist
seale that Covenant of Grace, which conditioneth not for Christianity, it is no sacrament but by equivocation of words. Where that conditionall is doubtfull, or voide, there is no security for poor soules that they receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist. They who depart from the Church that they may minister the Sacraments on such grounds, and to such effects, as the Church allowes not, in∣curre the nullities, and sacriledges, which, departing from the Church inferreth. But if, beside the Faith of the Church, the authority of the Church be supposed to the effect of the Sacraments; how shall the Sacra∣ments be Sacraments though ministred upon profession of the true Faith, where no authority of the Church can be pretended for the ministring of them; Or, where it can onely be pretended, but is in∣deed usurped and void? Posterity will never forget, that, there are in a Land inhabited by Christians called England, Country Parishes, in which, the Sacraments have not been mini∣stred, for so many years, as the order of the Church of England hath been superseded, by the late warre. If the Word and Sacraments be the marks of the Church; what pretense for a Church, where, there is indeed a pretense of the Word (though no presumption that it is Gods) but of Sacraments, not so much as a pretense? What hath the rest of England deserved of the Congregations, or of the Presby∣teries, that they should be left destitute of the meanes of salvation, because they cannot see reason to be of Congregations, or Presbyte∣ries? Lay men preach, and Lay men go to Church to hear them preach, because they cannot preach themselves at home to their fa∣milies. The horror of profaning the Sacraments of the Church by Sacriledge, is yet alive, to make them tremble still, at usurping to ce∣lebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But, will those Lay men that preach answer for the Lay mens soules to whom they preach, that they have sufficient means of salvation, by hearing them preach; being of no Church, that might answer, that it is Gods Word which they preach; ministring no Sacraments, for a mark of the Church? Is it possible a Christian should hold himself able to preach, who holds not himself able to baptize? Or, is it the appetite of devouring con∣secrated goods, that insnares men to preach; who, when it comes to baptizing, had rather let innocent soules perish then own the autho∣rity of the Church, which inables every Christian to baptize, in case of necessity, because they know, they usurp the office of preaching, without authority from the Church? It is I that have said, that a Lay man may be authorized to preach by the Church? And I be∣lieve still, I said true in it. But shall I therefore answer for him that preacheth without authority from the Church? Should he preach by authority from the Church, there were presumption for his hear∣ers, that it is the Word of God, which the Church authorizeth. When he preacheth without authority from the Church, shall he not answer for the soules, whom he warrants salvation by his preach∣ing, without Church, or Word, or Sacraments? But these are not the Godly. Those that know themselves such, are thereby authorized to retire themselves into Congregations, that they may injoy the purity of the Ordinances. It is then mens Godlinesse that inables
them to forsake the Church, and betake themselves into Congrega∣tions. And indeed, I know an Oxford Doctor, who, to prove him∣selfe no Schismaticke for it, hath alledged, that he can be no Schis∣matick, because, he knowes himself to be Godly, and to have Gods Spirit. I deny not that he hath alledged other reasons why he is no Schismaticke; the ground whereof I considered afore. But what Quaker could not have alledged the Spirit of God as well as he? And did not he who pretends himself Christ, alledge reasons for it as well as pretend the Spirit? A nice mistake it is, to imagine that a Christi∣an is to accept the Scriptures for the Word of God, because the Spirit of God assures him that so they are. For of a truth, untill the Spirit of God move him to be a Christian, he accepteth them not for such. When it doth, he is moved so to accept them by the Spirit of God, as by the effective cause; But for reasons, which though contained in the Scriptures, yet were they not visibly true before a man can accept the Scriptures for the Word of God, he could never so accept them by Gods Spirit; Unlesse we can imagine, the virtue of Gods Spirit not to depend upon the preaching of his Gospel; which, I suppose, onely Enthusiasts do imagine. Nor doth the Spirit of God distinguish to any Christian the Apochrypha from Canonicall Scripture, but by such meanes, as may make the difference visible. No more doth it assure him that he is a good Christian, but upon the knowledge of such resolutions, and actions, wherein Christianity consisteth. If it be requisite, to make a man no Schismatick, that it be not his own fault, that he is not of the Catholicke Church; If he perswade himselfe upon unsufficient reasons, that there is no such thing by Gods Law, as the visible body of a Catholick Church; Just it is with God, to leave such a one, to thinke it Gods Spirit that assures him a godly man, being a Schismatick. It is not therefore supposition of invisible godlinesse, that can priviledge men to with∣draw themselves from the Church, into Congregations; sup∣posing such a thing as a Catholicke Church. The purity being in∣visible, but the barre to it, separation from Gods Church, visible; the Ordinances for which they separate, will remaine their own Ordi∣nances, not Gods. The Presbyterians, sometimes pleade their Ordination in the Church of England, for the authority by which they ordaine others against the Church of England, to doe that, which they received authority from the Church of England to doe, provided that, ac∣cording to the order of it. A thing so ridiculously senselesse, that common reason refuseth it. Can any State, any society, doe an act, b virtue whereof, there shall be right and authority to destroy it? Can the Ordination of the Church of England, proceeding upon supposition of a solemne promise, before God and his Church, to execute the ministery a man receiveth, according to the Order of it, inable him to doe that, which he was never ordained to doe? Shall he, by failing of his promise, by the act of that power which supposed his promise, receive authority to destroy it? Then let a man obtaine the kingdome of heaven by transgressing that Chri∣stianity, by the undertaking whereof he obtained right to it. They are therefore meere Congregations, voluntarily constituted, by the
will of those, all whose acts, even in the sphere of their ministery once received, are become voide, by theire failing of that promise, in consideration whereof they were promoted to it. Voide I say, not of the crime of Sacrilege towards God, which the usurpation of Core constituteth, but of the effect of Grace, towardes his people. For, the like voluntary combining of them into Pres∣byteries and Synodes, createth but the same equivocation of wordes, when they are called Churches, to signify that which is visible by their usurpation, in point of fact, not that which is invisi∣ble, by their authority, in point of right. For want of this authority, whatsoever is done by virtue of that usurpation being voide before God; I will not examine whether the forme, wherein they execute the Offices of the Church which they thinke fit to exercise, agree with the ground and intent of the Church, or not. On∣ly, I charge a peculiar nullity in their consecrating the Eucharist, by neglecting the Prayer, for making the elements the body and blood of Christ, without which, the Church never thought it could conse∣crate the Eucharist. Whether, having departed from the Church, Presbyteries and Congregations scorne to learne any part of their duty from the Church, least that might seeme to weaken the ground of their departure; Or, whether they intend, that the elements remaine meere signes, to strengthen mens faith, that they are of the number of the elect; which they are, before they be consecrated, as much as afterwards; The want of Consecra∣tion rendering it no Sacrament that is ministred, the mini∣string of it upon a ground destructive to Christianity, renders it much more. On the other side, the succession of Pastors from the Apostles, or those who received their authority from the Apostles, is taken for a sufficient presumption, on behalfe of the Church of Rome, that it is Catholick. But, I have showed, that the Tradition of Faith, and the authority of the Scriptures which containe it, is more an∣cient then the being of the Church, and presupposed to the same, as a condition upon which it standeth. That the authority of the A∣postles, and the Powers left by them, in and with the Church, the one is originally the effective cause, the other immediately, the Law by which it subsisteth, and in which the government thereof consisteth. That the Church hath Power in Lawes of lesse conse∣quence, though given the Church by the Apostles, though recorded by the Scriptures; where that change which succeeds in the state of Christendome, renders them uselesse to preserve the unity of the Church, presupposing the Faith, in order to the publick service of God. But, neither can the Church have power in the faith, to add, to take away, to change any thing, in that profession of Christiani∣ty, wherein the salvation of all Christians consisteth, and which the being of the Church presupposeth; Nor in that act of the Apostles authority, whereby, the unity of the Church was founded and set∣led; Nor in that service of God for which it was provided. There is therefore something else requisite, to evidence the Church of Rome to be the true Church, exclusive to the Reformation, then the visi∣ble succession of Pastors; though that, by the premises, be one of
the Laws, that concurre to make every Church a Catholicke Church. The Faith upon which, the powers constituted by the Apostles, in which, the forme of government, by which, the service of God, for which, it subsisteth. If these be not maintained, according to the Scriptures, interpreted by the originall and Catholicke Tradition of the Church, it is in vaine to alledge the personall succession of Pastors, (though that be one ingredient in the government of it, without which, neither could the Faith be preserved, nor the service of God maintained; though with it they might possibly faile of be∣ing preserved and maintained) for a mark of the true Church. The Preaching of that Word, and that Ministring of the Sacraments, (understanding by that particular, all the offices of Gods publicke service in the Church) which the Tradition of the Whole limiteth the Scriptures, interpreted thereby, to teach, is the onely marke, as afore, to make the Church visible. To come then to our case; Is it therefore become warrantable to communicate with the Church of Rome, because it is become unwarrantable to communi∣cate with Presbyteries or Congregations? This is indeed, the rest of the difficulty, which, it is the whole businesse of this Book to re∣solve. To which I must answer, that absolutely, the case is as it was, though comparatively, much otherwise. For, if the State of Religion be the same at Rome, but in England farre worse then it was, the condition, upon which communion with the Church of Rome is obtained, is never a whit more agreeable to Christianity then afore; but it is become more pardonable▪ for him that sees what he ought to avoide, not to see what he ought to follow. He that is admitted to communion with the Church of Rome, by the Bull of profession of Faith, inacted by Pius IV. Pope, (not by the Councile of Trent) be∣sides many particulars there added to the Creed (which, whether true or false, according to the premises, he sweares to as much as to his Creed) at length professes to admit without doubting, whatso∣ever else the sacred Canons, and generall Councils, especially the Synode of Trent hath delivered, decreed, and declared; damning and rejecting as anathema, whatsoever the Church damneth and re∣jecteth for heresie, under anathema; But whether the whole Church, or the present Church, the oath limiteth not. Here is no formall and expresse profession, that a man believes the present Church to be Infallible. And therefore it was justly alledg∣ed in the first Booke, that he Church hath never enjoyned the profes∣sing of it. But here is a just ground for a reasonable Construction, that it is hereby intended to be exacted; because a man swears to ad∣mit the acts of Counciles, as he does to admit his Creed, and the ho∣ly Scriptures. Nor can there be a more effectuall challenge of that priviledge, then the use of it, in the decree of the Councile, that the Scriptures which we call Apocrypha, be admitted with the like reve∣rence as the unquestionable Canonicall Scriptures, being all injoyned to be received, as all of one rancke; Which, before the decree, had never been injoyned to be received, but with that difference, which had alwaies been acknowledged in the Church. For this act, giving them the authority of prophetical Scripture, inspired by God, which
they had not afore; though it involve a nullity (because that which was not inspired by God to him that writ it, when he writ it, can never have the authority of inspired by God, because it can ne∣ver become inspired by God; Nor can become known that it was indeed inspired by God, not having been so received from the begin∣ing, without revelation anew to that purpose) yet usurpeth Infalli∣bility, because it injoyneth that which no authority, but that which immediate revelation createth, can injoyne. Further the de∣cree of the Councile concerning justification involving a mistake, in the terme, and understanding by it the infusion of grace, whereby, the righteousnesse that dwelleth in a Christian, is formally and pro∣perly that which settles him in the state of righteous before God; not fundamentally and metonymically that which is required in him that is estated in the same by God, in consideration of our Lord Christ; Though I maintaine, that this decree prejudiceth not the substance of Christianity; Yet must it not be allowed to expresse the true reason by which it takes place. The Councile then transgres∣seth the Power of the Church, in erecting a Position of the Schoole, (and that, in the proper sense of the terms, not true) into an article of the Faith; But the Bull much more, in requiring to sweare it. And whether or no, the decree of the Councile concerne the salvati∣on of a single Christian, being under it; The swearing to it, which the Bull injoyneth, necessarily concerns the salvation of him, who, if he understand the businesse, knowes it not to be true, if he under∣stand it not, cannot sweare it. But, that the satisfaction of Penance is not to abolish the guilt of eternall death, by changing the love of this world into the Love of God above all things; but to redeem the debt of temporall punishment, remaining when the sinne is remit∣ted by the Sacrament, (or, when it cannot be had, by the meer de∣sire of it) as it is decreed Sess. VI. cap. XIV. this is necessarily pre∣judiciall to the Christianity of those, who must needs be induced by it, to think themselves restored to Gods grace, without the meanes which his Gospel requireth. For, be Penance never so much a Sa∣crament, if the Church suppose the Gospel, the applying of the Keyes thereof cannot abate that condition which the Gospel requireth, but is imployed to effect it. Therefore absolution proceeds, not but upon supposition, that the change of a mans disposition is visible, by the performing of his Penance. If the case of necessity create an ex∣ception, which, the Church presumeth that God dispenseth in, and therefore reconcileth all in the point of death, by giving them the Eucharist; It is not because there is ground of pardon in their being reconciled, but in the procuring of their being qualified for it, which must not have been presumed upon otherwise. For, the pre∣sumption of pardon not lying in the act of reconcilement, by the power of the Keyes, but in the ground of it; upon the corrupt cu∣stome, of absolving first, and imposing Penance to be performed after∣wards, to decree this construction, that it is not imposed for remissi∣on of sinne, (as conditionally depending on it) but to pay the tem∣porall punishment remaining when it is remitted; was to heape abu∣ses upon abuses. For, hence is come the change of attrition into contrition by the sentence of absolution, in him, in whom, all the
Penance that is in joyned pretends nothing else, then to effect it. So that, pardon being held forth upon undue grounds, the corruption of our nature must needs presume upon it, when it is not effected. How then shall a man sweare to admit this, without consenting, and concurring, to the intangling of simple soules in the snares of their sinnes? And this is therefore a point, wherein, the Christi∣anity which the decree constituteth is necessarily defective; as not providing for that which the Gospel maketh requisite to the remissi∣on of sinne; but teaching to expect it, from the act of declaring it, by the Church, without supposing the ground, upon which the Gos∣pel tendreth it. If the decree of Transubstantiation could possibly be expounded, to signify onely the Sacramentall presence of the body and bloud of Christ, which, I maintaine, the consecration effecteth; what would that serve the turne, when it is further required, that we hold him anathem, that believes the substance of the elements to remaine? which, being so manifestly justifyed by the Scriptures, neither any Tradition of the Church, nor any reason, rendring the bodily pre∣sence of them inconsistent with the Sacramentall presence of the flesh and bloud of Christ, excludeth. Nor is it enough, that Chri∣stian people frequent themselves, and admit in others, the use and ef∣fect of these offices, which the Councile of Florence first decreed to make up the seven Sacraments; unlesse they sweare to hold them for Sacraments, without distinguishing, either in that grace which the ceremony signifieth, or in the force whereby they concurre to the obtaining of it. Whereas the difference between our common Chri∣stianity, and, that which the Church is able to contribute towards the effect of it, by any office which it is inabled to celebrate, ought to distinguish the grace of the holy Ghost, which Baptisme and the Eucharist, immediately bestow, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, which they inact and establish; from that which any office of the Church, by Gods promise to hear the prayers thereof, is able to bring to passe. Further, seeing that, by the Scriptures, expounded accord∣ing to the originall Tradition of the Church, the soules of those that depart in grace are in an imperfect state of happinesse, till the gene∣rall judgement, according to the state in which they depart; Nei∣ther can any prayers be made, to redeem soules out of Purgatory paines, to the sight of God, (which the decree of the Councile of Flo∣rence supposeth) upon those termes, Nor any assurance be had, that the prayers which are made to the Saints do come to their know∣ledge. And how then shall a good Christian swear to believe, that Soules are helped out of Purgatory by the prayers of the living; or, that he is to pray to saints, of whom he can by no meanes be assured that they hear his prayers? Surely it cannot be imagined, that the communion of the Eucharist in one kinde, the making of these pray∣ers to Saints, which distinguish them not from God (desiring of them those things which onely God can give) the setting up of their images in Churches, to be worshipped and prayed to, in the house of Gods service, the worshipping of images, as the objects of that worship, in respect of their principals, which is not the wor∣ship of their principals, the serving of God in an unknown Language,
the barring of Christian people from the Scriptures, the maintaining of Masses where no body communicates, scarce any body assisteth, the opinion of applying the virtue of Christs death by them, to those who neither communicate nor assist them with their devotions, by virtue of the Sacrisice, the tendring of pardon for sinne by Indulgen∣ces, whereof there can be no effect but the releasing of Penance in∣joyned; These and other customes of that Church, which have the force and effect of Law, (which written lawes many times never attaine) are so farre from being reasonable meanes to advance the ser∣vice of God, that to live, under them, and to yield conformity to them, is a burthen unsufferable for a Christian to undergo; to ap∣prove them, by being reconciled to the Church that maintaines them, a scandal incurable, and irreparable. But to swear further, and to professe, firmely to admit and imbrace them as contained with∣in the title of constitutions, and observations of that Church, is a thing which, to me it seems strange, that it should ever be required of a Christian. The effect of this Bull is of so high a nature, in regard of those whom it concerns, that never any Generall Councile preten∣ded to produce the like. That every man should owne the Lawes of the Society wherein he lives, so farre, as to live in conformity with them, is a thing necessary to the subsistence of all communities. Nor is a private person chargeable with the faults of the Lawes un∣der which he lives, untill it appeare, that, by the meanes of those faults, he must faile of the end for which the community subsisteth; That is, of salvation, by communicating with the Church of Rome. But, to make a private Christian a party to the decrees and customes of the Church, (by swearing to admit and imbrace them all) because he communicateth with it; is to make him an∣swerable for that which he doeth not. He that would swear no more then he believes, nor believe more then he can see cause to be∣lieve (being a private Christian, and uncapable to comprehend what Lawes and customes are fit for so great a Body as the Church) must not swear to the Lawes of the Church, as good or fit (were there no charge against them) because past his understanding; but rest con∣tent, by conforming to them, to hold communion with the Church. But, in stead of mending the least of those horrible abuses, which the complaints of all parts of Christendome evidence to be visible, to exclude all that will not sweare to them; is to bid them redeem the communion of the Church, by transgressing that Christianity which it ought to presuppose. Well may that power be called in∣finite, that undertakes to do such things as this. But how should the meanes of salvation be thought to consist in obeying it? Here is then a peremptory barre to communion with the Church of Rome; onely occasioned by the Reformation, but fixed by the Church of Rome. That order which severall parts of Christendome had pro∣vided for themselves, under the title of Reformation, might have been but provisionall, till a better understanding between the par∣ties might have produced a tollerable agreement, (in order where∣unto, a distance for a time had been the lesse mischievous) had not this proceeding cut off all hope of peace, but by conquest, that is, by yeilding all this. And therefore, this act being that which formed
the Schisme, the crime thereof is chiefly imputable to it. As there∣fore I saide afore, that the Sacrament of Baptisme, though the ne∣cessary meanes of salvation, becomes a necessary barre to salvation, when it inacteth a profession of renouncing, either any part of the Faith, or the unity of the Church; So here I say, that the com∣munion of the Eucharist, obtained by making a profession, which the common Christianity alloweth not a good Christian to make, is no more the meanes of salvation to him who obtaineth it upon such termes, how much soever a Christian may stand obliged to hold communion with the Church. And this is the reason that makes the communion of the Church of Rome, absolutely, no more warrantable then afore, now that it is become unwarrantable, to communicate with Presbyteries and Congregations. But comparatively, an extremity, in respect to the contrary ex∣tremity, holds the place of a meanes; Nor did I ever imagine, that the humor of reforming the Church, without ground or measure, may not proceed to that extremity, that it had been better to have left it unreformed, then to have neglected those bounds, which the pretense of Reformation requireth. I say not that this is now come to passe, comparisons being odious; But this I say, that he who goes to reforme the Church, upon supposition that the Pope is An∣ti-Christ, and the Papists therefore Idolaters, is much to take heed, that he miskenne not the ground for that measure, by which he is to reforme; And, taking that for Reformation, which is the furthest distant from the Church of Rome that is possible; Imagine, that the Pope may be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters, for that which the Catholick Faith and Church alloweth. It is a marvaile to see, how much the zeale to have the Pope Antichrist surpasses the evidence of the reasons which it is proved with. For otherwise, it would easily appeare, that, as an Antipope is nothing but a pretended Pope, so Antichrist is nothing else but a pretended Messias; He who pre∣tends to be that which Christ is indeed, and to give salvation to Gods people. Our Lord foretells, of false Christs and false Prophets, Mat. XXIV. 24. Marke XIII. 22. and those are the Preachers of new Sects, which pretended to be Christs, and which pretended not to be Christs. Simon Magus, and Menander, we know by Irenaeus and Epiphanius; Dositheus, by Origen upon Matthew, pretended all of them to be the Messias, to the Samaritanes; who, as Schismaticall Jewes, expected the Messias as well as the Jewes. Saturninus and Basilides were false prophets, but not Antichrists; because not pretending that themselves were the Messias, but pretending, some of those, where∣of they made that fullnesse of the Godhead which they preached to consist, to be the Messias. Among the Jewes, all that ever took upon them to be the Messias, besides our Lord Jesus, are properly Anti∣christs; Among whom, Barcochab under Adriane was eminent. But there is reason enough to reckon Manichaeus and Mahomet both of that ranck; As undertaking to be that, to their followers, which the Jewes expected of the Messias; to save them from their enemies, and to give them the world to come. For Manichaeus seems indeed to have given himself the Name of Menahem, signifying in the Ebrew, the same as Parucletus, in Greeke; because he pretended to be assumed by the holy Ghost; as, not he, but Christians, believe, that the Word
of God assumed the manhood of Christ. But, when he writ himself Apostle of Jesus Christ, in the head of his Epistle called the foundation, which S. Austine writes against, it was not with an intent to acknowledge our Lord the true Christ, whose coming he made imaginary, and onely in appearance; but to seduce Christians, (with a colourable pretense of the name of Christ, and some ends of the Gospels, as you heard Epiphanius say) to take himself for that which Christ is indeed to Christians. Saint Austine contra Epist. Fund. cap. VI. suspecteth, that he intended to foist in himself to be worshipped in stead of Christ, by those whom he seduced from Christ; And shows you his reason for it there. But whether worshipped or not; (for, it cannot be said, that Mahomet pretended to be worshipped for God, by his followers) though he could not be that which our Lord Christ is to Christians, unlesse he were worshipped for God; yet he might be that which the Messias was expected to be to the Jewes, in saving them through this world, unto the world to come. Whether Christians are to expect a greater Antichrist then any of these, towards the end of the world, or not, is a thing no way clear by the Scriptures; And, the authority of the Fathers is no evidence, in a matter, which evidently belongs not to the Rule of Faith. It is not enough that Saint John saith, Ye know that the Antichrist is com∣ing, , 1 John II. 28. for, how many thousand articles are there that signify no such eminence; and therefore, how shall it ap∣peare to signify here any more then him that pretends to be the Christ? For it is evident that Saint John, both there, and 1 John IV. 3. speakes of his own time. As for the Revelation, neither is it a∣ny where said, that it prophesieth any thing of Antichrist; nor will it be proved, that it saith any thing of the Pope; Much of it, being a Prophesie, hath been expounded to all appearance of something like the Pope, though with violence enough. All of it, without Prophesying what shall come to passe, could never be expounded to that purpose; and it is not strange that so great a foundation should be laid upon the event of an obscure Scripture, (such as all Prophe∣sies are) to be conjectured by that which we think we see come to passe? For, I referre to judgement, how much more appearance there is that it intendeth the vengeance of God upon the Pagan Empire of Rome, for persecuting Christianity; both in the Text and compo∣sure of the prophesie, and in the pretense of tendring and addressing it. Nor is there any thing more effectuall to prove the same, then the Idolatries, which it specifies, that the Christians chused rather to lay down their lives then commit. True it is, no man can war∣rant, that by praying to Saints, for the same things that we pray to God for, and, by the worship of Images, Idolatry may not come in at the back door, to the Church of Rome, which Christianity shuts out at the great Gate. But if it do, the difference will be visible, be∣tween that and the Idolatry of Pagans, that professe variety of ima∣ginary deities, by those circumstances, which, in the Apocalypse, ex∣presly describe, the Idolatries of the Heathen Empire of Rome. And therefore I am forced, utterly to discharge the Church of Rome of this imputation, and to resolve, that the Pope can no more be Anti∣christ, then he that holds by professing our Lord to be the Christ,
and to honour him for God, as the Christ is honoured by Christians, can himself pretend to be the Christ. Nay, though I sincerely blame the imposing of new articles upon the faith of Christians, and that of positions, which I maintaine not to be true; yet I must, and do freely professe, that I find no positi∣necessary to salvation prohibited, none destructive to salvtion in∣joyned to be believed by it. And therefore, must I necessarily ac∣cept it for a true Church, as, in the Church of England I have al∣waies known it accepted; seeing there can no question be made, that it continueth the same visible body, by the succession of Pastors, and Lawes, (the present customes in force, being visibly, the corrupti∣on of those which the Church had from the beginning) that first was founded by the Apostles. For the Idolatries, which I grant to be possible, though not necessary, to be found in it, by the ignorance and carnall affections of particulars, not by command of the Church, or the Lawes of it; I do not admit to destroy the salvation of those, who, living in the comunion thereof, are not guilty of the like. There remaines therefore, in the present Church of Rome, the profession of all that truth, which it is necessary to the salvation of all Christians to believe, either in point of faith or maners. Very much darkned indeed, by inhansing of positions, either of a doubtful sense, or absolutely false, to the ranck and degree of matters of Faith. But much more over∣whelmed and choaked, with a deal of rubbish opinions, traditions, customes, and ceremonies; (allowed indeed, but no way injoyned) which make that noise in the publick profession, and create so much businesse in the practice of Religion, among them, that it is a thing very difficult, for simple Christians to discerne the pearl, the seed, and the leaven, of the Gospel, buried in the earth and the dough of po∣pular doctrines, and observations, so as to imbrace it, with that af∣fection of faith and love, which the price of it requires. But if it be true as I said afore, that no man is obliged to commit those Idola∣tries, that are possible to be committed, in that communion; it will not be impossible for a discerning Christian, to passe through that multitude of doctrines, and observations, (the businesse whereof being meerly circumstantiall to Christianity, allows not that zeale and affection to be exercised upon the principall as is spent upon the accessory) without superstition and will-worship, in placing the service of God in the huske and not in the kernell; or promising himself the favour of God upon considerations impertinent to Chri∣stianity. As for the halfe Sacrament, the service in an unknown language, the barring the people from the Scrptures, and other Lawes, manifestly intercepting the meanes of salvatian, which God hath allowed his people by the Church; It seems very reasonable to say, that the fault is not the fault of particular Christians, who may, and perhaps do many times wish, that the matter were other∣wise. But that the Church being a Society concluding all by the act of those who conclude it, there is no cause to imagine, that God will impute to the guilt and damnation of those who could not help it, that which they are sufferes in, and not actors. Nay, tis much to be feared, that the authors themselves of such hard Lawes, and those who maintaine them, will have a strong plea for themselves at the
day of judgement, in the unreasonablenesse of their adversaries; That, it is true, all reason required, that the meanes of salvation provided by God, should be ministred by the Church. But, find∣ing the pretense of Reformation without other ground, than that sense of the Scriptures which every man may imagine; and there∣fore without other bounds and measure, then that which imagina∣tion (for which there are no bounds) fixeth; They thought it necessary so to carry matters, as never to acknowledge, that the Church ever erred in any decree or Law that it hath made; Least the same error might be thought to take place in the substance of Chri∣stianity, and the Reformation of the Church to consist in the renoun∣cing of it; Which we see come to passe, in the Heresy of Socinus. And that, finding the Unity of the Church, which they were trust∣ed with, absolurely necessary to the maintenance of the common Christianity, whereby salvation is possible to be had, though more difficult, by denying those helps to salvation, which, such Lawes in∣tercept; They thought themselves tied, for the good of the whole, not to give way to Laws, tending so apparently to the salvation of particular Christians. On the other side, supposing the premises, there remaine no pre∣tense, that either Congregations or Presbyteries can be Churches; as founded meerly upon humane usurpation, which is Schisme, not upon divine institution which ordereth all Churches, to be fit to con∣stitute one Church, which is the whole. I need not say that there can be no pretense for any authority visibly convayed to them by those which set them up, having it in themselves before. I do not deny that a Christian may attaine to a kind of morall assurance, concerning the sincerity of another Christian; That he is in the state of Grace, and indowed with Gods Spirit. Not by any imediate dictate of the holy Ghost, to his own heart; which is not promised to that purpose. Not by any vehemence or suddennesse in the change which made him so, inabling him to designe the time, and place, and meanes, by which it came to passe, that it may appear the work of Gods Spirit, preventing and swallowing up all concurrence of his own free choice; For this, the change of the end and designe of a mans whole life, and the course of it, admits not. But by force of those arguments and effects of it, visible in his conversation, which, the prudence of a sincere Christian can impute to nothing else. But I deny therefore, that every true Christian can, by the ordinary meanes which God allowes, be so assured of the sincerity of other true Christians, as thereby to be priviledged, to forsake the Church of God in which they live, as consisting of others as well as of such, to retire themselves into Congregations, in which they may serve God in that order, which the sincerity of their Christianity assureth them to containe the purity of Gods ordinances. For it is manifest, that the gift of Gods Spirit, requisite to the salvation of all Christi∣ans, is not promised to this effect, as to give them that discretion, which inables to value the consequence of such appearances. And if it were, and if all true Christians could attaine assurance of all Christians of whom the question may be made, whether true Chri∣stians or not; yet hath not God provided, that the truest and sincer∣est
Christians retire themselves from communion with those, of whom there is no reasonable presumption that they are such, but are onely qualified members of the Church, by such Lawes as may comprise all the world, professing Christianity, in the communion of the Church. For, whatsoever our Lord hath foretold of the Church in the Gospel, as of a net that catcheth both good and bad fish, as of a floore, containing chaffe as well as graine, as of a flock, contain∣taining goates as well as sheep (as the Arke contained as well un∣clean beasts as clean) necessarily falls upon the visible Church; (and hath been so accepted by the Church, in the case of the Donatists) to assure us, that the good are not defiled by communion with the bad, but obliged to live in it, for the exercise of their charity and patience, in seeking their amendment. For separation, upon pre∣tense of satisfaction, in the Christianity of some, to them who pro∣fesse not to have it of others, as it carrieth in it a necessary appearance of spirituall pride, in overseeing all those that concurre not in it; So, it sets up a banner to the imposture of hypocrites, and turns the pretense of sincere Christianity, to the justifying of, whatsoever it is, that a faction so constituted shall take for it; Not measuring mens persons by the common Christianity, but the common Christianity, by that which appeares in the persons of those, who without due grounds, are supposed true Christians, exclusively to others. The ground of Congregations being thus voide▪ the constitution of them must needs involve the sacriledge of Schisme in the work, and there∣fore a nullity in the effects of it. The Baptisme which they give, void of the effect of Grace. The Eucharist, though consecra∣ted in the forme of the Church, (which, it is not to be doubted that the Novatians, Meletians, and Donatists held, because they are not blamed in it; Nor do I doubt that Tertullians Montanists did the like, whatsoever abuse might come in among them afterwards, by being separated from the Church) void of the thing signified by it. The prayers of the Church void of that effect which the promise of hear∣ing the prayers thereof importeth, whatsoever Offices, the Church exerciseth and solemnizeth therewith. How much more the constitution of Presbyteries, which, preten∣ding no such thing as separating the clean from the unclean, admits to the communion, upon no further pretense of Reformation, then answering the Assemblies Catechisme, at the demand of Triers, con∣stituted by those, who, contrary to that solemn promise, upon sup∣position whereof they were advanced to Orders in the Church of England, usurpe the Power, not of their Bishops, but of the whole Church, in prescribing an order of Ecclesiasticall communion, in all Offices of the Church, without warrant from it; Ordaining those, who undertake to warrant the salvation of poor souls, as suffi∣ciently provided for thereby, by becomming their Ministers; to be their Ministers. For, what pretense can colour this usurpation, can obscure the Sacriledge of Schisme in the act, the nullity of Gods pro∣mises in the effect of it; when the difference consists in renoncing that authority, which themselves deny not to have been in possessi∣on according to Gods Law, pretending further, so strongly as they know, by virtue of it? In disclaiming single heads of Churches,
and the Clergy that think themselves bound to doe nothing without them, though limited, both by the Law of the Church, and the Law of the Land, And in setting up themselves in their stead, to manage that authority, without the exercise whereof themselves beleeve Christianity cannot subsist, by Presbyteries and Synods. As if the tyranny of an Oligarchy were not more insufferable, then the ty∣ranny of a Monarch. Or, as if there were not presumption of ty∣rannizing, in those, who find themselves free from the bond of these Lawes, which fall to the ground with the authority that used them, to use the authority they usurpe at their owne discretion; which is necessarily the law of all Government, that is not limited by lawes which it acknowledgeth. For if they alledge, that they provide us a confession of Faith; (which is a strange allegation, not alledging, either what we wanted before, or what we get by it) I shall quickly bring them to the triall, by demanding of them, to spue out that damnable Heresy of Antinomians and Enthusiasts, in turning the Covenant of Baptisme into an absolute promise of life everlasting, to them for whome Christ died, without conditioning, that they beleeve and live like Christians. Which they can never doe, with∣out contradicting themselves, untill they make that Faith which onely justifieth to consist in that loyalty, wherewith a man under∣takes his Baptisme, out of a choice, the freedome whereof excludes all predetermination of the will, though by that Grace which effectually brings it to passe. For this condition, making all assurance of salvation the fruit of justifying faith, not the act of it, (as if one could be assured of it, by beleeving that he is sure of it▪) obligeth a man to his Christianity, for that very reason, which first moves all men to be Christians; to obtaine the promise which depends upon the per∣forming of it. The substance therefore of Christianity consisting in it, that baptisme which inacteth it not, that Eucharist which restoreth, and establisheth it not, is not Baptisme or the Eucharist, but by equi∣vocation of words; which, so long as we are not secured of, how should the word and Sacraments which such establishments hold forth be that word & those Sacraments, which are the marks of Gods Church? And are they not revenged of the seven Sacraments, in the Church of Rome, beyond the measure of moderate defense, who, to renounce them for Sacraments, suppresse the offices which by them are solem∣nized? If they allow the Baptisme of Infants, and the Covenant of Baptisme, what reason can they have to abolish the solemne pro∣fession of it, at yeares of discretion; with the blessing of the Church, for the performance of that, to which their profession obliges? What account will they give, either for not blessing Mar∣riages, leaving private Christians to contract without the authority of the Church; Or for blessing them, without being warranted by the Law of the Church, that they are such as Christianity al∣loweth? Are they not most Christianly revenged of extreme Unction, by providing no visitation for the sick? Of auricular confession, by consining the Keyes of the Church to the taking away, not of sinne, from before God, but of scandall, from before the Church? Ordinations, I mervaile not that all are forced to maintaine; for, how should altar be set up against altar, not providing who should
minister at it? As for the ceremonies and circumstances of Gods service, doth not superstitious strictnesse in abolishing them oblige reasonable men to think, that they imagine themselves nolesse accep∣table to God, for neglecting them, then the Papists for multiply∣ing them, beyond that which the order of them to their end can re∣quire? That the memories of the Saints should be fit occasions of ser∣ving God, (which, the Christianity of the ancient Church made one of the powerfullest means to extinguish Hethenisme) is now so abhorred, as if we had found out some other Christianity, then that which it served to introduce. That there should be set times of Fasting, is so frre from the care of Reformers, as if there were no such office of Christianity to be exercised by Gods Church. In fine, what is become of the substance, while we talke of ceremony and cir∣cumstance? Whether Churches were provided, revenues founded, persons consecrated, to the intent, that the service of God might daily and hourely sound in them, by the Psalmes of his praises, by the instruction of his word, by the prayers of his people, by the con∣tinuall celebration of the Eucharist? Or, that there should be two Sermons a sunday, with a prayer at the discretion of him that preaches, before and after it; Provided, nothing be done, to sig∣nify that humility of mind, that reverence of hart, that devotion of spirit, which the awfull majesty of God is to be served with; I report my selfe to the piety of Christendome, from sunne, to sunne. This I see, (woe worth my sinnes, that have made me live to see it!) an effectuall course is taken, that the Church dores be allwayes shut, and no serving God there, unlesse some body preach. This is the summe of that which the premises inable me to allege, why I can have no part in the present reformation, so called. Besides the utter want of all pretense for authority; the whole title and pre∣tense upon which, and the end to which, an equitable mind might question, whether ordinary authority, though of Gods institution and appointment, may be superseded, in a case of extrarodinary ne∣cessity, to restore the true Faith and service of God (which, all au∣thority of the Church presupposeth for the ground, and proposeth for the end of all communion with it) is found utterly wanting, up∣on the best inquiry that I have been able to make. I am to seek for a point, any one point, wherein, I can justly grant, that the change is not for the worse. Even that frequency of preaching, which was the outside of the businesse, even granting it to be by the Rule of true Faith; Yet hath the performance of it been so visibly, so pittifully defective, that he must have a hard heart for our common Christi∣anity, who can think, that there is wherewith to defend it from the scorn of unbelievers, had they nothing to do but to minde it. I confesse, as afore, I allowed the Church of Rome some excuse, from the unreasonablenesse of their adversaries; So here, consider∣ing the horrible scandales given by that communion, in standing so rigorously upon Lawes, so visibly ruinous to the service of God and the advancement of Christianity, and the difficulty of finding that meane, in which the truth stands between the extreames; (as our Lord Christ between the theeves, saith Turtulliane) I doe not proceed, to give the salvation of poor soules for lost, that are carried
away with the pretense of Reformation, in the change that is made, even to hate and persecute, by word, or by deed, those who cannot allow it. For, as for the appearance of Heresy, though the mistake be dangerous to the soule, because, if followed, it becomes the principle of those actions, which, whoso doeth shall not inherit the kingdome of God; Yet it may be so tenderly held, as not to extinguish other points of Christianity, which necessarily contradict it. For, though indeed they do not stand with it, yet it is pos∣sible, that those who, through the difficulty of finding the truth, have swallowed a mistake, may not proceed to act according to the consequence of it, but of the rest of that Christianity, which they retaine and contradicteth it. For, as for the authority of the Church, (the neglect wherof creates that obstinacy, in considerati∣on whereof, heresy is held heretically) the rigorousnesse of the Church of Rome, extending it beyond all bounds that our common Christianity can allow, and necessitating well disposed Christians to waive it; what mervaile, if, the due bounds becoming in visible to common sense, by communion with the Church, the misprision of Heresy possesse them with the esteeme of Christianity? And the difficulty of avoiding the temptation create an excuse to God, for them whose intentions are single? As for the crime of schisme, justly sticking to them, who presuming upon their understanding in the scriptures, by the scriptures alone, which God hath no where pro∣mised to assist, without using the helpes which he hath provided by his Church; though the sacrilege thereof justly render void of effect, the ordinances of God, which are ministered by virtue of that usurpation which it involveth, yet, there being abundance of soules, that may live and dye without knowing any better, much lesse, that can ever be able to judge the best, upon true principles; why should I not hope, that God, passing by the nullities which it createth, will make good the effect of his Grace to those, who, with singlenesse of heart, seek it in a wrong way, when, by his Law, he cannot be tied to concurre to the meanes? But, this resolution, being the result of the premises, demonstrateth how much reason the par∣ties (that is, those who create the parties by heading the division) have, to look about them, least they become guilty of the greatest part of soules, which in reason must needs perish, by the extremi∣ties in which it consisteth. And, the representing of the grounds thereof unto the parties, though it may seem an office unnecessary for a private Christian to undertake, yet, seemeth to me so free from all imputation of offense, in discharging of our common Christiani∣ty, and the obligation of it; that I am no lesse willing to undergoe any offense which it may bring upon me, then I am to want the ad∣vantages, which, allowing the present Reformation might give me. In the mean time, I remaine obliged, not to repent me of the re∣solution of my nonage, to remaine in the communion of the Church of England. There I find an authority visibly derived from the act of the Apostles, by meanes of their successors. Nor ought it to be of force to question the validity thereof, that the Church of Rome, and the communion thereof, acknowledgeth not the Ordinations,
and other Acts, which are done by virtue of it, as done without the consent of the whole Church; which, it is true, did visibly concurre to the authorizing of all acts done by the Clergy, as constituted by virtue of those Lawes, which all did acknowledge, and under the profession, of executing the offices of their severall orders according to the same. For, the issue of that dispute will be triable by the cause of limiting the exercise of them, to those termes which the Re∣formation thereof containeth, which if they prove such, as the com∣mon Christianity, expressed in the Scriptures expounded by the ori∣ginal practice of the whole Church, renders necessary to be maintain∣ed, notwithstanding the rest of the Church agree not in them; the blame of separation, that hath insued thereupon, will not be charge∣able upon them that retire themselves to them, for the salvation of Christian soules, but on them who refuse all reasonable compli∣ance, in concurring to that which may seem any way tollerable. But, towards that triall, that which hath been said must suffice. The substance of that Christianity which all must be saved by, when all disputes, and decrees, and contradictions are at an end, is more properly maintained in that simplicity which all that are concerned are capable of, by the terms of that Baptisme which it ministreth, requiring the profession of them, from all that are confirmed at years of discretion) then all the disputes on both sides, then all de∣crees on the one side, all confessions of faith on the other side, have been able to deliver it. And I conceive, I have some ground to say so great a word, having been able, by limiting the term of justifying faith in the writings of the Apostles, according to the same, to re∣solve, upon what termes, both sides are to agree, if they will not set up the rest of their division upon something which the truth of Chri∣stianity justifieth not, on either side. For, by admitting Christi∣anity (that is, the sincere profession thereof) to be the Faith which onely justifyeth, in the writings of the Apostles; whatsoever is in difference, as concerning the Covenant of Grace, is resolved, without prejudicing either the necessity of Grace, to the undertaking, the performing, the accepting of it, for the reward; or the necessity of good works in consideration for the same. The substance of Chri∣anity, about which there is any difference, being thus secured, there remaines no question concerning Baptisme, and the Eucharist, to the effect for which they are instituted, being ministred upon this ground, and the profession of it, with the form which the Catholick Church requireth, to the consecration of the Eucharist. Nor doth the Church of England either make Sacraments, of the rest of the seven, or abolish the Offices, because the Church of Rome makes them Sacraments. Nor wanteth it an order, for the daily morn∣ing and evening service of God, for the celebration of Festivalls, and times of Fasting, for the observation of ceremonies, fit to create that devotion and reverence, which they signify to vulgar under∣standings in the service of God. But, praying to Saints, and wor∣shipping of Images, or of the Eucharist, Prayers for the delivery of the dead out of Purgatory, the Communion in one kind, Masses without Communions, being additions to, or detractions from that simplicity of Gods service, which the originall order of the Church
delivereth, visible to common reason, comparing the present order of the Church of Rome with the Scriptures, and primitive records of the Church; there is no cause to think that the Catholick Church is disowned, by laying them aside. It is true, it was an extraordi∣nary act of Secular Power in Church maters, to inforce the change, without any consent from the greater part of the Church. But if the matter of the change be the restoring of Lawes, which our common Christianity, as well as the Primitive orders of the Church (of both which, Christian Powers are borne Protectors) make requisite; the secular power acteth within the sphere of it, and the division is not imputable to them that make the change, but to them that refuse their concurrence to it. Well had it been, had that most pious and necessary desire thereof, to restore publick Pe∣nance, been seconded, by the zeal and compliance of all estates; and not stifled by the tares of Puritanisme, growing up with the Refor∣mation of it. For, as there can be no just pretense of Reformation, when the effect of it is not the frequentation of Gods publick ser∣vice, in that forme which it restoreth, but the suppressing of it in that form which it rejecteth; So, the communion of the Eucharist being the chiefe office in which it consisteth; the abolishing of pri∣vate Masses is an unsusticient pretense for Reformation, where that provision, for the frequenting of the communion, is not made, which, the restoring of the order in force, before private Masses came in, re∣quireth. Nor can any meane be imagined to maintaine continuall communion, with that purity of conscience, which the holi∣nesse of Christianity requireth, but the restoring of Penance. In fine, if any thing may have been defective, or amisse, in that order which the Church of England establisheth, it is but justice, to compare it in grosse, with both extreames which it avoideth; and considering, that it is not in any private man, to make the body of the Church such as thy could wish, to serve God with; to rest content, in that he is not obliged, to become a party to those things which he ap∣proves not; conforming himself to the order in force, in hope of that grace, which communion with the Church in the offices of Gods service promiseth. For, consider againe, what meanes of salvation all Christians have, by communion with the Church of Rome. All are bound to be at Masse on every Festivall day, but, to say onely so many Paters, and so many Aves as belong to the hour. Not to assist with their devoti∣ons, that which they understand not; much lesse, to communicate. All are bound to communicate once a year at Easter, and before they do it, to say they are sory for the sinnes they confesse; undertaking the Penance which is injoyned, not for cleansing the sinne, but to re∣maine for Purgatory, if they do it not here. The like at the point of death, with extreme unction over and above. Within the com∣passe of this law, Christians may fall into the hands of conscientious Curates and Confessors, that shall not faile to instruct them, wherein their Christianity and salvation consists, and how they are to serve God in Spirit and in truth; preferring the principall before the ac∣cessory rubbish of ceremonies, and observations, indifferent of them∣selves, but, which spend the strength of the seed and root of Christi∣anity
in leaves and chaff without fruit. But they may also fall un∣der such, as shall direct them to look upon the virtue of the sacrifi∣ce, that is repeated in the Masse, and promise themselves the bene∣fit thereof by the work done, without their assistance. To look up∣on their Penance, onely, as that which must be paid for in Purgatory if not done here. To do as the Church does, and to believe as it be∣lieves, promising themselves salvation, by being of communion there∣with, though it import no more then I have said. Nay, though they be directed such devotions, as are common to God with his creature, as spend the seed of Christianity in the chaffe of observati∣ons, impertinent to the end of it. On the other side, departing thence to Congregations and Presbyteries, what meanes of salvation shall a Christian have? Two Sermons a Sunday, and a prayer be∣fore and after each; But, whether it be the Word of God, or his that Preaches, whether Christianity allow to pray as he prayes, or not; no Rule to secure. And, whether Christian liberty allow, that men be tied to serve God from Sunday to Sunday, or not, un∣till Gods spirit indite what every man shall say to God; no way re∣solved. A man may possibly light upon him, that does not take justi∣fying Faith to consist in beleeving that a man is of the elect, for whome alone Christ died; or that, beleeving it, presses the con∣sequences which contradict his owne premises, as if he did not. But, how easy is it to light upon him, that drawes the true conclusion from the premises which he professeth, and maketh meere Popery of the whole duty of a Christian? Certainly, the Church of Rome holdeth no error in the Faith, any thing neare so pernicious as this. That of transubstantiation is but a fleabite in comparison of it. He who, by reason of his education, is afraide to thinke that the elements remaine, is he therefore become incapable of the Spirit of God conveyed by the Body and Blood of our Lord in the Sacrament? And certainely, that is the prime Interest of our Christianity in it; though, the bodily pre∣sence of the elements is no way prejudiciall to the same. But, who so beleeveth he hath Gods Word for his salvation, not supposing any condition requisite, may think himselfe tied to live like a Christian, but by no meanes, but by holding contradictories at once; Which, though all men by consequence do, because all erre; Yet, in matters of so high consequence, to do it cannot be without prejudice to the work of Christianity, and dangerous to the salvation it promiseth. Nor can Baptisme or the Eucharist be Baptisme or the Eucharist but equivocally, to them that allow the true consequence of this. And, shall any man perswade me, that, un∣lesse a man will sweare, that which no man is able to show that a Christian may sweare, he perishes without help, for want of this communion so obtained? Or, on the other side, that his salvation can be secured, who, to obtaine that meanes of salvation which Congregations or Presbyteries tender, concurre to the open act of Schisme which they do? So necessary is it for me to continue in the resolution of my nonage, as being convinced, upon a new inquiry, that the meanes of salvation are more sufficient, more agreeable for substance, to the Scriptures expounded by the originall practice of
the whole Church, (though perhaps not for forme) in that meane, then in either extreme. This resolution, then, being thus grounded, what alteration can the present calamity of the Church of England make in it, to per∣swade a man, to believe thosearticles, which the Bull of Pius VI. ad∣deth to the common faith; to maintaine, whatsoever is once grown a custome in the Church of Rome, as for that service of God, which it destroyeth? Or on the other side, to become a party to that ex∣presse act of Schisme, with misprision of Heresy involved in it, which the erecting of Congregations and Presbyteries importeth? Epiphani∣us mentioneth one Zachaeus in Syria, that retired himself from commu∣nion with the Church, to serve God alone. If the force of the Sword destroy the opportunities and meanes of yeelding God that service which a mans Christianity professed upon mature choice, requireth; shall it be imputable to him, that, desiring to serve God with his Church, he is excluded by them, who ground their communion upon conditions which the common Christianity alloweth not? Or, to them, by whom he is so excluded? I can onely say to the scattered remaines of the Church of En∣gland, whose communion I cherish, because it standeth upon those termes, which give me sufficient ground for the hope of Salvation, which I have cherished from my cradle; that, the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of England, being no longer in force by the Power of this world, are by consquence, no longer a sufficient Rule, for the order of their communion in the offices of Gods service; In which Order the visibility of every Church consisteth. Not as if the nature of good and badde, in the matter of them, had suffered any change; but because, being the mean to preserve unity in the service of God, upon those termes, which the Law of the Land inforced, they are no sufficient meane to preserve it upon those termes, which onely our Christianity requireth; To wit, that it be distinct from Con∣gregations and Presbyteries, as well as from the Church of Rome. Which, in my opinion, making it necessary to the salvation of every Christian to communicate with the Catholicke Church (that is, with a Church which ought to be a member of the whole Church) is of great consequence. For, neither is it actually and properly a Church, the order whereof, in the service of God, is not visible; Nor is there sufficient meanes in that case for the effect of a Church, and of that visible order in which the being of a Church consisteth, to∣wards the salvation of those who are of it, or might be of it. And this is that which must justify that which I have done, in speaking out so farre, what I conceive the Rule of Faith, what the Lawes of the Catholick Church, require, to be provided for, in every Church and every estate. For if they be not wanting to themselves, to their Title, to the salvation of Gods people, they have enough in the Scri∣tures, interpreted by the Original Tradition & practice of the whole hurch, both to condemn the errors, which the ground of their Com∣nion obliges them to disown, & to give such a rule, to the order of  Communion, in the offices of Gods service, as the present state , compared with the primitive state of those Christians, who fir ucceeded the Apostles, shall seem to require. It is indeed, a
very great case to me, that, having declared against untrue, and unsufficient causes, for dividing the Church, (for which there can be no cause sufficient) I have owned the cause which I think sufficient, for a particular Church, to provide for it selfe without the consent of the whole. For by this meanes, I secure my self, from being accessory to Schisme, and the innumerable mis∣chiefes which it produceth. But I confesse, this declaration makes me liable to a consequence of very great importance; That there is no true meane, no just way to reconcile any difference in the Church, but upon those grounds and those termes which I propose. For, supposing the Society of the Church, by Gods Law; upon what termes, the least sucking Heresy amongst us is reconcileable to the party from which it broke last, (supposing it reconcileable up∣on the grounds and termes of our common Christianity) upon the same termes is the Reformation reconcileable to the Church of Rome, the Greek Church to the Latine, all parts to the Whole, the Congregations and Presbyteries to the Church of England. Where∣as, not proceeding upon those grounds, not standing on those termes, all preense of reconciling, even the Reformed, among themselves, will prove a meer pretense. Laus Deo. FINIS.
Faults escaped in the firse Booke. PAge 7. line 47. r. shall it be disc. pag. 20. l. 45. r. to all sentences p. 21. l. 50. 1 Thes. V. 14, 15. r. 12, 13. l. 52 Heb. XII. r. XIII. 23. 39. r. the act 40. 6. then those r. better then . 28. under-r. undertooke 48. 30. r. washing or sit∣ting downe to 59. 53. r. adulterers 66. 28. Ladies day r. Lords day 89. 53. secret to the r. sere, so 95. 46. with r. which, 115. 26. those found. r. thes. 116. 33. that this r. that is 121. 4. r. intertainment 122. 7. Church with r. with him 137. 8. without r. within 140. 13. r. virtue of the 147. 1. we had r. he had 57. r. indowment. 155. 25. now have r. now are 172. 34. after Acts? put) 176. 25. dele rome 177. 52. r. he eat 178. 28. then it was r. as it was 181. 57. r. so con∣tinuall. 182. 51. to Gods r. to use G. 183. 37. comming from Christ r. of Christ 185. 6. after lamented put) 186. 21. there may r. may be 189. 29. r. change 190. 14. banquet r. banquet 28. passive r. positive 45. r. owned 193. 16 ele argument 221. 2. not up r. cast up. 235. 18. if when r. when 237. 16. which the r. with the 37. aliver r. alone 241. 16. Ahab r. Jehn 248. 50. Jeroboams then r. Jeroboams sinne 250. 38. neither r. either. Second Book. Pag. 7. l. 30. r. we be p. 8. 36. John 7. 37. r. 39. 40. r. now if 20. 41. Joh. IV. r. Ephes. IV. 22. 12. that those r. those that. 62. 19. he pert. r. be prt. 23. Heb. IV. 16. r. 1. 68. of as r. of man, as 71. 33. r. evidenced 101. 55. r. the Angels. 109. 9. and both r. so bth. 116. 56. as you may by r. as you may see by 118. 35. Solomons r. Solomons words 36. r. composed. 119. 51. dele . 125. 28. r. to derie 26. 53. which r. with which 128. 31. r. they thought. 162. 5. tendred r. raended 164. 54. serve or the—purpose not r. serve the—purpose or not. 165. 24. concerning r. consining. 56. upon necessity r. upon the like n. 166. 21. after that r. the line afore iports—this or that. 167. to see that it supposeth r. that it is, sup. 171. 55. r. comes not to passe 174. 45. will not r. shall not 184. 28. of that k. r. or that k. 57. for which they addict themselves to love r. which they addict themselves to for love 51. r. with the 189. 35. discerne r. deserve. 192. 36. ye, knowing r. ye knowe 193. 34. or r. if 195. 15. ay r. might 35. 1. Ad ah 198. 24. that is r. that it is. prophets r. prophet 199. 12. were r. we are 17. in r. is 49. r. soverainty 201. 13. upon passe r. to asse 203. 31. generation r. regen. 206. 49. observations r. observation 207. 51. lusted r. lasted 208. 56. teach r. reach. 209. 10. decet r. decree. 22. you r. them. 26. verifying r. resolving 211. 34. sup∣posed r. suppose 215. 21. causes r. clauses 216. 6. XI. r. I. 217. 53. refutes r. refuses. 218. agined r. imagining 52. without the bonds r. wthn the bounds 219. 9. adxe r. adde 220. 3. of the r. to the 37. r. allwayes freely doe it. 221. 24. whereby r. that order 922. 34. by one r. by som 223. 37. revealed r. related 224. 30. S. S. Austine, point, S. Austme 225. 57. of God r. to God. 240. 31.  r.  247, 49. r. or to show 250. 12. they can be r. can be 251. 32. this part. r. his . 256. 55. in sending r. endrig. 259. 16. r. conceiving 260. 32. r. having excluded. 35. r. proposes. 261. 29. 31. r. premises premises. 264. 27. r.  281. 6. r.  can 282. 38. r. distinguiseh. 289. 45. r. which the 296. 26. let him in. r. let them 297. 7. the rank of it r. the werk 300. 25. as I said 1. I said 304. 33. should be r. that God should 307. 13. but the r. be  . Third Book. Pag. 6. l. 9. r. to be no more 12. 54. it not r. is not, 14. 2. which r. with 16. 1. is not r. is the 19. 6. after r. afore 37. 47. r. though not under 54. 7. r. times r. termes 55. 53. r. promises 58. 21. truly one r. done 61. 23. r. on purpose 64. 21. r. S. Peter 65. 51. r. Zonar 66. 10. a dore r. alone 69. 37. r. refused 38. r. construed. 48. r. whatsoever 70. 1. r. Predestinatians 86. 1. r. Novatians 88. 55. r. Homil. 91. 25. r. Cappadoc 95. 25. r. Synedrs 98. 58. repentance r. upon rep. 110. 55. r. prescribed. 111. 22. r. ministery 32. was Apostle r. we Apostles 113. 56. r. import 57. practice 1. Priests 115. 53. r. prefers 116. 4. for forn. r. except for . 117. 54. r. draw them 119. 57. corrected r.  122. 1. time r. erme 123. 12. r. is it 128. 2. r. Mileu. 137. 49. r. Gentium secum  139. 13. r. her husbands brother 145. 4. r. all one 151. 29. r. setled 160. 16. r. Eldest 163. 58. r. will find 164. 41. according the r. to the 169. 33. r. the third, 43. r. of the chief 178. 42. r. rights 191. 44. r. good works 197. 2. first r. seventh 206. 39. r. further, for the ord. 209. 1. r. so subject to 25. r. once a moneth 252. 2. r. if it be true, all 273. 32. or so, as 276. 46. or r. nor 277. 54. r. no by the order 279. 2. r. conferred 280. 12. r. preached 282. 2. and more. r. and not 283. 46. r. oblige 285. 17. r. which God 44. upon r. up an 288. 10. r. God, which, tho. 292. 20. seem r. serve 31. 22. r. appa∣ritions 316. 10. r. it is 318. 56. r. if the fire 327. 26. our r. one 328. 58. dele ne 334. 41. r. consecration 335. 29. in the r. is 336. 41. as he r. she 338. 7. r. grounded 56. this rec. r.  339. 31. r. variety 341. 22. r. and makes 26. not missing r. missing. 29. any dif. r. o . 342. 16. r. which, by to blessing 345. 30. r. Chrisme 36. hands. r. bnds? 5. some r. serve 349. 50. r. subsiste. 352. 6. r. premises, 353. 53. instructing r. in serving. 356. 55. sometimes. 360. 7. r. no . 364. 58. r. reasable though no. 370. 55. r. Laick 372. 53. r. ground 373. 38. r. necessarily 374. 5. r. degrees 374. 39. surey r. society 378. 13. r. as when 381. 36. r. upon Ep. but upon acts of the 385. 1. r. supposeth 40. r. supposition 54. r. of —then, that.
