T1868A 99825535 29919
Sad and Deplorable NEVVES FROM Nevv England. Poetically Related by an Inhabitant there, and Newly sent over to a Merchant in LONDON. BEING A TRUE NARRATIVE OF NEW-ENGLANDS Lamentable Estate at present, Occa∣sioned by many un-heard of Cruelties, Practised upon the Persons and Estates of its United Colonies, with∣out Respect of Sex, Age or Quality of Persons by the barbarous Heathen thereof. depiction of scene of David and Goliath With Allowance LONDON, Printed for H. J. Anno Dom. 1676.
THE PROLOGUE. THE times wherein old Pompion was a Saint, When men far'd hardly yet without complaint On vilest Cates; the dainty Indian Maize Was eat with Clamp shells out of wooden Trayes Under thatcht Hutts without the cry of Rent, And the best Sawce to every Dish, Content. When Flesh was food, and hairy skins made coats, And Men as well as Birds had chirping Notes. When Cimnels were accounted Noble Blood, Among the tribes of common herbage food. Of Ceres bounty form'd was many knack, Enough to fill poor Robins Almanack. These golden times (too fortunate to hold) Were quickly sinn'd away for love of gold. 'Twas then among the bushes, not the street, If one in place did an inferiour meet, Good-morrow Brother; Is there ought you want? Take freely of me what I have, you ha'nt.
Plain Tom and Dick would pass as current now, As ever since, Your Servant Sir, and bow. Deep skirted doublets, Puritanick capes, (Which now would render men like upright Apes) Was comelier wear our wiser Fathers thought, Then the cast fashions from all Europe brought. 'Twas in those days an honest Grace would hold Till an hot Puddin grew at heart a cold. And men had better stomachs to Religion, Then I to Capon, Turky cock or Pigeon. When honest Sisters met to pray, not prate About their own, and not their Neighbors state. During Plain-Dealings Reign, that worthy Stud Of th' Ancient Planters Race before the Flood. These Times were good, Merchants car'd not a rush For other fare then Jonakin and Mush. Although men far'd and lodged very hard, Yet Innocence was better then a Guard. New Englands Beauties, which still seem'd to me Illustrious in their own simplicity. 'Twas ere the Neighboring Virgin-land had broke The Hogsheads of her worse then hellish smoke. 'Twas ere the Islands sent their Presents in, Which but to use was counted next to sin. 'Twas ere a Barge had made so rich a fraight As Chocolate, dust Gold and bits of Eight. Ere Wines from France and Moscovadoe too, Without the which the drink will scarcely do. From Western Isles, ere fruits and delicacies, Did rot Maids teeth, and spoil their handsom faces▪ Or ere these times did chance, the noise of War Was from our towns and hearts removed far.
No Bug-bear Comets in the Chrystal Air, To drive our Christian Planters to despair. No sooner Pagan malice peeped forth, But Valour snib'd it; then were men of worth Who by their Prayers slew thousands, Angel like, Their weapons are unseen with which they strike. Then had the Churches rest, as yet the coales Were covered up in most contentious souls. Freeness in Judgement, Union in Affection, Dear Love, sound Truth, they were our grand Protection; These were the Twins which in our Councels sate, These gave Prognosticks of our future fate; If these be longer-liv'd our hopes increase, These warrs will usher in a longer Peace: But if New Englands love die in its youth The Grave will open next for blessed Truth▪ This Theam is out of date, the Peaceful Houres When Castles needed not but pleasant Bowers. Nor ink but bloud and tears now serve the turn To draw the figure of New Englands Urn. New Englands hour of passion is at hand, No power except Divine can it withstand; Scarce hath her Glass of fifty years run out, But her old prosperous Steeds turn heads about, Tracking themselves back to their poor beginnings, To fear and fare upon their fruits of sinnings: So that the Mirrour of the Christian world Lyes burnt to heaps in part, her Streamers furl'd Grief reigns, joyes flee, and dismal fears surprize, Not dastard spirits only, but the wise. Thus have the fairest hopes deceiv'd the eye Of the big swoln Expectant standing by.
Thus the proud Ship after a little turn Sinks into Neptunes arms to find its Urn. Thus hath the Heir to many thousands born Been in an instant from the Mother torn. Ev'n thus thine Infant-cheeks begin to pale. And thy supporters, through great losses, fail. This is the Prologue to thy future woe The Epilogue no Mortal yet can know.
Sad and Deplorable News from New-ENGLAND. IN Seventy Five the Critick of our years Commenc'd our war with Philip and his Peers. Whither the Sun in Leo had inspir'd A feav'rish heat, and Pagan spirits fir'd? Whither some Romsh Agent hatcht the plot? Or whither they themselves? appeareth not. Whither our Infant-thrivings did invite? Or whither to our Lands pretended right? Is hard to say; but Indian spirits need No grounds but Lust to make a Christian bleed. And here, methinks, I see this greazy Lout With all his Pagan slaves coil'd round about, Assuming all the Majesty his throne Of rotten stump, or of the rugged stone Could yield; casting some bacon-rine-like looks, Enough to fright a Student from his books, Thus treat his Peers, and next to them his Commons, Kennel'd together all without a summons. My friends, our Fathers were not half so wise As we our selves who see with younger eyes: They sell our Land to English Men, who teach Our Nation also fast to pray and preach.
Of all our countrey they enjoy the best, And quickly they intend to have the rest. This no wunnegin so big matchit law Which our old fathers fathers never saw. These English make, and we must keep them too, Which is too hard for them or us to do. We drink we so big whipt, but English they Go sneep, no more, or else a little pay. Me meddle Squaw me hang'd, our fathers kept What Squaws they would whether they wak't or slept Now if you'l fight Ile get you English coats, And wine to drink out of their Captains throats: The richest Merchants houses shall be ours, We'll lie no more on mats or dwell in bowers. We'll have their silken wives, take they our Squaws, They shall be whipt by vertue of our Lawes: If ere we strike, 'tis now before they swell To greater swarmes then we know to quell. This my Resolve, let neighboring Sachems know, And every one that hath Club, Gun or Bow, This was assented to, and for a close He strok't his smutty beard, and curst his foes. This counsel lightning like their tribes invade, And something like a muster's quickly made, A ragged regiment, a naked swarm, Whom hopes of booty doth with courage arm, Set forth with bloody hearts, the first they meet Of men or beasts, they butcher at their feet. They round our skirts▪ they pare, they fleece, they kill, And to our bordering towns do what they will. Poor Hovills (better far then Caesars Court In the experience of the meaner sort)
Receive from them their doom next execution; By flames reduc'd to horror and confusion: Here might be seen the smoking funeral Piles Of wildred townes pitcht distant many miles. Here might be seen the infant from the breast Snatcht by a pagan hand to lasting rest: The mother Rachel-like shrieks out my child, She wrings her hands and raves as she were wild. The bruitish wolves suppress her anxious moan By crueltyes more deadly of her own. Will she or nill the chastest turtle must Tast of the pangs of their unbridled lust. From farmes to farmes, from towns to towns they post They strip, they bind, they ravish, flea and roast. The beasts which wont their masters crib to know, Over the ashes of their shelters low. VVhat the inexorable flames do spare More cruel Heathen lug away for fare. These tidings ebbing from the outward parts, Makes Tradesmen cast aside their wonted Arts And studie Arms: the craving Merchants plot Not to augment but keep what they have got. And every soul which hath but common sence Thinks it the time to make a just defence. Alarum every where resound in streets, From West sad tidings with the Eastern meets. Our common Fathers in their Councels close A martial treaty with the Pagan Foes; All Answers center here, that Fire and Sword Must make their Sachem universal Lord. This armes the English with a resolution To give the vapouring Scab a Retribution.
Heav'ns they consult by Prayer, the best design A furious foe to quell or undermine. RESOLV'D that from the Massachusets bands Be prest on service some Herculean hands; And certainly he well deserv'd a jerk, That slipt the Collar from so good a work. Some Volunteers, some by compulsion goe, To range the hideous Forest for a foe. The tender Mother now's all bowels grown, Clings to her son as if they'd melt in one. Wives clasp about their Husbands as the Vine, Hugs the fair Elm while tears burst out like Wine. The new sprung love in many a Virgin-heart Swells to a Mountain when the Lovers part. Nephews and Kindred turn all springs of tears, Their hearts are so surpriz'd with pannick fears: But dolefull shrieks of captives summon Forth Our walking Castles, men of noted worth, Made all of life, each Captain was a Mars, His name too strong to stand on wat'rish verse: Due praise I leave to some Poetick hand, Whose Pen and Wits are better at command. Methinks I see the Trojan-Horse burst ope, And such rush forth as might with Giants cope: These first the Natives treachery felt, too fierce For any but eye witness to rehearse. Yet sundry times in places where they came Upon the Indian skins they carv'd their name. The trees stood Centinels, and bullets flew From every bush (a shelter for their crew) Hence came our wounds and deaths from every side, While sculking enemies squat undescri'd,
That every stump shot like a Musquetier, And Bowes with Arrows every tree did bear. The Swamps were Courts of Guard, thither retir'd The stragling blew-Coats when their Guns were fir'd In dark Meanders, and these winding Groves, Where Bears and Panthers with their Monarch moves. These far more cruel slily hidden lay, Expecting English men to move that way. One Party lets them slip, the other greets Them with the next thing to their winding sheets; Most fall, the rest thus startled back return, And from their by-past foes receive an urn. Here fell a Captain, to be nam'd with tears, Who for his Courage left not many Peers, With many more who scarce a number left To tell how treacherously they were bereft. This flusht the Pagan-courage, now they think The victory theirs, not lacking meat or drink. The ranging Wolves find here and there a prey, And having fill'd their paunch they run away By their Hosts light, the thanks which they return Is to lead Captives, and their Taverns burn. Many whose thrift had stor'd for after-use Sustain their wicked plunder and abuse. Poor people spying an unwonted light, Fearing a Martyrdom, in sudden fright Leap to the door to fly, but all in vain, They are surrounded with a Pagan train; Their first salute is death, which if they shun, Some are condemn'd the Gauntelet to run; Death would a mercy prove to such as those Who feel the rigour of such hellish foes.
Posts daily on their Pegase Steeds, Bring sad Reports of worse then Nero's deeds; Such bruitish Murthers as would paper stain, Not to be heard in a Domitians Reign. The Field which Nature hid is common laid, And Mothers Bodies ript for lack of aid. The secret Cabinets which Nature meant To hide her Master-Piece is open rent; The half-form'd Infant there receives a death Before it sees the light, or draw its breath; Many hot welcomes from the Natives arms, Hid in their sculking holes, many alarms Our brethren had, and weary weary trants, Sometimes in melting heats and pinching wants: Sometimes the Clouds with sympathizing tears, Ready to burst, discharg'd about their ears; Sometimes on craggy hills, anon in bogs And miry swamps better befitting hogs, And after tedious Marches, little boast Is to be heard of stew'd, or bak'd, or roast, Their bds are Hurdles, open house they keep Through shady boughs the stas upon them peep; Their Chrystal drink drawn from the Mothers breast Disposes not to mirth, but sleep and rest. Thus many days and weeks some months run out To find and quell the vagabonding Rout, Who like Inchanted Castles fair appear, But all is vanisht if you come but near; Just so we might the Pagan Archers track With towns and Merchandize upon their back; And thousands in the South who setled down, To all the Points and Winds are quickly blown.
At many Meetings of their fleeting crew, From whom, like hail, arrows and bullets flew: The English courage with whole swarmes dispute, Hundreds they hack in pieces in pursuit. Sed haud impune, English sides do feel, As well as tawny skins, the lead and steel; And some such gallant Sparks by bullets fell, As might have curst the Powder back to Hell: Had only Swords these Skirmishes decided All Pagan Sculls had been long since divided. The lingring War out-lives the Summer-Sun, Who hence departs hoping it might be done Ere his Return at Spring; but ah, he'll find The Sword still drawn, men of unchanged mind. Cold Winter now nibbles at hands and toes And shrewdly pinches both our friends and foes. Fierce Boreas whips the Pagan tribe together, Advising them to fit for Foes and Weather: The Axe which late had tasted Christian blood, Now sets its steely teeth to feast on wood. The forests suffer now, by weight constrain'd To kiss the Earth with souldiers lately brain'd. The lofty Oaks and Ash do wag their head To see so many of their Neighbors dead; Their fallen Carcasses are carried thence To stand our Enemies in their defence. Their Myrmidous inclos'd with clefts of Trees, Are busie like the Ants or nimble Bees: And first they limber Poles fix in the ground, In figure of the Heavens convex  all round They draw their Arras-mats, and skins of beasts, And under these the Eves do make their Nests.
Rome took more time to grow then twice six hours, But half that time will serve for Indian bowers. A City shall be rear'd in one days space As shall an hundred English-men out-face. In several Precincts there swarmes unite, Rather to keep a Winter-Guard then fight; A dem and dismal Swamp some Scout had found Whose bosom was a spot of rising ground, Hedg'd up with mighty Oaks, Maples and Ashes, Nurst up with springs, quick bogs, and miry plashes, A Place which Nature coin'd on very nonce For tygers, not for Men to be a Sconce. 'Twas here these Monsters, shap'd and fac'd like men, Took up their Rendezvouz and bumal den, Deeming the depth of snow, hail, frost and ice, Would make our Infantry more tame and wise, Then by forsaking beds and loving Wives, Meerly for Indian skins to hazard lives: These hopes had somthing calm'd the boiling passion Of this inorrigible warlike Nation. During this short Parenthesis of Peace Our forces found, but left him not at ease. Here English valour most illustrious shone, Finding their numbers ten times ten to one. A shower of leaden Hail our Captins feel, Which made the bravest Blades among us reel. Like to some Ant-hill newly spurn'd abroad, Where each takes heels and bears away his load: Instead of Plate and Jewels Indian Trayes, With baskets up they snatch, and run their wayes. Sundry the Flames arrest, and some the blade, By bullets heaps on heaps of Indians laid.
The Flames like lightning in their narrow streets, Dart in the face of every one it meets. Here might be heard an hideous Indian cry, O wounded ones who in the Wigwams fry. Hd we been Cannibals, here might we feast On brave Westphalia Gammons ready drest. The tawny Hue is Ethiopick made Of such, on whom Vulcan his clutches laid. Their fate was sudden, our advantage great To give them once for all a grand defeat; But tedious travel had so crampt our Toes, It was too hard a task to chase the foes. Distinctness in the numbers of the slain, Or the account of Pagans which remain, Are both uncertain, losses of our own Are too too sadly felt, too sadly known. Warr digs a common Grave for friends and foes, Captains in with the private souldier throws. Six of our Leaders in the first assault, Crave re-admission to their Mothers Vault, Who had they fell in ancient Homers days, Had been enroll'd with Hecatombs of praise. As Clouds disperst, the Natives Troops divide, And like the Streams along the thickets glide. Some breathing time we had, and short God knows, But new alarums from recruited foes Bounce at our ears, the mountain clouds of smoke From martyr'd towns the Heav'ns for aid invoke; Churches, Barns, Houses, with most pond'rous things Made volatile, flie o're the Land with wings. Hundreds of Cattel now they sacrifice For aiery spirits up to gormandize;
And to the Molech of their Hellish guts, Which craves the flesh in gross, their Ale in Butts. Lancaster, Mendon, Medfield, wildred Groton, With many Villages by me not thought on, Dy in their youth by Fire that useful foe, Which this grand Cheat the world will overflow. The wandring Priest to every one he meets Preaches his Churches Funeral in the streets. Sheep from their Fold are frighted. Keepers too Put to their trumps not knowing what to do. This Monster War hath hatcht a beauteous Dove In dogged hearts, of most unfeigned love; Fraternal love, the livery of a Saint Being come in fashion, though by sad constraint; Which if it thrive and prosper with us long Will make New-England fourty thousand strong. But off the Table Hand, let this suffice As the Abridgement of our miseries. If Mildew Famine, Sword, and Fired Towns, If Slaughter, Captivating, Deaths and Wounds, If daily Whippings once Reform our Ways, These all will issue in our Fathers Praise; If otherwise, the Sword must never rest Till all New-Englands Glory it divest. FINIS.
