T670 99827491 31911
TEN Considerations In FAVOUR of the East-India COMPANY. The Wisdom of the Nation having RESOLVED That the EAST-INDIA-Trade is Necessary and Beneficial to the Kingdom; That the said Trade will be best Managed by a Joynt-Stock, exclusive to all others; and that such a Company be Esta∣blished by Act of PARLIAMENT. Those Gentlemen are answered, That urge its being an Unprofitable-Trade; or, if it be Beneficial to the Nation, that it would be most so, it laid open. A Company, being designed the present East-India Company, hope their Petition (to the Honourable the House of Commons for an Establishment under such Regulations and Limitations as to their Great Wisdom shall seem meet) will be Granted, notwithstanding the opposition made by the Subscribers for a new Joynt-Stock, upon the following, a∣mong many other Considerations, VIZ. I. They are already Incorporated and Confirmed by divers Charters. II. They have run great Risques, and been at vast Charges, in raising that Trade to the heighth we see it, and Capacitating themselves by Purchases, Forts, Factories, Set∣tlements, &c. to Maintain and Promote it. III. The Interlopers were, really, the Original cause of the War. IV. Should this Company be dissolved, not only many Aged-Persons, Widdows and Orphans, but all new commers in upon account of the Peace, (who are not a few, and have yet received no Benefit) would be great Sufferers. V. It is unreasonable the whole Company should suffer for the Miscarriages (as is said) of a few Members; private-Contracts and other Proceedings of that nature objected a∣gainst, have always been disapproved of by all but the concern'd in them, while it hath not been in their power to prevent them, by reason of plurality of Votes, and the small appearance of the unconcerned at General Courts. VI. The late Dividents have proceeded from fears of a Dissolution, or a permission of Interlopers, which a timely Establishment by Act of Parliament, pursuant to their se∣veral Petitions, would (undoubtedly) have prevented. VII. The Joynt-Stock hath been Charged with great Taxes, (besides the new Du∣ties upon East-India Goods Imported) while want of Protection and Incouragement hath considerably interrupted their Trade. VIII. If their remaining Stock, when the Accompts are inspected, is not thought sufficient, the Act that Establishes them may obliege them to an addition. IX. There cannot be any Benefit Proposed that the Kingdom shall receive, by a New East-India-Company, but the old may be so regulated, as equally to afford it. X. The Old Company, with facility, may be Established without Injury to any Man, whereas a New Company cannot be erected without Difficulty and Complaints.
