V406A 09436301 43095
AN ELEGY Upon the DEATH of that HOLY, REVEREND and LEARNED Minister of CHRIST, Mr. RICHARD BAXTER, Who in the 77th Year of his Age departed this Life Decemb. the 8th 1691. By N. VINCENT Minister of the Gospel , a true Mourner at his FƲNERAL. BLess't Man! In singing forth thine Elegy, Now every Muse should turn Melpomene was the weep∣ing Muse of the Nine. Melpomene! There's not an Eye, that saw what's worth; but will For loss of Thee, a showre of Tears distil! Who would thy Life in Truth describe, must tell, Its Length, and Ʋsefulness, was Miracle. That Tongue, by which, Thy Parts and Grace are shown, Must be an Angels, or one like thy own. He that did wish th' Apostle Paul to hear, Thy powerful Preaching, Praying, if his Ear Had once been bless't with: this would granted be, Only Inspired Ones excelled Thee! Thy  thee, Star; and truly None, Brighter than Thou, in this The Sun of Righteousness did sure dispense Such Light to Thee, with so great Influence The Prince of Darkness was (how often!) foil'd; His strongest Holds thrown down! his Weapons spoil'd! Thee Spiritual Father, a large Off-spring call; Thy Crown thy Glory, and thy Joy; these all Will at the last be found; and These with Thee Will live, love, praise unto Eternity! Thou didst aloud the Unconverted Call; Heaven bless't thee with Success, so that the fall Of Many into Hell was hinder'd; Greater skill, To win Souls to thy Lord; and to his Will To subject them; Who in this Age has had? The worst of all the Ages that were bad. Hard Hearts before Thee melted, and their Grief Was Angels Joy, when some of Sinners chief Repented; then Heavens Sons were glad to see Those so near Hell, snatch'd out of Misery. Thou wast the Worlds Eclipse; Thy noble flight Towards the things Eternal, out of sight Of Mortal Eye: was to the Worldlings shame, And strong Conviction. Conscience did them blame, Because their Hearts were plac'd on, what thy Feet Did trample under, as it was most meet; Earths Vanities deserv'd no better treat. Thy Faith did make Thee Mammon's Conquerour Wealth, Pleasure, Honour; even the whole Worlds store Was in thine Eye contemptible and poor. This Age of Infidels might plainly see That Christ did dye, and rose again, in Thee! How wondrous was thy Art (when Hearts did groan Burthen'd with Sin and Sorrow; making moan, Because of Wounds intolerable) to apply That Panacea signi∣fies an niver∣sal Mdicine curing every Malady. Panacea of Iniquity, The Blood of Jesus Christ! Thou didst divide The Word aright, and most exactly guide, That trouble might be true; yet not exceed Due Measure and o'rewhelm: when once the need Of Christ and Grace was seen, sweet was thy Word Reviving, Comfort, Peace, it did afford. The Merciful High Priest did Thee employ, And no man more, to make them reap in joy, Who sow'd in tears. Now surely at thy Grave Tears would become a Deluge; where to have Relief, we should not know, but that we all In thy Divine Discourses practical; Thee living, breathing, speaking still may find, Though dead, This Treasure Thou hast left behid. In Controversies Theological, Thy skill was great; the Adversaries all Of Truth and Thee, thou easily didst confound, And unto Errour give a mortal Wound, A readier Disputant who ever was? through the Schools of Learning pass. Both Ʋniversities may That neither from Thee honour can receive! But though Thou wast so able to defend The Cause of Truth, yet once to see an end Of strife and wrangling, was thy Heart's desire: Strife, thou well knew'st, is a consuming fire. 'Tis thy great glory, in this wrangling Age, hen Pride, Malignity, and bruitish Rage Are all so high, Thou wert a Man of Peace. That sharp Contentions in the Church might cease, Was thy desire in praying, and thy aim In Preaching, Writing, Blessed we proclaim ee from thy Lord's own Mouth.Matth. 5. 9. Thou sparedst none real Faults, on every side, were shew'n: y Wisdom was without Hypocrisy, had not Partiality. Patience in Affliction, and thy Faith, exercise sufficient; yet who saith at either fail'd, would wrong thee. Surely He Whose Arms all things uphold, did sustain thee! To preach, pray, study, praise, though in great pain, s Thou didst, was peculiar: Ah! 'tis vain To seek thy Equal, who does bear the Rod So well, and does so very much for God! But Death has eased Thee of all thy pain, Nor Sin, nor Trouble, shalt thou feel again. The King of Terrours, the last Enemy, Long look't for, was not Terrible to Thee. When Ʋsher, Gataker, and Vines did sleep, Thou saidst Three Nations should consent to weep: Let these three Kingdoms joyn in doleful moan, The Tears of All, Thy Death deserves alone. Saecula vix referent, quem tulit una dies. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside. 1691.
