W1804 99833254 37729
Englands Doubtfull hopes OR, Long lookt for may come at last. Which hath beene expected God grant that we may, Once more in England see a joyfull day. To the tune of, The Princes Birth. If Faith and Truth were joyned hand in hand, and that our people would agree, To feare that God, that made both Sea and Land, our King and Parliament would As one, O then, Brave English men, how would your hearts be fil'd with joys What ever dap, panne my cap, And drink a health to god king Charles, And to his faithfull Lord and Earles, upon this joyfull day. The gallant London Citizens also, when are they see this happy time, Will be at charges this for truth I kno, to make the Cunduits run with wine: Each man would part Even with his heart, and bresse hinselfe in rich array, Much like the spring When Charles our King, Returnes in peace to faire White-hall The Bells shall totter great and small, upon this joyfull day. The country people that have beene opprest and also ready to dispaire, Would all rejoyce and each men make of which the poore should have a share, And never grutch Nor yet think much, Nay, I have heard a many say. This Land to see From misery, And from the Papists deadly hate, They'd spend three quarters of their to see this joyfull day. The Maidens that are like their Lords to would all be jocund at this tide, And to contribute they will not refuse, but lay their doubtfull though is aside, And likewise joyne For Beere and Wine, and sing a merry round delay, To welcome home, Dick, Jack and Tom, That have beene Actors in this cause, Returne to nish Cupids Laws, upon this joyfull day. The second part, to the same tune.
O What an alteration here will be, when these things are accomplished, The Miser of his money will be frée, all will be metamorphosed; The Usurer old, That makes his gold his god, will straight without delay, For very joy, Seeke to destroy His greedy mind, and cast of care, And drinke healths to our Kings welfare, upon this joyfull day. All sort of Tradesment would be over joy'd which now doe heavily complaine, For want of trading have not bin imploy'd, peace would revive their joys againe; O such a change Would seeme most strange, all Subjects will their King ebey, Then should we prove True friends with love, And not seek one anothers woe, London would make a gallant show, upon this joyfull day. What preparations would all people make to entertain his Majesty, And to good government themselves betake, like Subjects true with constancy; O this would please, And yeild much ease, to King and State in every way, With friends or Foes, Ile sing old Rose, And pay what ever is my lot, All hatred should be quite forgot. upon this joyfull day. Nay more our late made widdowes will be glad; though they have lost their husbands deare, The parents which of late young sons have had; will all rejoyce of peace to heare; The peoples griefe, Finding reliefe, theyle wipe all mournefull teares away, The mother mild. That lost her child, In Wars will soone forget the same, And praise Gods everlasting name, to see this joyfull day. Though we are round beset with sorrowes déep, and every man oppressed sore, And peace the whilst that séemed for to sléep, can when she please our joyes restore: And set to rites, King Lords and Kinghts, then would all sorrowes passe away, With Trmpets sound, Joyes would abound, Our London Lads will play their parts, The which will breake the Papists hearts, to see this joyfull day. Whilst life doth last ther's hope, thus I conclude as yet all is not over-run, Our Townes and Cities that have bin subdu'd, there was no way the saine to shun; To save the rest, I thinke tis best. from harme, O therefore let us pray, His Royall Grace, Might take his place, In Parliament to make all even, Then would all Nations under heaven. take notice of this day. Finis. Robert White. Printed at London for Nicholas Gamage on London-Bridge.
