W1935 08246766 41162
Innocency Triumphant OVER Insolency and Outrage OF A Self-Condemn'd APOSTATE: IN ANSWER To Francis Bugg's most Abusive and Scandalous Book, falsly Stiled; New Rome Arraigned, &c. AND In Defence of the Christian Testimony of G. Whitehead and Eleven Witnesses, against the great Defamation of Perjury and Pillory, unjustly cast upon them by the said F. B. His Mischief shall return upon his own Head. London, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard-street, 1693.
INTRODUCTION Our Christian Testimony reassum'd in the Affirmative. TO all Christian, Sober, Im∣partial and Judicious Peo∣ple, to whom these Pre∣sents shall come, Salutation in the Love and Good Will of the on∣ly true God, and his dear Son Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. To prevent Mistake, and remove Misrepresentation in the Matters fol∣lowing, these are sincerely to Testifie and Declare, That, I. We sincerely own, profess and con∣fess Jesus to be the Christ, even the same Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem in Judaea, Matth. 2. suffered Death upon the Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem, was
quickned and raised again by the Power of God, and ascended into Heaven and Glory, according to the Scriptures. II. We give Witness only to this Christ, as being the very Christ, the only Be∣gotten Son of God and confess both his Coming in the Flesh and in the Spirit, according to holy Scripture-Testimony. III. Though this Christ the only be∣gotten Son of God, took Flesh and came of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, and suffered death in the Flesh; yet his Flesh (or Body prepared for him) did not see Corruption; it did not corrupt, but was raised again from the dead; consequently did not perish, nor is his Body of a perishing Nature, but a glorified Body, like unto which, we believe, our's shall be changed and fa∣shioned, Phil. 3. IV. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, namely, the holy Doctrine and divine Precepts therein, were first given by divine Inspiration (as we have confessed unto Authority) and in no wise to be contemn'd, but seri∣ously read, believed and fulfilled, as the
Spirit of the Lord giveth Vnderstand∣ing and Ability, being the Life of the Scripture, and without which the meer Letter and all Preaching therefrom in Man's Will is dead and ineffectual. V. The Protestant Religion considered in the primitive Purity of it (in oppo∣sition to Popery) and all sincere Pro∣testants, who desire a clear and thorow Reformation from all Idolatry and Super∣stition, we have a tender Respect to them, and sincerely desire, that the holy Scri∣pture and the Gospel Ministry, true Wor∣ship, Prayer, Obedience of Faith and Chri∣stianity in its purity may be promoted, grow and increase in Spirit, Life and Power among Christians. VI. The divine Precepts and Doctrine contain'd in the holy Scriptures, we must needs believe to be Holy and Blessed, not only because they proceed from the holy Spirit, but also because they require Holi∣ness and Righteousness in Life and Pra∣ctice, under the several Dispensations of God to Mankind. VII. We own no such Saying, as that the holy Doctrine or divine Precepts,
of Scripture is either Dust, Death or the Serpents Meat, but truly profitable to us by the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit given to us; although the false Prophets Preaching was but compared to the Chaff (or Husk) when they stole even the words of the true, Jer. 23. And Men of corrupt minds, by perverting the holy Scriptures, and Preaching in their earthly Wisdom from the Letter and not from the Spirit of Christ, do bring Darkness and Death over many; and also strengthen the hands of evil Doers, that they may not forsake their Sins, whereby the Serpent, the Enemy of the Soul, is gratified, and many led captivate at his will, when indulg'd and sooth'd up in their sins by such literal and lifeless Preachers, as pervert the holy Scriptures to ther own and others Destruction. VIII. The promised Messiah, of whom the holy Prophets give witness, is the very Christ of God, even that Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin, who in the fulness of time came in the Flesh, and was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, as the Scripture testifies. Yet,
IX. The glorious Body of Christ is not now like ours, nor of an Earthy perishing Nature, but Heavenly, Spiritual and most Glorious, far excelling all Terrestrial Bo∣dies. X. Our Ministers do not Teach, that the Name of Jesus and Christ belong to every Member in the Body (or Church) as amply, as to Christ the Head; but that the Divine Anointing (to which the Name Christ hath relation) virtu∣ally is in some Measure or Degree, af∣forded to every Member of his Body, but not so amply as to Him the Head, (nor for any Member to be called Christ, but a Christian) because Christ received the Anointing, the Holy Spirit, not by Measure, but in Fulness; and because he is the Head of the Body the Church. XI. 'Tis really contrary to our Faith and Principle, to make Christ Jesus him∣self only a Figure, a Vail or Garment, He being the Substance and end of all Figures, Types and Shadows; yet his Flesh was call'd the Vail, Heb. 10. and he took upon him the Form of a Servant,
and was made like unto Men, and was found in the  Shape or Figure of a Man, Phil. 2.6, 7. XII. F. Bugg's pretended Examina∣tion, Tryal, and Conviction of Perjury against G. Whitehead and Eleven Wit∣nesses, and saying that, for the same they are put in the Pillory, We sin∣cerely and solemnly Testifie against it all, as a great Lye, Scandal and Defamation, and as a piece of Mockery, Romantick Forgery, and Fools Tragedy, contrived by the said F. B. to render them Odious and Ridiculous, and that no such Ex∣amination, Tryal, Conviction or Penal∣ty was ever really Acted or Inflicted on G. W. or the Witnesses aforesaid. Writ in the behalf of Truth, and it's Friends concerned, and hereaf∣ter mentioned. By G. Whitehead
I. The Testimony of the Twelve Witnesses against Fr. Bugg's great Abuse, reassum'd and en∣larg'd in the Negative, or Denial of his false Charge and Perversions. WE whose Names are hereunto Subscrib'd, in behalf of our selves, and of the Christian Society and People commonly called Quakers (to whom we belong) do sincerely and solemnly, and in the Fear of God, testifie and declare, That Francis Bugg in his late great Book, stiled, New Rome Vnmask'd, hath most injuriously and falsly Accused and Charg'd the said People and their Ministers, as followeth. I. With denying Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, rose a∣gain and ascended into Heaven, &c. And that they believe and say, That they cannot call Him Christ, Chap. 3. p. 16.
and Epistle to Bereans: P. 2. of his New Rome Unmask'd. II. That the Quakers Prophets give witness to G. Fox INSTEAD of this Christ; that they call Him (G. F.) the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righte∣ousness; and put the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem. Epistle to the Bereans, and p. 81. III. That they (i. e. the Quakers) say, His Body (viz. Christ's Body) was of an earthly perishing Nature. Epist. ibid. Remark on Creed 3. IV. That they say, The HOLY SCRIPTURE is Carnal, Dust, Death, and Killeth, &c. Epist. ibid. on Cr. 6. and p. 78. And to aggravate Mat∣ters against the Quakers, F. B. most un∣justly and maliciously affirms their Creed to be Anti-Christian, Blasphemous, Ido∣latrous, if not a Compound of all Heresies. Epist. ibid. on Cr. 6. V. That if they should Sing, clap their Hands, or leap for Joy, then might all true Protestants wring their Hands, mourn and lament; for they would soon see ALL THINGS turn'd upside down. For in∣stance (saith F. Bugg) down with the Holy Scriptures; down with the Ministers of the Gospel, &c. down with the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the
Apostles Creed, and all that bears the face of true Christianity. [This he unjustly insinuates against the People called Quakers in his New Rome Arraigned, Epist. to Be∣reans, p. 12, 13.] VI. That they (speaking of the Qua∣kers) do not believe the Doctrine and Pre∣cepts contained in the Bible, to be Holy and Blessed. Apol. Introd. p. 7, 8, 9, 14. [He might as well tell us, we must not believe our own Eyes, but put them out and see with his; he would destroy our own Belief, to impose false Creeds on us.] VII. That THESE Quakers, who pre∣tend to own the PRECEPTS and DO∣CTRINE of the Bible to be Holy and Blessed, yet say, 'tis Dust and Death, the Serpents meats, &. Apol. Introd. p. 18. [We do not believe any of these Quakers ever so said of the Precepts and Doctrine, nor do they own any such saying] VIII. That this same Jesus (who was born of the Virgin, this Messiah or Son of God) the Quakers say, they cannot call Christ. New Rome Arraign'd, p. 26. [But where do we thus say of this Messiah? F. B. falsly makes his own Con∣sequence our Saying.] IX. That they teach, That the Body of Christ is like ours, of an earthly perishing Nature. Ibid. p. 30. [Where do we
teach that Christ's Body is so? We deny it.] X. That the Quakers teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belong to every Member in the Body, as amply as to Christ the Head. Ibid. p. 47. [Where proves he as amply?] XI. That the Quakers would make Christ only a Figure, a Vail, a Garment, who is the Substance of all Figures (imply'd by way of Question Ibid. p. 58.) [Where proves he only a Figure? &c.] And now seeing F. B. pretends plain Matter of Fact against us, and saith, viz. That to My Knowledge I have not set down one Line or Word as their's, which is not their's, p. 22. And also saith, I love to keep to Matter of Fact, p. 59. Ibid. There∣fore we plead Not Guilty, both to the Manner and Form of these his Charges (or Indictment) and to Matter of Fact, as in Words laid down by him; and in the holy Fear of Almighty God, and in behalf of the said Christian Society and People, declare and testifie, That all these his re∣cited Accusations, and all other of the same kind, or naturally depending thereupon, are utterly false, wicked and malicious; and never so believed, nor (in words) affirmed or intended by us, nor as in the same words charg'd against us; but expresly
contrary to our Christian perswasion, Prin∣ciple, Profession and Testimony (as before re-assumed in the Affirmative) as we also sincerely believe, they are contrary to the Principle, Intentions, meaning and Professi∣on of our Friends and Ministers of Jesus Christ in Communion with us. XII. And further, that the said F. Bugg (being pufft up with Pride, Self-conceit, deadly Malice and abominable Outrage, scorn and derision against the peaceable peo∣ple called Quakers, and to the reproach of Religion and Christianity) hath most mali∣ciously invented, fram'd and forg'd a ficti∣tious Judicature, an Extra—Judicial and Mock—Court or Tragedy, thereby notori∣ously defaming and Scandalising Peaceable Subjects, not only G. Whitehead, but Eleven Witnesses, who Signed the aforesaid Te∣stimony, who (he falsly saith) are examined, try'd and convicted of Perjury, and for the same put into the Pillory, as in his Title-page. And to make a flourish upon such his Scandalous Forgery and Romance, he hath erected the Form or Figure of a Pil∣lory, and twelve Pictures in it, with the first Letters of their Names over ther Heads, and the word Perjury set over them in the middle; which is all but an Idle ficti∣ous Romantick Tragedy of his own mali∣cious inventing and framing; never such a thing having been in reality.
He proceeds to his Ridiculous Tryal and Ex∣amination as followeth, viz. F. Bugg, come Tho. Green, what canst thou say for thy self? How came it to Pass that G. W. drew you into this snare? You cannot but know that he hath as little This is a deceitful and false Insinuation, I have a true love and respect to them both, and a real honour to the very Memory of W. D. If he means William Dewsbury. Love for you as he had for W. D. who when a false Report was once raised on him (as there have been of others) he and A. P. laughed I positively deny this Story against A. P. and my self, as a base lying Story, and de∣mand of Bugg to pro∣duce his Author for it. and rejoyc'd at it, you must needs also know, That when W. D. came to London, it was frequent with G.W. to go I know in my own Conscience these to be lying Stories; and a∣gain, Challenge Bugg to bring out his Author for them. out of Town he was obser∣ved to avoid his com∣pany; and do you think that he hath more Love for you J. C. This also is as de∣ceitful and false an In∣sinuation as the first, and I do not believe that either T. G. or J. C. (if he means John Cook) do question my love to them. By me, George Whitehead. and others of your frame and temper than he had for W. D. I tell you nay.
Tho Green. I know George Whitehead as well as thee, he never could draw me in before, and if thou wilt excuse me now, I hope it will be a warning to me never to commit the like Errour. F. Bugg, well Thomas, I cannot but dis∣charge you, and you are discharged; go in peace, and do no more so, least a worse thing come upon you. F. Bugg, come James Park, thou dry Stick, thou formal insignificant Preacher; who not only imitates G▪ W. in his preach∣ing, but follows him in his lying; what canst thou say, why Sentence of Perjury may not be pronounced against you? come, do not hang down your Head, but look uP like a Man, and let me hear what you can say for your self. James Park, I am a lover of the Women's Meetings, for when I was robb'd, I felt benefit of them: I will stand by G.W. what he is, I am; what he says, I will avouch; what he writes, I will Subscribe; whither he goes, I will go; I will stand by G. W. in all things what ever I suffer. F. Bugg, come Benjamin Antrobus, what sayest thou for thy self, why Sentence of Perjury should not be pronounced a∣gainst thee? Come stand up, speak like a Man, answer for thy self.
Benjamin Antrobus, I once committed a fault about taking up my Freedom, and they constrained me to acknowledge my trans∣gression against their Orders, or else I had lost a good prize, I am now their Servant. If they write, I dare not but subscribe, what ever I suffer, do as thou wilt. F. Bugg, come Samuel Waldenfield, thou seeming Zealot, and John Vaughton, and John Butcher, Gilbert Laity, Theodore Eccleston, Richard Needham, Francis Ette∣ridge, John Bowater, William Robinson, &c. what can you say, why Sentence of Perjury should not be pronounced against you up∣on your own proposals to Authority? S. W. And the rest, we are like Chil∣dren sitting in the Market, if G. W. Pipe we Dance; if he write a Certificate, whe∣ther true or false, we Subscribe; and now ccording to the old Proverb, the Blind leads the Blind, until we are fallen into the Ditch of Error and Perjury together, and We are fallen into a sad Dilemma, and none will help Us, nor none will pitty Us. F. Bugg, Come G. W. thou old Make-bate and Cunning Sophister, what canst thou say for thy self and thy Proselites, who write after thy Copy? After other Fictions, and Bugg's pretend∣ing to sum up the Evidence, and to speak both to matter of Fact, and matter of
Law to his pretended Jury; he feigns his Jury to bring us in Guilty. Thus, viz. Jury, Guilty of the Matter charged, and all things relating thereunto, or depending there∣upon, and that of PERJVRY. Against all which pretended Proceeding, Trial and Examination invented and feign∣ed by F. Bugg, we solemnly and sincerely testifie, as both a wicked, false and mali∣cious Forgery, to defame and scandalize both our Christian and Civil Reputation, and against the said F. B. as an unjust Judge, false Accuser and false Witness; and that his Proceeding, Trial and Judicature are both Illegal, Presumptuous and Arbitrary. Signed in behalf of our selves, and the rest of our Friends concern'd. George Whitehead, Gilb. Latey, John Bowater, John Butcher. Rich. Needham, William Robinson: I do further solemnly and in good Con∣science Testifie and Declare, That I find no cause in the least to retract or receed from our Negative Testimony before re∣cited against Fra. Bugg's Perversions, and
his grosly Misrepresenting us about Jesus Christ and the Holy Scripture; and for which our Testimony, F. B. hath most unjustly rendred us Perjured Persons. Hereunto I subscribe, G. Whitehead. II. The aforesaid Testimony Vin∣dicated against Fr. Bugg his gross Abuses and foul Perver∣sions herein examined. BY the way 'tis to be noted, That in this mock Tryal and Court of Judica∣ture, presumptuously Erected and Feigned by Fr. Bugg. He makes himself both Judge, Accuser, Witness and Jury, and also forges the Quakers Answers (without ta∣king the least Notice of our own proper Answers to his Objections in our Books, only impertinently cites three or four Lines out of G. W.'s Charitable Essay for his An∣swer, p. 7. Though in none of these In∣stances cited against us, can we find those words as charged by him, viz. That the
Quakers say, The Holy Scripture is Car∣nal, Dust, Death and Killeth, &c. or that they deny Jesus to be The Christ, &c. And 'tis evident, That F. B. is not able to make Replication or Answer to our single sheet, Intituled, A Charitable Essay. Nor to clear himself from the Arguments and Inversions upon him therein, concern∣ing his feigned Creed and false Charges against the Quakers, but gives the greatest part of that Sheet (and the most substantial Matters that are in it to clear us) the go by; so it remains against him unrefuted. His pretended Evidence, That we deny Christ Jesus, &c. and that we cannot call Him Christ, is from Isaac Pennington's Que∣stions to Professors, wherein he calls the Body or Flesh (which the Son of God took upon him) the Vail, &c. And what then? Does this prove we deny Christ Jesus, that was born of the Virgin? Did not the A∣postle say, he consecrated a new and living way through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh? Heb. 10.20. Did the Apostle herein deny Jesus to be Christ? No sure. But what if I. P. said, he could not call the bodily Garment or Vail Christ? (that is) the entire Christ; or the Body (which was prepared for him) chiefly, and in the first place, Christ; as he Explains his own
words. Does this deny Him (the Son of God) to be Christ? Surely no. Is the masculine [Him] properly relative to the Neuter [Body] distinct from the Soul? I do not think that to be proper (or Grammatical) Sence. The word [It] is relative to Body, but [Him] to our Lord Jesus Christ himself. For Joseph went unto Pilate, and asked the Body of Jesus, and took It down, and wrapped It in a Linnen Cloath and laid It in a Tomb, Luke 23.52, 53. Which is also called the Body of the Lord Jesus, Chap. 24.3. Yet the entire Messiah or Christ of God, is not to be divided in Body or Soul. And Isaac Pennington did not say he could not call Him Christ, who was both God and Man, Immannuel and the Man Christ Jesus the Messiah. First, His Charge; That the Quakers believe and say, They cannot call Him Christ that was born of the Virgin. I can∣not find these words either as believed or said by the Quakers in any of Bugg's Quo∣tations, either out of Is. Pennington's Questions, or any other; and therefore I desire him in his next, to shew me ex∣presly, where the Quakers say they cannot call Him Christ, that was born of the Virgin, &c. if he can, I can as expresly deny that saying; for I have told him
the contrary in my Charitable Essay. Secondly, I cannot find (nor believe) that the Quakers call Geo. Fox the Branch, the Star, the Sun of Righteousness. In the In∣stance quoted by F. Bugg, p. 34. I find not G. Fox mentioned in that Cita∣tion; but instead thereof F. Bugg questi∣ons it in the Margin thus; viz. Pray who do you account this Branch, if not G. Fox? I say, who else did you assign these Titles to? Was it to G, FOX, or the Light in him? Pray distinguish in your next. Thus he now questions that which before he has possitively charged over and over. Thus instead of Proof, he meerly beggs the Question, and so whirles about begging Questions; and not only so, but (like an unjust Judge) has condemn'd us as perjur'd Persons, yea, even a pack of false Witnesses and perjur'd Persons for denying his Charge, p. 33. And this is not all, but he has condemn'd us to the Pillory too with his ridiculous Figure thereof, in his Epistle to the Bereans (as before) But now, upon Tryal and Enquiry, he is fain to question Matters of Fact, after his Condemnation and such his Execution. Thus preposterous is this unjust Judge in his arbitrary Proceedings, and scandalous Treatment against us. And his Conse∣quence of the Quakers giving Witness to
G. Fox Instead of Christ follows not from such his begging Questions, his lame De∣fective and false Evidence; and we are sure it's contrary to our Faith and Testimony— For our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, of whom the Holy Scriptures Te∣stifie, who is the Branch, the Morning Star, the Sun of Righteousness, and hath spiritually risen both in the North, South, East and West of England, and other Parts, even in the Hearts and Souls of many Thousands, and G. F. and many others on∣ly his Servants and Ministers. F. Bugg's other consequence, That they (i. e. Quakers) put the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem. 'Tis also a notorious falshood deduced from his other falshoods, which is but adding one Lie to another. Thirdly, I neither do believe, nor can find, that the Quakers say, Christ's Body, either was, or is, of an earthy perishing Na∣ture (as F. B. hath frequently charged it upon Isaac Pennington, and consequently up∣on the Quakers Ministers, for his sake, but that the Flesh and Blood of our Na∣ture (and as 'tis in us) is of an Earthly pe∣rishing Nature, whereas Christs Flesh saw no Corruption, it did not Corrupt; Psa. 16.10. Act. 2.31 and 13.37. And therefore it were a very great Ignorance
and Absurdity for any to say, that his Bo∣dy (which is chang'd and glorified) is of an Earthy and perishing Nature, he being Ascended into Glory. This is answer'd in our Charitable Essay, p. 4. and Unrefu∣ted by F. B. And I still charge it upon him as a Lie, that the Quakers say Christ's Body, either was, or now is, of a perishing Nature. Fourthly, I do not find in F. Bugg's In∣stances and Quotations, nor yet in any of our Friends Books, that the Quakers say, The Holy Scripture is either Carnal, Dust, Death, or killeth, &c. (These are not our Words, he wrongs us in Fact) but that the Letter killeth, and is dead. And did not the Holy Apostle say, The Letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth Life? And did he not speak of the Ministration of Death Written? 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. Yet he did not contemn, but own the Holy Scriptures, as able to make the Man of God Wise unto Salvation through Faith in Christ, 2 Tim. 3.15, 16. In the Book Cited by F. B. News out of the North, p. 14. the Words he chief∣ly picks out, and Objects, are, viz. Their Gospel is dust [it's not the Gospel] Mathew, Mark, Luke and John, which is the Letter [not their Doctrine, but the meer Letter or Writing.] The Words should rather be thus Transposed, viz. Their Gospel is dust,
who put the Letter (or four Books of Mathew, Mark, Luke and John) for the Gospel, with∣out distinction. Such also have put the Letter or Writings for the Light, and the Letter for the Word, and for the Gospel, yea for Eternal Life, consequently for Christ, &c. Some clapping hands upon the Book, saying, This Book is the Word of God, the Gospel, you must have Eternal Life here, such Life-less Preachers we have often met withal. Though it's not my place Litterally to excuse these Expressions as laid down be∣fore, yet I cannot take this Instance for any real Proof or clear Evidence of matter of Fact as charged, viz. That the Quakers say, the Holy Scripture is Carnal Dust, Death, &c. as he chargeth Us; yet if F. B. can fairly prove that any of Us have expresly said, or said That the Gospel-Doctrine contain∣ed in the four Books of Mathew, Mark, Luke and John is Dust, or but the Letter that killeth. We do, and shall positively disown it: This I fairly proffer him: However, the said Author's intention and meaning ought justly and charitably to be consider∣ed and compared with some other passages in the said Treatise which I take to be thus, viz. by Their Gospel is Dust, i. e. the false Ministers Preaching their own con∣ceivings and immaginations on Scripture for
Gospel, and by Matthew, Mark▪ Luke and John being the Letter, as not meant either of those holy Men or their Evan∣gelical Doctrine, but to the meer Letter or Writing in the four Books abstractly consi∣dered as in Paper and Ink; and false Ministers dead Preaching and Commenting thereupon, without the Spirit, Life or Power of Christ Jesus; like as the false Prophets, who though they stole the true Prophets Words, yet their Preaching was compared but to the Chaff (or Husk, &c.) Jer. 23.28, 30. Accordingly the same Treatise before quo∣ted the Reflects on these Hipocrites, Proud, Covetous and Idolatrous Priests, who Preach their own Words, Imagi∣nations and Conceivings, painting them∣selves with the Words of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; and teach People, They shall never overcome their Sins in this Life, calling such Preaching the Gospel. This is their Gospel in∣tended before (News out of the North, p. 12, 13, 14.) yet falsely pretend Mat∣thew, Mark, Luke and John to be their Gospel. There are many substantial living Truths and divine Openings declared and testified in that Treatise, which no doubt proceed∣ed from a Divine Motion. And suppo∣sing some accidental Mistakes and Mistrans∣sposing
of Words, and Defects in Gram∣mar and Syntax (in the manner of word∣ing) have happened, either in Printing, Transcribing or otherwise, is it just to charge our Principle, or the Author's Intention, therewith. The Scriptures themselves have not been wholly free from vain Carpers and Caviller; our Adversary when he has de∣clared positively, That he is not endued with that Spirit the Holy Apostles bad, and that his Reasons against us must needs be de∣fective. Yet now we must take his mean∣ing, that he has it not by way of Eminency as they had, Apol. p. 2. Yet pretends the Assistance of God's holy Spirit, p. 46. Now let's but have the same Liberty to construe our Friends Words as he takes here for his own, and we shall make them look far better then he does, no doubt. Concerning G. F's. respect to the Holy Scriptures, I further add, That 'tis well known, it was his frequent and publick Testimony; and in his Books also, That Holy Men of God gave them forth from the holy Spirit; and that they spake and prophesied as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and that the Scriptures were thus given forth to be Read, Be∣lieved and Fulfilled.
To return, though it be improper to say, the four Evangelists are but the Let∣ter, because they were holy Men who Preached the Gospel; and their Testimo∣nies and Declarations contain evangelical and lasting Truths as declared; yet the four Books, as made up of Paper and li∣teral Characters, will decay, wear out and turn to Dust, as many good Bibles have done; as in my Just Enquiry is more fully answered, with due respect to the holy Scriptures; to wit, the Holy Doctrines and divine Precepts thereof (and to the Books also) as F. Bugg also confesses, viz. G. W. says, Though he does not ascribe Holiness to the Paper and Ink or dead Characters; no more do I, nor do I know any body does; but (says George) to the holy Doctrine, and blessed Precepts therein contained. which therefore are called holy Scriptures: Very well; here we agree, if G. W. &c. speak as they mean, Apol. Introd. p. 6. [Thus far F. B,] Pray observe, then both we and he agree in this, not to ascribe Holiness to the Paper and Ink or dead Characters, but to the holy Doctrine and blessed Precepts therein contained. How now F. B. where art thou now with thy Charge and Condemnation of Perjury and Pillory upon us? Thou hast fairly given
away thy Cause, and discharged us whom thou hadst unjustly Condemned. Thy Charge is now more remote from Proof than ever it seemed: Therefore I challenge thee to prove that we say, The holy Scripture, namely, the holy Doctrine and blessed Precepts, are either Carnal, Dust, Death, Killing, &c. We still deny thy Charge herein as false and slanderous, considering the Nature and Import of it, and thou dost but clamour and foam out thy own Shame, in crying out of Impu∣dence, and such a notorious Lye, as the very Heathens would abhor; and all this for our denying thy notorious Lye, in charging us with saying that which we never said nor believed, viz. That the holy Scripture, namely, the holy Doctrine, &c. is Carnal, Dust, &c. And thy pretended Ten Rea∣sons to prove thy other false Charge, That we do not believe the Doctrine and Precepts contained in the Bible, are Holy and Blessed: They are so shallow and imper∣tinent Reiterations, and begging the Que∣stion, (as also clamorous) that they are not worth answering, the substance being already answered. Only to thy first pretended Reason: There is no proof, that by the Letter any of our Friends cited, meant the Doctrine and divine Precepts contained in the Bible,
nor that the Ministers of the Letter only were true living Ministers of the Word of the Gospel, or of Christ Jesus, who is the Word of God. Though some Priests in the North, in and before the Year 1653, when those Books, News out of the North, and Saul's Errand, &c. were Printed, were so ignorant, as to call the Bible, namely, the Books made up of Paper, and Ink, and literal Characters, the Word and the Gospel: Wherein they were oppos'd, Christ being the Word, and the Gospel the Power of God which endures for ever, which the Books and Letters or Characters cannot. Of his charging these Quakers who pre∣tend plainly to own the Precepts and Do∣ctrine of the Bible to be Holy and Blessed; yet, that in other Books they say, 'Tis Dust and Death, the Serpents meat, &c. and that to preach out of them, is Conjura∣tion, Apol. Introd. p. 18. I want still plain Proof of Matter of Fact herein, that we, who are these Quakers (so called) say, The holy and blessed Doctrine, &c. is Dust, Death, &c. Let him produce plain Proof that we say so, or else be ashamed of this his horrid reiterated Slander. Whereas Is. Pennington did in his Que∣stions, take it for granted, that the Names and Titles Jesus and Christ, chiefly and in
the first place, belong not to the Body which he took, but to him who took the Body, namely, to Him the Son of God, who said, A Body hast thou prepared me. Now, F. B. grants, viz. I own the Son of God was before the Incarnation; then I ask, if he was not the Anointed of God, and a Saviour before his Incarnation? If he was, then he was Christ before, consquently, the name Christ in the first place belonged to Him, who took Flesh, and not chiefly, nor in the first place to the Body which he took on him; tho his Words chiefly and in the first place im∣ply that the Titles Jesus and Christ did also belong to the Body, when he took it upon him, and sometime given to it. Again, F.B. grants, That the names Jesus and Christ, are given to the Word, the Son of God af∣ter he took a Body, and so neither to the Body which he took, nor to him, before he took the Body, p. 4. Apol. Introd. But I ask, was Jesus Christ the Word, and Son of God, be∣fore he took the Body? If he was, did not both the Tiles of Saviour and Anointed belong unto him, as being the Son of God? What does this Man quarrel at? What against I. P. for implying that the names Jesus and Christ do not chiefly and in the first place belong to the Body, but to him that took it? Is this such a great Error of the Quakers? And must they be Prosecu∣ted
for Perjury and unto the Pillory for testifying against F. B. for his falsly charg∣ing us with denying Christ Jesus, who was Born of the Virgin Mary? &c. O what sad Envy and Confusion is this, poor dark Back∣slider run into! Who also grants, That there needed not many Arguments to prove, what he never denyed; whereas the Argu∣ments were to prove both, that Jesus Christ was before he took the Body of Flesh, and that the names chiefly and in the first place belonged to him that took the Body, yet the Body not denied them, Charitable Essay, p. 3, 4. Object. But further, he inveighs against Isaac Pennington, viz. Isaac Pennington's Words are, He took the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of a perishing Nature: Now if he took ours, and ours be of a perish∣ing Nature, Ergo, his was perishing, or it was not of our's, so that G. W's Evasion will not do. Ibid. p 4. Here F. Bugg, by his kind of Logick, has run himself into the same Snare and Error (as he deems it) which he has unduly charged Isaac Pennington withal, namely, That if Christ took upon him the Flesh and Blood of our Natures, and our's be Perishing, Ergo, his was perishing; but he took our's, he cannot deny, he took part of the same Flesh and Blood the Children had, Heb. 2.
14. Then by F. B's. own, Ergo, his must needs be of a perishing Nature, unless he will whirl about, and unsay what he has said, namely, that it was not of our Na∣ture which Christ took upon him: And then he must deny him to be of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh. But I deny F. B's Argument in this case, as neither very good Logick, nor true in its self; I deny his Ergo: Though the Flesh of our Nature be perishing, as in us, yet it was not perishing as assumed by him (Christ,) his Flesh, his Body, which he took upon him, saw no corruption, it did not Corrupt; consequently was not perish∣ing, much less is it now, his Body being changed into a Heavenly, Spiritual and Glorified State; and therefore called, his Glorious Body, like unto which our low bo∣dy shall be changed and fashioned, Phil. 2.21. The Premises considered, we do solemn∣ly, and in the holy fear of God, both te∣stifie against F. Bugg's precedent Argu∣ment, viz. 1. That because Christ took up∣on him the flesh and blood of our Nature. therefore his was perishing. 2. Also against his false Affirmation and Testimony against us, p. 25. viz. And thereupon I do affirm and testifie, and charge it upon them in the pre∣sence of God, Angels and Men, that they
disown and deny Jesus Christ, whom God hath ordained to be Salvation to the ends of the Earth, and a propitiatory, Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World to be CHRIST. [Thus far F. B.] But this we utterly deny, and sincerely testifie against, as a∣bominably false and presumptuous, as well as Anti-Christian in it self. And to his saying, the names Jesus and Christ, are given to the Mediator, &c. [True, but what follows?] Therefore, quoth F. B. 'Tis no absurdity to say, It was not Jesus Christ for whom the Body was prepared; It was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh, but the Word, Joh. 1.1. Apol. In∣trod. p. 3. And yet he has confessed, it was the Son of God that took the Body, p. 4. What confusion and Self-contradiction does the Man blindly run into? And how contrary to the Apostle John's Testimony is his Doctrin herein. See 1 Joh. 4.2, 3. Every Spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God, and every Spirit which confesseth not, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God; but this is the Spirit of Anti-Christ. What Spirit is this in our Adversary, which saith, It was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh, who was it then? It was the Word the Son of God; as if Jesus Christ were neither
the Word, nor the Son of God: O horrible Anti-Christianism! And contrary also to that Martyr Dr. Barnes his Confession, as cited by F. Bugg himself, p. 45. viz. I believe, that without Man's will or power, Christ Jesus was Concei∣ved by the Holy Ghost, and took Flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary, Acts, and Mon. p. 610. Now, if Jesus Christ took Flesh of the bles∣sed Virgin Mary, then it was Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh: But it was Jesus Christ that took Flesh; Therefore 'twas Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh; con∣sequently F. Bugg's Doctrine, That is was not Jesus Christ that came in the Flesh, is Anti-Christian, Anti-Apostolical and con∣tradictory to the said Martyr's Do∣ctrine. Note. His accusing us, That we own no other Christ than He that appeared in the body, Introd. p. 5. 'Tis well he grants we own that Christ, what other Christ would he have us own? For his Light, Spirit, Heavenly Treasure,, that we have in our earthen Vessels, is neither any divi∣ding of Christ, nor any other Christ, but of the same Christ Jesus who came in the Flesh, was born of the Virgin Mary, &c. and spiritually manifested, and partaken of in his Saints (in Measure) by his Grace and good Spirit, where the Spirit of Christ is, there is Christ.
I observe, that much of F. B's former Book is reprinted in this; at which rate 'tis an easie matter to make Books, to print and reprint the same things over and over again; and when Answered (as in my Charitable Essay) instead of Replicati∣on, to impose the same things refuted, over and over again: And this is F. B's man∣ner of troubling the World with his Im∣pertinent Scribbles, and Scandalous Books, tending to divide and make discord, Sedi∣tion and Strife among the People; as may be easily made appear, that the very Na∣ture and Tendency of them is Seditious, to cause Discord, most falsly to render the People commonly called Quakers Obnoxi∣ous, and so much Popish as Rome's Sister▪ New Rome, Babylon the Whore, a Cage of unclean Birds, among whom he has cros∣wise plac'd, the names of many ho∣nest Men (far more Righteous and clean than himself) in the Figure or Form of a Cage, p. 50. maliciously invented by him (as his Pillory is) to Reproach and Scan∣dalize Men, fearing God, and of good Repute and Esteem in their day; as G. Fox, John Audland, Francis Howgil, Samuel Fisher, Edward Burroughs, Jo. Blaykling, Isaac Pennington, Richard Hubberthorn, Stephen Crisp, William Gibson, John White∣head and others, having in all to the num∣ber
of Thirty Four Persons names in his Cage. Thus he can Pillory, Stage and Cage-Men at his pleasure to defame and scanda∣lize them! His Accusation, that the Quakers insinu∣ate in a Book, called, The Quakers Refuge, That what the true Prophets spake, was false; and what the false Prophets spake was true, p. 47. We disown these Expressions as laid down; and I think they are not duly In∣ferr'd from the said Book; questioning, Whether some Words in theirs were not spoken by Wicked Men, some by Wise Men, ill applied; some by good Men ill Expressed; some by false Prophets, and yet true; some by true Prophets, and yet false (or rather mistakes) yet this questioned but of some words in Scripture, not all, as what the true or false Prophets spake, as he states it in his New Rome Vnmask'd, p. 23. Of the false Ministry (Introd. p. 9.) He is offended at some of our Friends former∣ly calling them The Priests of the World, Conjurers, raising dead Doctrines out of the Letter, Theives, Robbers, Anti-Christs, ra∣vening Woolves, greedy Doggs, &c. (Introd. p. 9.) But who were these names given to? Not to all other Ministers in general, that are not of us, or not in outward So∣ciety with us: Who to then? F. B. An∣swers They (i. e. Quakers) give them
generally to all the false Ministry, Apol. In∣trod. p. 10. And why is he offended then? Have our Friends wrong'd the false Mini∣stry therein? What need he be so much concern'd for the false Ministry? But he Objects, They account none true Ministers but themselves, which is not true: There were sincere and true Ministers under se∣veral Dispensations, as among the Puritans, Protestant Martyrs and others, according to what the Lord had made known to them: And there are divers true in Words, who have a Zeal of God in some measure; but too many who Preach true and good words, live bad lives. But F. B. it seems is rather willing to rake up the Characters given of the false Ministry against us, than to answer what he calls our false Glosses, Evasions, and subtil Turnings (Ibid. p. 12.) which ap∣pears to be his Evasion and Shuffle, when he cannot answer my Arguments, but is put to a Ne plus ultra; then he rambles, rakes up, picks, and reiterates Stories, scraps and broken Sentences, and pieces out of old Books, and so patches up his Dirty and Scurrilous Books against us, and then gives us all the ill names he can, and cries out against us as New Rome, Impu∣dence, Impudent Impostors, Cowards, cunning Sophisters, Jugglings, Legerdemean, a pack of
false Witnesses and Perjur'd Persons: And saith, Surely Simon Magus never exceeded these Impostors, Act. 8. (Introd. p. 11.15.18.47.) Thus his great Outrage and Impla∣cable Malice appears. And like a furious Incendiary, to blow up the Fire of Contention and Persecution again, and to incense the Government and Magistrates against us; he does not only call us New Rome, Rome's Sister, compa∣ring us with the Papists, as coming, not one jot behind them, but harmonising with them (Ep. Ded. p. 3.4.) and most unjustly accu∣sing the Quakers with condemning the Pro∣testant Religion in general terms (Ibid.) and with accounting Magistracy a cumber∣some Tree, that must be cut down, and our Principles he maliciously accuseth, as both Anti-Magistratical and Anti-Monarchical, Ep. to Bereans, p. 12, 13. How much re∣sembling an Incendiary and Seditious Wri∣ter hath our Apostate Adversary appear∣ed in these Invectives against a peaceable People fearing God, and by his Divine Pro∣vidence recogniz'd by the Government as Protestants also? Though this Incendiary will needs have us Papists. But pray does he therein befriend the Protestant interest, or Government either? By thus magnifying or falsly Greatening the Popish Interest, as in (and by) a Peo∣ple
who are wholly averse to Popery: Let the wisest in Heart, and impartial Judge, the Nature and tendency of this Adversa∣ries work of Division and Discord, and whether it will excuse him therein to shel∣ter and shroud himself in the Church of England, and to assume the Testimonies of Protestant Martyrs and Authors for his co∣ver and Authority. Also he might have been so discreet, as not to question, nor upbraid us about, paying Ten Pounds, &c. towards carrying on a Vigorous War against the French King, because scrupling to pay 2d. or 4d. towards the Militia-Arms, accu∣sing us with deluding the World (p. 65. and 49.) He might in prudence have considered, how far this may affect the Government, under which we live, and Charitably have excused those, who conscientiously scrupling active∣ly to raise or bear Arms, yet in a sense, quietly pay the penalty by patiently suffer∣ing distress. Christ and his Servants of old would not Fight, yet payed Tribute to Caesar. Because of our Solemnly declaring to the King and Parliament, that we believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testa∣ment were given forth by Divine Inspira∣tion, and that they have accepted this our Declaration. F. Bugg thus grosly reflects upon us, viz. The more shame for you to be
so deceitful, to give in a Testimony so contra∣ry to your belief, p. 40. further, That this we pretended to the Parliament to serve a Turn, p. 24. Pray observe the horrid Envy and Inso∣lency of this Incendiary herein, and not only the reproach he casts upon us, but what reflection upon the Civil Government? as if the same were deceived and cheated by us, and thereupon granted us our Liber∣ty. O horrible, Mischievous and deadly Malice! What, will nothing less satiate his Fury, but our Destruction by Persecution again? Oh! O thou Backslider and malici∣ous Man, the Lord rebuke thy envious Spi∣rit, thy deadly Hatred and Outrage! And he will signally rebuke thee, I doubt not. And moreover, thou F. B. hast no great cause to boast, nor thy Priests to glory in thy Conversion to the Church of England, from the People called Quakers, with whom thou wast conversant for twenty five Years (as thou pretendest,) if such thy Conversi∣on was a being Sold into Aegypt, as thou hast granted in thy Pamphlet, Stiled, The Qua∣kers detected, p. 8. by thy applying to thy self Joseph's words, Gen. 50.20. and Chap. 45.5. on which thou sayest, thou canst say as Joseph did to his Brethren, viz. But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God
meant it unto good. Now, therefore be not grieved, nor angry with your selves, that you Sold me hither. Didst not think this Applicable to thy Condition? If thou didst, then where art thou now, but in Aegypt? But we Sold thee not thither; thou art gone down into Aegypt for help, and there∣fore art not a Joseph, who trusted in, and feared the living God. And woe is to them, that go down into Aegypt for help! Art not thou rather like Judas, turn'd to the Priests to betray and persecute the Innocent, and to gratifie them that hate us, with thy refuge of Lies and Calumnies? Even against Inno∣cent People, unto whose Principle, Foun∣dation, Doctrine, Ministry, Faith, Love, Unity, Spiritual Testimony (and as being the Church of Christ Jesus) Thou hast made large and solemn Confession, both some∣time before thou quite left us (in thy Book De Christina Libertate, Printed 1682 Chap. 1. p. 24, 25, 26, 27, &c.) as also in thy said Quakers Detected, Printed in the Year 1686. about two Years after thy Conformi∣ty to the Church of England; wherein thou hast given large Testimony to the Truth of our Principle, and high Commendations of the People called Quakers, their Doctrine and Ministry, as in the beginning, even as being a Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a Visitation to Mankind; together with
their Christian Society, love unfeigned, and blessed Estate for many Years, and how God blessed their Meetings with the comfortable Enjoyments of his Presence; as may be seen more at large in the said Quakers Detected. Insomuch, that thy Self-condemned Back-sliding, Apostacy and Envy against God's People, and Heritage is the more apparent in thy now exclaiming against us for dan∣gerous Errors, pernicious Principles, Blasphe∣mies, Heresies, Impostures, and saying, thou wast more than 25 Years a Member of their Society (meaning the Quakers) being carried away with their Dissimulation, see Title Page of thy New Rome Arraigned; thus self condemn'd, and self-contradictory thou art. And I cannot rationally Perceive; how F. B. can warrantably excuse himself, by pretending the Approbation of his Minister Isaac Archer for the Substance of his Book, or the Approbation of another Divine of the Church of England, (as he calls them) and of Letters, both from Conforming and Non-Conforming Ministers, which he pretends, brevity constrains him not to recite: Epist. to Bereans, p. 12. 1. As to Isaac Archer's Approbation, F. B. saith, he recites only an Abridgment thereof, viz. I do own the substance of this Book, as a defence of those Eternal Truths,
by which I hope for Salvation, &c. But why did not F. Bugg recite the whole? Was he so tied up to brevity in this concern, that he al∣lowed his Teacher no more room in a Book of ten or eleven Sheets? But it was very warily done of Isaac Archer to own the substance of F. B's Book, that is so much of it, as he esteems to be in defence of those Eternal Truths, by which he hopes to be Saved; that is, so much of it, as is Scriptural, in behalf of Jesus Christ. But this will not Excuse nor Warrant those circumstantial passages of F. B's, in his Book, which consists of Perversions, Rai∣lery and false Accusions, and of his Errors justly Inverted upon him, in my Charitable Essay. 2. That Divine of the Church of England (so called) who gave his Approbation of F. B's Book, as a most acceptable peice of Ser∣vice to his Country, in unvailing the falshoods, errors and hippocrisies of the Quakers, as he saith; pray; what is his name? Why does not he appear, and make proof of F. B's malicious confused Work against the Qua∣kers? He may be ashamed of such his Ap∣probation, if any such pretended Divine did give such Approbation. 3. And if F. B. has Letters by him of the same Import, both from Conforming and Non-Conforming Ministers, what are
their names, and why do not they appear? I am perswaded, many of their Brethren would be greatly ashamed of such their Ap∣probation upon serious perusal of F. Bugg's bitter Invectives, and our Answers, and see that all such Approbations will be of no Reputation or Honour, either to Conform∣ing or Non-conforming Ministers. As to Bugg's comparing the People called Quakers, with the Papists, as he has fre∣quently done, he has fairly contradicted himself therein, by quoting W. P's Caveat against Popery, saying, Let them renounce their Errors, &c. And what follows, but, Therefore the People called Quakers are no Papists, according to F. B's way of argu∣ing; concluding all by one. But many o∣thers of our Friends, have sincerely testi∣fied against Popery, Superstition and Ido∣latry, both in the root and branch, and for the Protestant Religion, considered in the purity of it; and therefore free from excu∣sing Idolatry, as falsly charged on their Teachers, in his third charge, p. 23.44. which hath been refuted, both in some o∣ther answers to this false Accuser, as also in our Answer to the Athenians (so called) and more particularly in my Just Inquiry into the Libeller's abuse from p. 17. to p. 30. concerning the pretended Letters of John Audland and Jos. Coale.
Now Bugg acknowledges himself to have a Hand in, and to own the Composing the Book (he should have said Scandalous Libel or Pam∣phlet) Intituled; Some of the Principles and Doctrines, Laws and Orders of the Quakers, &c. (Introd. p. 10.) which is fairly an∣swered in the said Just Inquiry. Some of F. B's Abuses in Ci∣tation. 1. OBject. p. 33. News coming out of the North, p. 15. He cites G.F. thus I am (saith G. Fox) The Door that ever was, the same Christ yesterday and for ever. This is a plain perversion, rendring G.F. to speak this of himself; whereas these quotations in the Margent, John. 14.6. and Chap. 10.3. Luk. 11.34. and Joh. 1.9. clearly shews that he speaks it of Jesus Christ, and not of him∣self, and so do the foregoing words, viz. Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth and Life, he is the Door that all must pass through; which words are very unfairly left out, in Bugg's citation. 2. Risen up out of the North, which was Prophecied of but now is fulfilled. Here he leaves out The Armies coming out of the
North, against you terrible ones. This was Prophesied of, see Jer. 23.8. Isa. 43.6. Jer. 16.15. and 51.48. he could not mean that G. Fox's being risen up out of the North, was Prophesied of by Isaiah and Je∣remiah. 3. [Your Baptism is Carnal.] Here he leaves out [Sprinkling Infants, which God never Commanded.] 4. Their Sacrament [as they call it] left out] Is Carnal, and their Communion is Carnal. [a little Bread and Wine, left out.] Query, if their Bread and Wine be Spiri∣tual? If he saith it is, Query then, is it Transubstantiated? Are there not Carnal Ordinances, and Washing mentioned in Scripture? Their Church is Dust [a heap of Lime and Stones gathered together,] left out. 5. That the Quakers Teach that the Gospel is Dust, p. 47. This is false also, here he puts [the Gospel] for [their Gos∣pel] whose Gospel? The Covetous false Minister's, who put the Letter and their own conceivings thereupon for the Gospel. Moreover F. B. pursuant to his old Lye, viz. That we deny Him to be Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, &c. saith, It doth appear by Jo. Coales Testimo∣ny, that Christ after he Ascended, had no other Body but his Christ; consequently did
not Ascend in his Body, which was seen apparently, Act. 1.9, 10, 11. (Quo∣ting, p. 332. of Josiah Coales's Works.) Which consequence, I must needs look upon as unjustly deduc'd from J. C's words in the very Page Quoted. For he does not only own the Church of Christ as his Body under Affliction, now on Earth, but also that this his Body shall be Fashi∣oned like unto his glorious Body, whereof notwithstanding, all they are Members, who are Members of the true Church. So that the Body of Christ in it's Union and fulness, is one Body. I take notice of what an Abusive fling he has at me, about a little Book, Intituled, The Christian Doctrine, and Society of the Quakers, &c. relating to some differences in America, Accusing me with Peeping and Creeping, and with Turning and Winding this way and that way, hither and thither, and centring no where, but Janus like, look∣ing two ways, &c. with other false and scurrilous detractions. And why so? Why am I vilified in this Case also? Bugg saith, He (meaning my self) seems to own the Doctrine, i. e. of one Party, but dare not own his Testimony, nor him in it: He seems to blame the Doctrine, i. e. of the other Party, but dare not blame their Per∣sons, nor give Testimony against their Do∣ctrine,
as their's, &c. pag. 37. To pass by his scornful Abuse of me herein. Did not the Holy Apostles testifie against Divi∣sions in the Churches, sometimes without naming or reflecting on the Persons (by name) concerned therein? Did Paul name those of Corinth, whom he charges with Strife and Devision, &c. and therefore Carnal? Where one saith, I am of Paul, another of Apollo, &c. was this to reflect on them by name? And what's more usu∣al among Judicious and Impartial Men, who know common Law and Justice, than to give Judgment or Counsel, only upon the Case in difference, where the Parties differing are absent, without reflecting on the Persons of either Party? Because it is not Judicial nor Just, to pass Judgment on Persons unheard, Face to Face in their own respective Pleas and Defence. But such an Imperious Arbitrary and unjust Judge is this our Implacable Enemy, that he can presume, not only to be both Accuser, Judge and Jury, but also to Trie, Sen∣tence and Condemn Persons in their absence, both to Perjury, Pillory and Cage, without either hearing their own Just Defence, or taking Cognizance of their respective ra∣tional Pleas and Answers for themselves: But instead thereof, Forging and Framing Answers in their Names, which never
were their's, nor in the least resembling them, as he hath done against us, whom he hath most ignominously and scanda∣lously Traduc'd, Condemn'd, and Senten∣ced, both to Perjury and Pillory. And this is not all: But because I cannot be as Unjust and Wicked as himself, to Condemn Persons in their absence, and they as far remote as America: Therefore he Flouts, Scoffs, Scorns, Rages and Rails, Foaming out his own Shame. — And I doubt not, but the Just God will rebuke him in his own time, for his Injustice and Cruel En∣vy, with all his Secret Abettors therein, let him Scoff, Boast, Insult and Scribble out of old Books as long as he can, it will not rescue him from the stroke of that Divine Hand, that will seize upon him, I wish it may at last humble him unto Repen∣tance. — If yet there be a place thereof, to be found for him. — He complains of Personal Defamations and Detractions, which have had such an Effect, not only (saith he) of our profession in Religious Matters, but upon our Persons and Imployments, which in time may be far∣ther taken notice of, p. 37. 'Tis very strange, he should thus complain of Personal Defa∣mations and Detractions, when he is so deep∣ly and notoriously Guilty thereof, who hath used Personal Defamations and De∣tractions
so gross as he himself? What, presume to set himself up, as both Accuser, Judge and Jury, and Sentence and Condemn honest Men of good repute, as a pack of Per∣jur'd Persons to the Pillory, and also to the Cage of unclean Birds, and yet complain of Personal Defamation and Detractions! What horrid Hipocrisie, Insolency and Self-con∣tradiction is this! Can he rationally sup∣pose, that such his foul Defamations and Detractions may not affect both Religion, Persons and Imployments of those Men he has thus most Injuriously treated? And can he think himself secure from having his Insolency therein, in time further take notice of? Though some among us be loath to be Vindicative upon him, according to his Demerits, especially for the sake of his honest afflicted Wife. Yet I would advise him (if he be not past it) not to be so fool-hardy for the future, nor to Act any more Fools Tragedies, to Reproach and Scandalize others.
THE Self-Condemn'd APOSATE, OR Francis Bugg AGAINST FRANCIS BUGG. In His Apparent Contradictions. His Confession in his own Words. F. B's New Rome Arraign'd, p. 45. and they (i. e. the Quakers) of∣ten as a Decoy [false, by the way] Exorted us to o∣bey the Light, the Spirit of God in
our Hearts, and to observe the di∣ctates of our Con∣sciences to abstain from Evil and pur∣sue what was Good, and to follow the Leadings and Guidance of the Light within, which was sufficient to lead unto Salvation, &c. And this being a general Truth and a Duty upon all Christians, and no less than the publick Ministry does, yea, and ought to exhort to.
His Opposition, with Additional Notes (inclosed in Square Parentheses) from his Confession. F. B's New Rome Arraigned, p. 68. For as it is false Doctrine to Teach, that the Light being
obeyed, is sufficient to lead to Salvation, for then your Obedience is meritorious, and Christ Dyed in vain. Observ. If the Light within followed, be sufficient to lead to Salvation, and this true Doctrine, then 'tis not false Doctrine too, that the Light within being obeyed, is sufficient to lead to Salvation; neither does it invalidate Christ's Death, Merits or Deservings for Man to follow and obey his Light within to lead to Christ, who is Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth: For Christ deserves to be Obeyed, and 'tis our Duty, and without believing in his Light, there is no Salvation received from him. F. B's One blow more, p. 5. Artic. 3. In the Beginn∣ing, G. Whitehead
and many others, came through the Countrey in plain Habit, walking on Foot, content with Mean Accommo∣dation, Apt to Teach: Not gi∣ven to filthy Lu∣cre, often Visiting the Sick, the Poor as well the Rich, Working often on their Trades, that they might not be Charge∣able.
F. B. Battering Rams, p. 14. I mean Guilty in that they (i. e. the Teachers a∣mong
the Quakers) alwayes pretend to Preach and Teach freely; but contrary to all these their Pre∣tensions, have all a∣long taken Money for the same. Observe, The latter is a notorious Fals∣hood, as well as contradictory to the for∣mer: How all along take Money for Preaching and Teaching, and yet not given to filthy Lucre? and so Industrious and Careful, not to be Chargeable, when thus we Travel'd and Laboured as before. F. B.'s Quakers detected, p 3. In the Beginning, they (i.e. the Qua∣kers Ministers) Taught, That all Men were Enlight∣ned, according to Joh. 1.9. and that this Light where∣with Christ had
enlightened them, was sufficient, if obeyed, to lead to Salvation; and that it was the work of the Mini∣sters of Christ, to turn the Peoples minds from dark∣ness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; affirming, that this Light was a suffi∣cient Teacher, Leader, and Guide to every Believer, without the help of outward Pre∣scriptions, Forms, Orders, and De∣crees of Men; upon these and the like Notions, I became persuaded to make Trial of their Do∣ctrine; and when I came to see and observe their Pra∣ctice, Conversati∣ons, and Deport∣ments
in the Be∣ginning, and what simplicity & plain∣ness attended their Ministry, I was still more Confir∣med, that it was a Dispensation of the Love of God; sent as a visitation to Man∣kind; and being thus perswaded, I was resolved to bear the Cross; and did utterly despise the shame that attended them and their Message; and was not behind any of my Equals, both in doing and suffering for the Te∣stimony thereof; as some amongst them can still bear me witness. And in this manner we went on for many years, and Loved one another with Love un∣feigned; and doubtless God blessed our Meetings with the comfortable Enjoy∣ment of His Presence. [Thus far Fra. Bugg.]
F. B. New Rome Arraign'd, and out of her own mouth Con∣demned: containing, A farther Discovery of the Dangerous Er∣rours, and Pernicious Principles of the Teachers and Leaders of the People called Quakers; which tend
to overthrow the Chri∣stian Faith: In An∣swer to G.W's. Cha∣ritable Essay, &c. [Wherewith he has not proved any one Pernicious Princi∣ple,] Who for his false Testimony, to∣gether with Eleven of his Witnesses, that came in to his assist∣ance, are Examined, Tryed, and Convict of Perjury, and for the same put into the Pillory, by one who was more than twenty five years a Member of their Society, being carried away with their Dissimula∣tion. Francis Bugg, (Title Page,) [When they Preached Christ the Light, and in the Work of his Mi∣nisters, and in a Dis∣pensation of the Love of God.] F. B. Ibid. Epist
Dedicat. The Qua∣kers come not one jot behind the Papists, in Condemning the Pro∣testant Religion. [Which is a great Lye by the way; 'Tis Popery, and Humane Prescriptions in Wor∣ship, that we con∣demn, by our owning the Light, and Holy Spirit's conduct there∣in.] [These Confessions F. B. made in his said Book, Quakers Detected, Printed in 1686, about two years after his forsaking the Society of the people called Qua∣kers,
and conforming to the Church of England.] And farther, F. Bugg, in his Book De Christiana Libertate, printed 1682, hath also made these Confessions to the Principles of Truth, Professed among the People com∣monly called Quakers; and to them as a True Church, a Church of Christ, Built on the True Foundation. Second Part of his said Book, Ch. 1. Treats of Principles of Truth, received and believed in the Beginning, as fol∣lows, viz. That in the Be∣ginning, the In∣shining Light of Christ Jesus, by his heavenly spiritual Appearance in the Hearts and Souls of his People, was our Principle, the very Foundation, Prin∣ciple, and Corner∣stone in our Build∣ing, there are yet many living Witnes∣ses; and our Work
and Labour in that day, was, to turn peoples Minds there∣unto, as to the more sure Word of Pro∣phecy; whereunto as many as took heed, did well; and that there was suffi∣ciency in it (being obeyed) to lead to Salvation. And as our Minds came to be turned to this Inward Teacher; and as we came to experience the Vir∣tue and Excellency of this Holy Vncti∣on; so we held a Publick Testimony thereof to others, that they might thereby be provo∣ked to make Tryal thereof: that so they might have the Witness in them∣selves, and see for themselves, and taste for themselves. And
to this Word, nigh in the Heart, were we committed and recommended; sui∣table to the Do∣ctrine and Ancient Prophesies of Christ Jesus our Lord, and his Blessed Apostles and Prophets. And in that day, how did our Harmony sound in our As∣sembly? and how did our Love a∣bound one towards another! and our Zeal for the Holy Name of our God! In this stood our Unity, in this stood our Fellowship; e∣ven in that Inward Testimony, which God committed to us to bear for His Name sake. [From all which F. B. is now apparently Apostati∣zed, and gone into Envy and Malice, as
appears on the other side.] Here was the moving Cause of our Love to God, and one towards another: Even the inward Testimony, or Manifestation of his Spirit; which God in his infinite Love hath given us to Profit withal; pursuant to his for∣mer Promises to our Fathers by his Pro∣phets; saying, I will give him for a Light to the Gen∣tiles, and to be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth: I will give him for a Commander and a Leader to my People Israel. And as we came to be∣lieve this Report, and to experience the fulfilling of these Promises; and to be Witnesses of
the virtue of his blessed Appearance; so we declare to others, that they might also believe, and have Fellowship with us therein. [I never understood that F. B. was a Preach∣er.] And the more we came thus to be spiritually minded, and spiritually ex∣ercised; and the more we came to take delight there∣in, and to meditate therein, the more the Lord manifested his Love unto us, and his pure Power amongst us; and became a Hedge about us, and a Wall unto us, and gave us favour in the sight of the People. Blessed and Praised be his Holy Name for ever. And in that day,
when others would boast, of their Church-Authority, and Church-Disci∣pline, useful Ceremo∣nies, comely Orders, decent Vestments, &c. We told them, the Spirit of God was the Foundation of our Church, as well as the Founda∣tion of the Pro∣phets and Apostles. That Christ Jesus, the second Adam, the Lord from Hea∣ven, who is a Quick∣ning Spirit, was Head of our Church, Law-giver to our Church; on whose shoulders the Go∣vernment and Au∣thority of our Church is laid; yea the Hedge and Pale of our Church, and able to preserve it; and in this Faith we Lived & walked in
pure and undefiled Love. If any said to us, Lo here is Christ in this Ordi∣nance, or in that Observation; we told them, Nay, Christ is within; and there they must wait to know him, except they were reprobates; for the kingdom of heaven is within, and there they must wait, to receive the Earnest of it; for it comes not by outward Observations. This, we told People, this we Proved to the People out of the Holy Scriptures. This upon all occasions we Testified to all People, Pro∣fessor and Profane, bond and free, noble and ignoble.
F.B. Epis. to Ber. p. 9, 10. These Books wrote by G.F. Is. Pen∣nington, and other Eminent Quakers Er∣roneous, [who have given Testimony to the Spirit of God,] have not been Burnt, either by the Common Hangman, or some other Officer, then you are to bring these Impudent men in Guilty. [What, for owning Jesus Christ, and the Holy Scri∣ptures, and standing by their Testimo∣ny?] F.B. Apol. Introd. p. 11. Surely Simon
Magus never exceeded these Impostors. [Yet Christ's Mi∣nisters, and in their Work, Preaching Christ, and his Light in Men.] F.B. Ibid. Intr. p. 15. Good God! how have these Impostors prevailed upon the People? And how was my Vnderstanding dar∣kened by their Sleights for many years? [since they turned me to the Light of Christ within.] F.B. Ibid. Intr. p. 18. Whoever observes these Quakers turn∣ings and windings, in all their Juglings and Legerdemain, will find, they tread the same Path, (i.e. with the Papists. [How then Living Witnes∣ses to the True Foun∣dation, the Inshining Light of Christ Jesus,
the Holy Unction, the Spirit of God, the Inward Testimo∣ny, as sufficient with∣out Outward and Humane Prescripti∣ons and Decrees? &c.] F.B. Ibid. Epis. to Ber. p. 13. Silent Meeting (meaning of the Quakers) those Nurseries of Igno∣rance, where they sit until they are weaned from the Principles of true Christianity. [Which Meetings, God Blessed with the comfortable En∣joyment of his Pre∣sence.] F.B. Ibid. Book, p. 33. And this I charge upon them, as a Pack of False Witnesses, and perjured per∣sons. [Yet Living Wit∣nesses of Christ Je∣sus the True Light,
and of that Inward Testimony, which God commited to us·] F. B. Ibid. p. 44. They (i.e. the Qua∣kers) have False Wit∣nesses at their beck, to justifie G.W. and back his work with the most notorious Lyes that Men can be guilty of. [How then Living Witnesses of a Dis∣pensation of the Love of God to Mankind? Yea a True Church, whereof the Spirit of God and Christ is the Foundation.] F. B. Ibid. p. 46. Their Blind Guides. [Who turn Peoples Minds from Dark∣ness to Light.] F. B. Ibid. p. 47, 48, 49. The Quakers are of the World, and are Deceivers and Antichrists; the
Quakers are Great Deceivers, and Hor∣rible Blasphemers, and Impostors, Deceivers and Impudent Impo∣stors, Blasphemers, Deceivers, Deluders and Impostors, &c. [Whose Church (nevertheless) Christ is the Head, and Law-giver of; and even the Hedge and Pale thereof; who is able to preserve this our Church in true Faith, Pure and Un∣defiled Love.] F.B. Ibid. p. 48. Such a Generation of Teachers among the Quakers, who exceed all that ever went be∣fore them, Professing Christianity, the Pa∣pists only excepted, both in Idolatry, Blas∣phemy, and Supersti∣tion; yea and other gross Enormities. [What? both
Christ's Ministers, and Church, all thus miserable, fallen and degenerate, and F.B. only standing in the Faith? When back∣slidden from the Love, and from the Testimony and Pra∣ctice of this Church of Christ (that was at least) among us; for and with which, F.B. suffered, (as he has confest.) This is new Doctrine! Oh! sad, Self-condemned, and woful Aposta∣cy!] F. B. Ibid. p. 50. Babylon, a Cage of every unclean, hate∣ful Bird. [And then he has made the form of a Bird-cage, with the Names of many faithful and good Men in it; as Is. Pen∣nington, Fra. Howgill, Edw. Burroughs, Ric.
Hubberthorn, and o∣thers; the Truth of whose Testimony he hath owned and con∣fest.] F. B. Ibid. p. 54. G.F. and his Preach∣ers, would seem to Justle Christ out of his Place. [Yet their Mini∣stry, a Dispensation of the Love of God.] When they told us of their Articles of Faith, and how many they had; and the Scripture being the Rule, &c. We told them, that Faith was the Gift of God, and to be waited for; and that Faith was the Evidence of things not seen: And that although in the World there were Faiths many, and Lords
many, yet to us there was but one Faith, and one Lord Jesus Christ, who was the Author of that Faith. And that altho' the Scri∣ptures were good, and a true Declara∣tion of those things which were most surely believed by the Apostles; and by us ought to be believed; yet not the only Rule. But still the Spirit of God, which was the first Principle, the Foundation-Principle, the Pale and only Hedge of the Church and Sanctified People of God. So likewise it was the Rule of Life and Practice first, and before any other Rule; and always had the Preheminence in our Testimony from the Beginning. F. B. p. 68. Ibid. To me it seems easie to write a History of the Rise, Growth, and Progress of their Church-Government; and that monster Womens Meet∣ings, &c. and how the Spirit of Perse∣cution hath been a∣mong them from the Beginning. [Even when we loved one another with love unfeigned, and how did our love abound one to∣wards another? and when doubtless God blessed our Meet∣ings with the Com∣fortable Enjoyment of his Presence.] And if any question the Truth of what I have here affirmed; then for Proof
thereof, I referr them to the Testimo∣nies of Isaac Pennington, Edward Bur∣roughs, George Bishop, &c. (Published by T. Crispe) together with the Wri∣tings of Francis Howgill, Richard Hub∣berthorn, and many other Antient Friends, &c. [Thus far Francis Bugg's Confession to the Truth of those Testimonies and Authors which he has now declined; and not only most basely Revolted from, but Oppo∣sed, and shamefully Reproached divers of the same Authors, (as with his Mock-Cage, Scorn, and Envy, &c.) whose Testimonies he has here so manifestly Assented unto, Owned, and Asserted; which shall Rise up in Judgment against Him; whose Judgment lingereth not, and whose Condemnation slumbereth not.]
SOME REMARKS Upon F. B.'s former CONFESSIONS; FARTHER Arguing and Evincing his Self-condemnation and Apostacy, his Hypocrisie and Tem∣porising. PRay, impartial Readers, observe what excellent Testimonies and Characters he has here before given of the Principles, Foundation, Faith, Religion, Profession, Church (and Christ as Head thereof) Mi∣nistry, Christian Love, Society, Enjoy∣ment and Conversation of the People call∣ed
Quakers, both as in the Beginning and for many Years together, wherein he walked among them. Come, F. B. now do thou observe and consider well, 1. That in all these foregoing, ample and solemn Confessions and Commenda∣tions thou hast given of the Christian Do∣ctrin, Society and Conversation of the said People, and their Ministry (both before and after thou forsook them, and con∣formed to the Priests, &c.) Thou wast either Sincere or Insincere therein. To be Insincere therein, I suppose thou wilt not charge thy self: If Sincere, then thy Con∣formity was Insincere and Hypocritical, and Self-condemned; it being thy own and our professed Principle and Testimony in the beginning, and for these many Years, when thou wast conversant among us, ac∣cording to thy own Confessions made in the Year 1684 and 1686, before and since thy conformity. 2. Thy new Pretence, Thou art not now of the same mind thou wast in, in 1686, con∣cerning us in the beginning, and that thou hadst then a charitable Opinion, and better Thoughts of us, with respect to our begin∣ning than now thou hast; and that thou wast in an Error, mistaken, &c. As in thy New Rome Vnmasked, p. 12, 13, 16. Then thy
good and charitable Thoughts of us, our Ministry, Doctrine and Society (respe∣cting our beginning and for many Years) continued until Anno 1986, until near two Years after thy conformity. Wherefore thy turning to the Priests and Church of England in 1684. proceeded not from in∣ward conviction of Conscience, nor from the Spirit of Christ, but self-condemned Hypocrisie and Temporising: For in the be∣ginning the Quakers were in a clear Se∣paration from the National Priests, &c. And the same is continued by all of them who are sincere and faithful to their Prin∣ciple. And that thou knewest, when thou suffered among them for Meeting and Nonconformity, then thou hadst a Testi∣mony against all Mercenary Priests, against Tythes and their Persecutions, Oppres∣sions, &c. Wast thou mistaken therein all that Time? and mistaken in thy Te∣stimony for the Light of Christ and our Ministry and Doctrine (as in the begin∣ning) both before and since thy confor∣mity? If so, then why dost thou not re∣tract thy mistaken Books in that Case? And then who will credit thy Scribling? It seems thou knewest not thy pretended mistake, till some Years after thou hadst turned about and conformed, which if so, it was therefore in a blind Obedience:
Didst thou go blindfold to Church? (so called) Such slim Shifts and mean Subter∣fuges will not cover or acquit thee from Self-condemnation; nor thy telling us, Thou art not of the same mind thou wert in in 1686, concerning us in the beginning, p. 12. [Thou art very mutable then, no doubt thy Thoughts grow worse and worse, and thy Charity very cold,] and why so? Why are thy Thoughts grown of late so bad of us? Thou sayest thou hast of late examined our ancient Errors, and observed the Consequences of them. New Rome unmask'd, p. 12. that is, when we were a true Church, and Christ our Head and Law-giver, found in Doctrine, and Christian in Conversation, Love and So∣ciety, according to thy own Confessions in 1682. before thou went out to the Parish Church (so call'd) and in 1686. after thou so went out and conformed thereunto. It seems then, thou knewest no such preten∣ded Errors in 1686. two Years after thy Revolt and Conformity; then 'twas not Error in Doctrine that was the cause of thy deserting us, and turning to the Priests; what then was it, outward Pre∣scriptions, Forms, Orders, Decrees of Men, Laws, Canons, Ecclesiastical, &c. as thou pretendest, Qua. Detect. p. 3.4.
Thou cannot be sincere in any such Pre∣tence, unless thou hadst conformed to a Church, that hath no Order nor Disci∣pline; Canons or Rules in it; and where's that Church that will own its self to be without Order or Discipline in it? Thy comparing thy Case with Bishop Cranmer's and the Protestant Martyrs, p. 13, 14. appears more thy Ambition, then Pertinent or Sincere. If Bishop Cranmer said, in the Beginning the Church of Rome thought pure and sound Doctrine, but did he say he was mistaken, and in Error in so saying? No, he own'd her as such; But after the Church of Rome fell into that new unsound Doctrine of Transubstantiation, &c. He disowned Her. He could be no self-condemn'd Apostate therein, whilst he neither diserted the pure sound Doctrine nor conformed contrary to his own Te∣stimony thereunto, (as thou hast done) Thou in Words, hast owned and commen∣ded of a Church and People, (i. e. call'd Quakers) as once pure and sound in Do∣ctrine and Conversation, both before and since thou left them, and joyn'd to ano∣ther in Opposition to that Church and People; and now to excuse thy whirling about and base temporizing, pretendest thou wast mistaken, even in such thy so∣lemn Commendation. Thus uncertain
Unstable, Self-contradictory, and self-condemn'd thou art both ways; Insincere and Self condemn'd, in acting contrary to the Principle, Profession and Conversati∣on of a Church and People, whilest high∣ly commended by thy Self; and thou ap∣pearest a Self Condemned Temporizer, in retracting that Commendation, as an Er∣ror and Mistake; Self Condemned, in now pretending thou hast of Late, examin'd and observ'd our ancient Errors (as thou callest them.) Being some Passages in some ancient Books, writ by some parti∣cular Persons, even when we were a Church pure and sound in Doctrine and Conversation, in thy own account, (and as still we are.) That God Blessed Vs, and our Meetings, according to thy late Confes∣sions, as thou hast unfairly snapt and carpt at some Passages or Words out of G. F.'s Great Mystery, Printed in 1569. Isaac Pennington's Question to Professors. Some of Edward Burrough's Books, with more old Books, many Years ago printed, being writ within the compass of those many Years, wherein thou had'st such sweet Conversation, and Divine Blessing among us, long before thou left us, we may be∣lieve thee therein; therefore the Fallacy and Deceit of thy now pretence of anci∣ent Errors, will not excuse thy Back-sli∣ding,
nor absolve thee from Self-Condem∣nation, in thy acting against Light and Conviction, which will pursue thee. Be∣sides, thou yet confessest a party of Chri∣stian Quakers, who hold what's sound, and that though they dissent from the establish∣ed Religion, yet they hold the true Faith for Substance. New Rome unmask'd, p. 68. and yet actest contrary to the Faith, Pro∣fession and Practice of those Dissenting Christian Quakers, in thy going to Pa∣rish Churches (or rather Steeple-Houses) wherein they do not follow thee, for ac∣cording to thy own Confession, thou art gone or sold into Egypt, as in thy Qua. detected, p. 8. In applying Joseph's Words to thy Self; Namely, that thou canst say as Joseph did to his Brethren, Gen. 45.5. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with your Selves, that you sold me hither, though very greatly misapplyed, for we did not sell thee into Egypt, but (to e∣vade the Cross and shun suffering for it,) thou wentest down voluntarily thither for help, which woe is to them that do, and doe thou remember it. Nor is thy Case like that of Joseph; for he confest, as that God had a hand in sending him thi∣ther before his Brethren, for their Preser∣vation, but thou art gone down into E∣gypt, to Revile, Reproach, and Rail a∣gainst
thy Brethren, as if thou wouldst incense Egyptians against them, even the very Mob or Rabble to destroy them if thou couldst, with thy Pillory and Cage, &c. to excuse and cover thy wilfull Revolt and Back-sliding, and to extenuate thy Judgment, and Self Condemnation; but the Lord will find thee out, and thou shalt know that thine own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Back-sliding shall reprove thee, and the Witness of God will pursue thee to thy Anguish. And further to give a summary Demon∣stration of thy Self-Condemnation and A∣postacy, and where thou art. Thou cal∣lest Conformity the monstrous Womb, de chr. Lib. p. 81. and confessest that Conformity is a Monster, conceiv'd by the great Whore Mystery Babylon, p. 83. Yet in Self-con∣tradiction to thy Self, art since confor∣med, and consequently joyn'd to a Mon∣ster, if Conformity be it, though thou mightest better have distinguished Confor∣mity. Thus thou art Conformed to shun Con∣formity, thus confused and into Babylon thou art run, and in the Cage of unclean and hateful Birds left among whom thou hast unjustly pretended to Cage and num∣ber us.
Thou hast not only in contempt writ a∣gainst Conformity, outward Prescriptions, Forms, Orders, Decrees of Men, Canons, Rules, Laws, Impositions, &c. (i. e. in Church-Government and Discipline) in thy several Pamphlets, as Q. detected, B. Rams, one Blow, &c. but hast charged us with Apostacy therein, and turned from us on that Pretence. Yet in contradiction to thy self, art conformed to a Church and Ministry, which have all these (i. e. out∣ward Prescriptions, Forms, Orders, De∣crees of Men, Canons, Rules, &c.) in Church-Government and Discipline, whilst thou canst prove no unjust or unwarrant∣ble Canons, Rules, Laws or Methods in our Church, either in Government or Dis∣cipline. Thy now Pretence of false Doctrine, Er∣ror, Heresie and Imposture against us, is a new Pretence lately taken up for a Cloak to thy Back-sliding and Temporizing, and contrary to thy own Confession as before cited, and therefore no just Pretence, nor true Excuse for thy deserting (or going out from) us, and turning to the Priests. Our Principle, Ministry and Doctrine were true, when thou wast amongst us, when thou left us, and since thou left us; (the same considered as from us Beginning accord∣ing to thy own Confession) and therefore
thou appearest a self-condemn'd Hipocrite. 1st. In conforming contrary to thy own Testimony against Conformity to outward Canons, Prescriptions, &c. 2dly. In thy now Reproaching us as Er∣ronious and Heretical, contrary to thy own solemn Confessions, both before and since thy conforming (as before mentioned:) So that into Egypt and Babylon thou art gone, and miserably fallen, and shalt see and know that it is an Evil thing and bitter that thou hast forsaken the Lord God, and that his Fear is not in thee. And mayst thou not justly expect that a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour Truths Adversaries will surprize and seize upon thee? And I wish all others concern∣ed may take timely Warning by thy Fall and Misery. Thy poor Soul's (and all Mens) Friend, G. WHITEHEAD.
POSTSCRIPT. THere are yet two Things remarkable to manifest what Perfection of Malice and Impudence this our persecuting Adver∣sary, F. Bugg, is arrived unto: First, His dedicating his scandalous Book, (hereby answered) unto Henry Goldwell Esq A Justice of Peace, and A Member of the House of Commons, with this Complement, viz. I have been the bolder, Honoured Sir, to present you with the ensuing Discourse, in hopes of your favourable Construction of my weak Endeavours, and that under your Pa∣tronage they may appear, &c. Now I am perswaded from some late Discourse which I, and some others of our Friends, had with the said H. Goldwell Esq that he is a Person so rational, that he must needs justly resent Bugg's boldness herein, as no small Reflection upon him and his Reputa∣tion; to be thus rendred a Patronizer of such a wicked, scandalous and abusive Book, as that of Bugg's is, against a peaceable People, fearing God. But to do the said H. Godwell Justice and Right in this Mat∣ter; When three of us shewed him the Injury Bugg had done him therein, he signi∣fied to us, That he was not made privy to
his Dedication, for he knew not of it be∣fore it came forth; and had shewed his dislike thereof. What a Shame and Inso∣lency was it then in Bugg, so publickly in Print to hope for his Patronage, to make a Person in his Station suspected, for en∣couraging this our implacable persecuting Adversary, in such his scurrilous and most calumnious Book; hoping that not only this Account may be some reprehension to the said Bugg's presumptuous Insolency: But also, that the said Justice Goldwell will farther (in point of Justice) reprehend him, for Imposing such a Dedication upon him for his Patronage. Secondly, It is farther remarkable, how the said Bugg, to vent his inveterate Malice, had the Impudence to deliver an envious, perverse and lying Phamphlet of his own, against the People called Quakers, to the Members of the House of Commons, the 16th Instant, [stiled, Something in Answer to the Allegations of the Quakers, in their printed Case presented to the House of Com∣mons, Decemb, 1693,] on purpose to Ca∣lumniate the said People, and to interrupt and gainsay their Conscientious Case for their not Swearing, &c. before presented as he saith: Whereby Bugg did not only shew himself a busie-body in other Mens Matters,
but also in the very height of deadly Ma∣lice. Therein falsly accusing the said Peo∣ple, 1. With Contempt of Scripture and Or∣denances (without exception.) 2. With Contempt of the Publick Ministry (without exception also.) 3. With Denying Jesus of Nazareth. 4. With Contempt of Gover∣nours; as if he eagerly thirsted for Perse∣cution again for our utter Ruine. Some of his Instances to prove, that the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, are, 1. William Smith's asserting something of God in Man, for him to wait to know. 2. Our knowing Christ the foundation in us. 3. Our believing that Christ in us doth in∣tercede the Father on our behalf. 5. Edw. Burrough's confessing, the very Christ of God to be in us, and that we dare not deny him. 5. The Answer formerly given by James Naylor; viz. If I cannot witness Christ nearer than Jeru∣salem, I shall have no Benefit by him; but I own no other Christ but that (i. e. Christ) who witnessed a good Confession before Pilate, which Christ I witness suffering in me now. These are some of his Instances to prove, that the Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth. Wherefore, according to F. Bugg's Do∣ctrin (since he turned from the Quakers to the Church of England) the ancient Chri∣stian
and Apostolical Doctrin and Confession of Jesus Christ in you, except ye be Repro∣bates, and Christ in you, the hope of Glory, and the Spirit of the Son, as sent into your Hearts, crying Abba Father, and making intercession, &c. This all (with Bugg) is a denying Jesus of Nazareth. Oh! horrible Antichristianism and Apostacy. The Lord preserve all honest simple Hearts, from such gross darkness of Envy and Apostacy, against which I propose, 1. That Christ's being in Glory and Majesty in the Heavens, does not wholly exclude him out of the Souls of his People. 2. That Jesus Christ, who is in his own Glory and Majesty in the Heavens, yet is spiritually in the Hearts of his true Followers, in his Church and San∣ctuary, and Minister thereof. See Heb. 8.1, 2. London the 19th. 10 month 1693. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 5. line 24. for be read he: p. 17. l. 4. for to read of; l. 14. dele the: p. 18. l. 9. read Cavil∣lers: p. 14. l. 21. for 2. read 23: p. 31. l. 2. read wise: P. 38. l. last, for Christ read Church: P. 42. l. 15. read taken: P. 46. l. 5. 2 Col. for wherewith read wherein.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Northcott, in George Yard in Lombard Street. THE Works of that faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Robert Barclay, in Folio Price Bound 13 s. Truth Exalted, in the Writings of that Emi∣nent Servant of Christ, John Burnyat, in 4to. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. Robert Barclay's Apology for the People cal∣led Quakers, in 4to. Price 4 s. Francis Howgil's Works, in Folio, 10 s. Samuel Fisher's Works, in Folio 12 s. The Spirit of the Martyrs revived, in 4to. 4 s. George Keith's Visible Churches, in 80. Price bound, 1 s. 6 d. — His Way to the City of God described, in 80, Price bound, 1 s. — His Fundamental Truths of Christiani∣ty, by way of Question and Answer, in 8vo, 8.d. — His true Christ owned, in 8vo, 4d. Stephen Crisp's Epistle, concerning the pre∣sent and succeeding Times, 2 d.
Robert Barclay's Possibility and Necessity of Inward and Immediate Revelation. Price 3d. Just Measures, in an Epistle of Peace and Love, by G. P. The Harmony of the Old and New Testa∣ment, by I. T. with an Appendix, by W. P. Price 9 d. Some Fruits of Solitude, in Reflections and Maxims, relating to the Conduct of Humane Life. Price bound 9 d. A Key, opening a Way to every Common Vn∣derstanding, How to discern the Difference betwixt the Religion professed by the People called Quakers; and the Perversions, Misre∣presentations and Calumnies of their several Adversaries. The Third Edition, with Ad∣ditions. By W. Penn. Price 3 d.
