W2574 17165905 106110
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a General FAST. MARIE R. THeir Majesties taking into most serious Consideration the continued War, in which Their Majesties (together with most of the Prin∣ces and States of Europe) are Engaged against the French King; And that upon the Success thereof the common Safety of this Realm doth, under God, wholly depend; And putting Their Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a special Blessing on Their Majesties Righteous Undertakings, and Consummate the Deliverance of these Nations, by Settling the same in a firm and lasting state of Peace, Security and Prosperity: Have thought fit to Appoint, and do, (by and with the Advice of Their Privy Coun∣cil hereby Appoint and Command a General and Publick Fast and Humiliation, to be Observed throughout this Realm of Eng∣land, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in most Devout and Solemn manner, for Supplicating Almighty God for the Pardon of our Sins, and for Imploring his Blessing and Protection in the Preservation of Their Majesties Sacred Persons, and Prosperity of Their Arms both at Land and Sea, to be Religiously Kept and Observed on Friday the Eighty Day of April next, and thenceforth on the Second Wednesday of every following Month during the present War. And for the more orderly Solemnizing of the said several Fast-Days, Their Majesties have given Directions to the Right Reverend the Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion, to be Vsed in all Churches and Chappels, and other Places of Publick Worship; And have given Charge for the Dispersing thereof through their several Diocesses in the whole Kingdom. And Their Majesties do most expresly Charge and Command, That the said Fastings and Prayers be Soberly, Reverently and Decently Performed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and upon pain of such Punishments, as Their Majesties can justly Inflict upon all such as shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious a Work. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty fourth Day of March, 1691/2. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. London, Printed by Charles Hill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1692.
