W2617 99831433 35896
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION Requiring all Seamen and Mariners to Render themselves to Their Majesties Service. WILLIAM R. WHereas divers Seamen and Mariners have lately left their usual and ordinary Places of Abode, and have removed themselves into some private and obscure Places in the Inland Countreys, endeavour∣ing thereby to avoid the Search that is now made for Men of that Calling and Condition, and to escape the Press that is gone out for Their Majesties present Service; Their Majesties therefore, by the Advice of Their Privy Council, have thought fit to Publish this Their Royal Proclamation, and do hereby straitly Charge and Command all Seaman and Mariners remaining in any County of England or Wales, and not Listed in Their Majesties Service, that they forthwith Render themselves unto the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy in London, or to the Commissioners of the Navy at Portsmouth, or to the Mayor of Newcastle, or to the Mayor of Hull, or to the Bayliffs of Yarmouth, or to Mr. John Addis at Plymouth, or to Robert Henley Mer∣chant at Bristol, or to Captain Greenhill at Leverpoole, in order to their being received into Pay, and sent on Board such of Their Majesties Ships as shall be found most expedient for Their Majesties Service: And if any of them shall hereafter be found out or discovered, who have neglected to obey this Their Majesties Royal Command, they shall be Proceeded against with all Severity. And their Majesties do hereby Require all Mayors, Bayliffs, Sheriffs, Iustices of Peace, Constables and other Officers to whom it both or may appertain, That they cause diligent Search to be made within all and every of their Precincts, for the said Seamen and Ma∣riners, and do Sieze and Secure the Persons of such of them as shall there be found; And also all loose and unknown Persons whatsoever, who may justly be suspected to be Seaman or Wa∣termen, and to cause them to be sent to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of Their Ma∣jesties Navy in London, or to such other of the Persons and Places aforesaid, to which they may be most conveniently sent, in order to their further Employment. And they are hereby further Required to take notice of, and Certifie to Their Majesties in Council, the Names of all such Persons as shall refuse or neglect to give Assistance in the Premisses, or shall contribute to the Concealing or Escape of any Seamen or Mariners, as aforesaid; And hereof they are not to fail, as they will Answer the contrary at their Peril. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty seventh Day of February, 1689/90. In the Second Year of Our Reign. God save the King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1689/90.
