W342 99830812 35266
THE PROTESTANT's Crums of Comfort: CONTAINING I. Prayers and Meditations, with Ejaculations for every day in the Week, and other oc∣casions. II. Thanksgivings for Delive∣rances from Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power. III. The Rebellion in Ireland, and Massacre of Paris. IV. The Learned Bishop Usher's Prophecy, concerning Ireland and the Downfall of Rome. V. Advice to the late Besieged in London-Derry, under that Reverend Divine and valiant Commander Coll. George Walker. Ilustrated with Pictures sutable to each particular Occasion. London; Printed by W. W. for Ni∣cholas Bodington at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane 1690.
Defenders of ye Protestant Religio Q. Elizabeth. K. William. K. James Q. Mary II. of Sam. XXIII v. 3. He that ruleth ore men must be just ruling in ye fear of God.
Licensed, December 16th. 1689.
To the Honourable The Lady P. T. Madam, WHere true Piety inha∣bites, Charity always ims a Priviledge in owning Religious Actions▪ d, like the good Samaritan, ords the Oil of relief to the ounds of the distressed. Such tender Compassion al∣ys attends the Great and st, of whom, Madam, you  a perfect Pattern; your nty has been unlimited to  distressed and afflicted, to  Fatherless and the Widow, t even Commiseration it
self has been your daily delight and practice. Divine Souls, like yours can never be free from humbl Addressers, which creates  Prsumption in me to lay th Tract at your Laships Door where I humbly conceive yo will honour it so far, as  take it into your Closet. That Heaven may prosp you with length of days here and reward you with a Cro of Glory hereafter, is t hearty Prayer of, Madam, Your most obedient Servan G. W.
THE Protestant's Manual, OF PRAYERS AND MEDITATIONS▪ When we first awake. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. I will sing of thy power, d will praise thy Mercy be∣comes in the Morning; for ou hast been, and wilt be  defence and refuge in the y of my Trouble.
A Prayer for the Morning O Eternal God, whose Pro∣vidence has protected m the night past, & brought me t the beginning of this day; de∣fend me, O Lord, in the same by thy Almighty power, an grant that this day I fall into n Sin, neither run into any kin of danger, but that all m doings may be ordered by th Governance, to do alway that which is righteous in th sight, through Jesus Christ. II. I praise thy Name, th thou hast still continued to  the opportunity of servin thee, and advancing my hop of a blessed Eternity; preser me this day from all violence and snares of my Enemies, vi¦sible and invisible; keep me from all pride, self-love, and vain-glory; all obstinacy and
disobedience; all fraudulen∣cy and dissimulation, and let the graces of thy holy Spirit take an absolute possession of my Soul, and all its faculties, that I may finally tread down Satan under my Feet; all this I beg for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. A Prayer for the Evening. ALmighty God, I praise and magnifie thy holy Name, for thy preservation of me this day, and all the days of my Life; for unless thy Mer∣cy had withheld me, I had committed▪ more and more grievous Sins, and had been overwhelmed by thy just wrath, and severest judgments: Pardon, O Lord, I beseech thee, the Sins and Offences of my Youth, and the irregu∣larity of all my Actions, ei∣ther
in thought, word, or deed. II. Let thy Heavenly Grace be present with me, that though my Body sleep, yet let my Soul be vigilant, lest I sleep in Sin, and be forgetfull of my Duty towards thee; let thy goodness and loving kindness never slip out of my remem∣brance, but so unite my heart unto thee with fervent Chari∣ty, that whatever I do, may redound to thy glory. III. Grant that whether I sleep or wake, live or dye, I may never lose the light of thy Countenance, but evermore live in thy favour; that esca∣ping from the Darkness of this World, I may at last arrive at the Land of everlasting Peace and happiness, to behold thy power and glory, Amen.
Meditations for Sunday Morning. LEt God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him, flee before him. Like as the smoak vanisheth, so shalt thou drive them a∣way; and like as wax melteth at the Fire, so let the ungod∣ly perish at the presence of God. But let the Righteous be glad and rejoyce before God; let them also be merry and joyfull. II. O Sing unto God, and sing Praises unto his Name; mag∣nifie him that rideth upon the Heavens as it were upon an Horse; praise him in his Name, yea, and rejoyce be∣fore him. He is a Father of the Fa∣therless,
and defendeth the Cause of the Widows; even God in his holy Habitation. He is the God that maketh Men to be of one Mind in an House, and bringeth the Pri∣soners out of Captivity, but letteth the Runnagates conti∣nue in scarceness. III. O God, when thou wentest forth before the People, when thou wentest through the Wilderness: The Earth shook, and the Heavens dropped at the pre∣sence of God, even as Sina also was moved at the pre∣sence of God, which is the God of Israel. Thou, O God, sentest a gracious Rain upon thine in heritance, and refreshed'st i when it was weary. Thy Congregation shall dwell therein; for thou, O God, hast of thy Goodness
prepared for the Poor. IV. The Lord gave the Word: Great was the Company of the Preachers. Kings with their Armies did flee, and were discomfit∣ed, and they of the House∣hold divided the spoil. Though ye have lin among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the Wings of a Dove, that is co∣vered with silver Wings, and her Feathers like Gold. V. When the Almighty scatte∣red Kings for their sake, then were they as white as snow in Salmon. As the Hill of Basan, so is God's Hill; even an high Hill, as the Hill of Basan. Why hop ye so, ye high Hills? this is God's Hill, in which it pleaseth him to dwell; yea, the Lord will a∣bide in it for ever.
VI. The Chariots of God are Twenty thousand, even thou∣sands of Angels, and the Lord is among them, as in the holy Place of Sini. Thou art gone up on high, hou hast led Captivity Cap∣tive, and received Gifts for Men; yea, even for thine E∣nemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them. VII. Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helpeth us, and poureth his benefits upon us. He is our God, even the God of whom cometh alva∣tion: God is the Lord by whom we escape Death. God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such a one as goeth on sill in his wickedness. VIII. The Lord hath said, I will
bring my people again, as I did from Basan: Mine own will I bring again, as I did some∣time from the deep of the Sea. That thy foot may be dip∣ped in the bloud of thine E∣nemies; and that the Tongue of thy Dogs may be red through the same. IX. It is well seen, O God, how thou goest; how thou, my God, and my King, goest in the Sanctuary. The Singers go before, the Minstrels follow after; in the midst are the Damsels playing with the Timbrels. Give Thanks, O Israel, un∣to God the Lord in the Con∣gregations, from the ground of the Heart. There is little Benjamin their Ruler, and the Princes of Ju∣da, their Counsel; the Prin∣ces of Zabuln, and the Princes of Napthali.
X. Thy God hath sent forth strength for thee: Stablish the thing, O God, that thou hast wrought in us. For thy Temples sake at Jerusalem; so shall Kings bring Presents unto thee. When the Company of the Spear-men and multitude of the Mighty are scattered a∣broad among the Beasts of the People, (so that they humbly bring pieces of Silver,) and when he hath scattered the People that delight in War. Then shall the Princes come out of Egypt; the Morians Land shall soon stretch out her hands unto God. The Prayer. MOst gracious God, who art  Father of the Fatherless, and pleadest the Cause of the Wido, have Mercy upon thy holy Catholick
Church, and since her Lord is ∣scended up on high, even to his hea∣venly Mansions, leave us not alone comfortless, but send thy holy Spirit into our hearts, that by his assistance we may escape spiritual, and the bit∣terness of the temporal. II. Send a gracious showre, even the Dew of thy divine Favours, to re∣fresh our weariness in this Calamity; make thy People as Doves, innocent and chast, and adorn them with the Beauty of inward Sanctity: Let all Kings, Princes, and Rulers of the Earth, confess thy Name, and thy honour; that thy Gospel extending forth into all Lands, Peace, and all thy Blessings may follow it, and thy praise be encreased from Genera∣tion to Generation, through Christ our Lord and Saviour, Amen.
Sunday Noons Meditations. SIng unto God, O ye King∣doms of the Earth: O sing Praises unto the Lord, Who sitteth in the Hea∣vens over all from the begin∣ning: Lo, he doth send forth his Voice, yea, and that a mighty Voice. Ascribe ye the Power to God over Israel; his Worship and strength is in the Clouds. O God, wonderfull art thou in thy holy Places! even the God of Israel; he will give strength unto his People, bles∣sed be God. II. O clap your hands toge∣ther, all ye People; O sing unto God with the voice of melody. For the Lord is high, and to be feared; he is the great King upon all the Earth.
He shall subdue the People under us, and the Nations un∣der our Feet. He shall chuse out an Heri∣tage for us; even the Worship of Jacob whom he loved. III. God is gone up with a merry noise, and the Lord with the sound of the Trump. O sing Praises, sing Praises unto our God: O sing Praises, sing Praises unto our King. For God is the King of all the Earth: Sing ye Praises with understanding. The Prayer. O Lord God, Celestial King, who reignst Potentate in all the World, thou art exalted above all Creatures, and art to be feared in all the Dominions of the Earth; let the Seed of thy glorious Gospel be planted in all parts of the habitable World, that thy saving Health may be known unto all Nations.
II. Let thy Grace pull down all the strong Holds of Sin and Satan, that any ways oppose thy Holy Name and Word; subdue all thy People unto thee, and the Nations under thy Feet, so that we that are thy Peo∣ple, and Sheep of thy hands, may be∣come one Sheepfold under one Shep∣herd, Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour. Meditations for Sunday Night. I will magnifie thee, O God, my King; and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. Every day will I give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Name for ever and ever. Great is the Lord, and mar∣vellous worthy to be praised; there is no end of his Great∣ness.
II. One Generation shall praise thy Works unto another, and declare thy power. As for me I will be talking of thy Worship, thy Glory, thy praise, and wondrous Works. So that Men shall speak of the might of thy marvellous Acts; and I will also tell of thy greatness. The Memorial of thine a∣bundant Kindness shall be shewed, and Men shall sing of thy Righteousness. III. The Lord is gracious and mercifull, long-suffering, and of great Goodness. The Lord is loving unto e∣very one, and his Mercy is o∣ver all his Works. All thy Works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give thanks unto thee. They shew the glory of thy
Kingdom, and talk of thy power. That thy power, thy glory, and mightiness of thy King∣dom might be known unto Men. Thy Kingdom is an everla∣sting Kingdom; and thy Do∣minion endureth throughout all Ages. The Prayer. MOst mighty God, marvellous worthy art thou to be praised, and of thy greatness there is no end; give us sanctified Hearts, and Lips, that we may express thy Righteous∣ness, and magnifie thy glory, Wor∣ship, and wondrous Works. II. All the Earth praises thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give Thanks unto thee: Make us religious and sincere before thee, and to lay aside all Hypocrisie. Protect us, O Lord, by thy hand of Providence, that we
fall not, and raise us up when we are down. III. Give us spiritual and temporal Meat in thy on due time for our Souls and Bodies; that we being fil∣led abundantly with thy Mercies here, we may have our hearts desire fulfilled, and satisfied hereafter, a∣mong such as fear thee, and praise thy holy Name for evermore. Amen. Monday Mornings Meditations. THE Lord upholdeth all such as fall, and lifteth up all those that be down. For he shall deliver the Poor when he cryeth; the Needy also, and him that hath no helper. He shall be favourable to the Simple and Needy, and shall preserve the Souls of the Poor.
He shall deliver their Souls from wrong, and falshood, and dear shall their bloud be in his sight. II. There shall be a heap of Corn in the Earth, high upon the Hills: His Fruit shall shake like Lianus, and he shall be green in the City, like Grass upon the Earth. His Name shall endure for ever; his Name shall remain under the Sun among the Po∣sterities, which shall be bles∣sed through him, and all the Heathen shall praise him. III. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only doth won∣drous things. And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, and all the Earth shall be filled with his Majesty, Amen.
The Prayer. O Eternal God, thou that defendest the Children and Poor, but pu∣ishest the wrong doer, have mercy upon thy People under affliction; ex∣tend thy Mercy and compassion from ne Sea to another, even unto the Worlds end. II. Make thy People, who love thy Name, flourish; and subdue their E∣nemies under them, that neither alshood nor wrong may any ways p∣ress them. Bless them with Peace nd Tranquillity, and satisfie them with thy Righteousness and Salvati∣on, through thy Mercy, O blessed esu, Amen. Mōnday Noon's Meditations. NOT unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the Praise, for thy
loving Mercy, and for thy Truths sake. Wherefore shall the Hea∣then say, Where is now their God? As for our God, he is in Heaven; he hath done what∣soever pleaseth him. II. Their Idols are Silver and Gold, even the Work of Mens hands. They have Mouths and speak not; eyes have they, and see not. They have Ears and hear not; Noses have they and smell not. They have hands, and han∣dle not: Feet have they, and walk not; neither speak they through their Throat. They that make them are like unto them; and so are all such as put their Trust in them. III. But thou House of Israel,
trust thou in the Lord: He is eir succour and defender. Ye House of Aaron, put your Trust in the Lord: He is heir helper and defender. The Lord hath been mind∣ull of us, and he shall bless s: Even he shall bless the ouse of Israel, he shall bless e House of Aaron. He shall bless them that ar the Lord, both small and reat. The Prayer. ALmighty God, whose Dwelling is in the highest Heavens, and st whatsoever pleaseth thee both in heaven and on Earth; give Grace,  beavenly Father, that in all our ubles and calamities, we may put  whole Trust in thee, who art our y succour, defender, and delive∣r. II. Let us evermore praise thy holy
Name, and never ascribe to our selves any Honour, and Glory, or Thank of any good Action, or prosper o Success; but to thee alone who a the Author and Giver of all good things. Keep us from Idolatry from worshipping vain Imagination and any thing which is contrary to t Gospel. Bless us in all our way that when we go from hence, we  inherit thy Kingdom. Amen. Meditations for Mon∣day Night. I Will lift up mine Eyes un the Hills, from when cometh my Help. My Help cometh even from the Lord, which hath ma Heaven and Earth. II. He will not suffer thy Fo to be moved: and he th keepeth thee will not sleep.
Behold he that keepeth Is∣rael shall neither slumber nor eep. III. The Lord himself is thy Keeper: The Lord is thy De∣fence upon the right hand. So that the Sun shall not urn thee by day, nor the Moon by night. IV. The Lord shall preserve thee om Evil: Yea, it is even he hat shall keep thy Soul. The Lord shall preserve thy oing out, and thy coming in, om this time forth for ever∣more. The Prayer. O GOD, from whence cometh all our Help and Succour, pre∣ve us by thy Power and Providence, at nothing either by day or night ay molest our Peace, or disturh our afety; suffer not the Vanities of e one to allure us, nor the Terrours  the other to amaze and affright us.
II. Let our Feet be immoveable, an fixed upon the Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus; and so dispose of o going out, and coming in, that  may not swerve from thy Command¦ments: but walk according to t Holy Rule in all things, who art o Lord and Saviour. Meditations for Tues∣day Morning. THey that put their Tr in the Lord shall be ev as the Mount Sion, which m not be removed, but stande fast for ever. The Hills stand about Jeru¦salem: even so standeth t Lord round about his Peop from this time forth for ev more. II. For the Rod of the Ungo cometh not into the lot of t
Righteous; lest the Righteous out their hands unto Wicked∣ness. Do well, O Lord, unto hose that be good and true of Heart. As for such as turn back un∣o their own wickedness, the ord shall lead them forth with the Evil-doers: but eace shall be upon Israel. The Prayer. MErciful God, our▪ only Trust and Confidence, and whosoever usteth in thee shall not be removed, t stand fast for ever; let thy Pow∣ and Glory stand round about us, nd all thy Holy People, like Hills r our Protection and Safety, that e may be sheltered from our Ene∣mies. II. Permit us not to put our hands to Wickedness, neither let us partake  the Lot of the Ungodly, whom
thou or dainest for Destruction: B let us receive that Blessing which o Lord and Saviour hath left  Church, even the Peace of God t Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:  whom be all Honour and Glory, Wor without end. Amen. Meditations for Tues∣day Noon. WHen the Lord turned a¦gain the Captivity  Sion, then were we like unt them that dream. Then was our Mouth fil¦ed with Laughter, and o Tongue with Joy. II. Then said they among th Heathen, the Lord hath do great things for them. Yea, the Lord hath do great things for us already whereof we rejoyce.
III. Turn thou our Captivity, O Lord, as the Rivers in the South. They that sow in Tears shall eap in Joy. He that now goeth on his way weeping, and beareth orth good Seed, shall doubt∣ess come again with Joy, and ring his Sheaves with him. The Prayer. GRacious God, who hast promised Life and Salvation to thy cho∣en Servants, and hast wrought ighty things for them already, hereof they rejoyce. Deliver us we eseech thee, from the Slavery and etters of Sin and Misery; dissipate nd scatter all our Enemies which ay close Siege to us, seeking to de∣stroy us. II. Fill our Hearts with Con̄tition, or having trespassed against thee;
teach us that Divine Art of Self denial, to motifie our Affection  our Lust, and extinguish a shly Temptations; that when th great Harvest shall come, e may  admitted as Fellow Labourers  work in thy Spiritual Kingdom through Jesus Christ. Amen. Meditations for Tues∣day Night. OUT of the Deep have called unto thee, O Lord Lord hear my Voice. Oh let thine Ears conside well the Voice of my Com∣plaint. II. If thou, Lord, wilt be ex∣tream to mark what is done a miss, O Lord, who may a bide it? For there is Mercy with thee: therefore snalt thou b feared.
I look for the Lord, my Soul doth wait for him; in his Word is my Trust. III. My Soul flieth unto the Lord before the Morning Watch: I say before the Morning Watch. O Israel trust in the Lord: for with the Lord there is Mercy, and with him is plen∣teous Redemption. And he shall redeem Israel from all his Sins. The Prayer. O Blessed Lord, who with thy most precious Blood, didst pay ur Ransom, to purchase for us Free∣dom, and Salvation. With thee, here is Mercy and plenteous Redemp∣tion; O let the height of that Mercy ake us out of the bottomless Pit of in and Misery.
II. Be not extream, O Lord, in mar∣king out what we have done amiss in our Life time, but rather blot out th Hand-writing which is against us▪ And as thy boundless Mercy pardon what is past, so let the sweetness of i create thy Fear in our Hearts, that we may never more dare to offend s gracious and merciful a Saviour a thou art to us. Grant this, O Lord, I beseech thee, for thy alone sake. Amen. Meditations for Wednesday Morning. DEliver me, O Lord, from the Evil Man, and pre∣serve me from the Wicked Man. Which imagine mischief i their Hearts, and stir up stris all the day long. They have sharpened their Tongues like a Serpent: Ad∣ders
Poyson is under their Lips. II. Keep me, O Lord, from the Hands of the Ungodly, preserve me from the wicked Men, which are purposed to overthrow my going. The Proud have laid a sare for me, and spread a Net a∣broad with Cords; yea, and set Traps in my way. III. I said unto the Lord, thou art my God: hear the Voice of my Prayers, O Lord. O Lord God, thou strength of my Health, thou hast cover∣ed my Head in the day of Battle. IV. Let not the Ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous Imagination pro∣sper, lest they be too Proud. Let the mischief of their own Lips fall upon the head
of them that compass me a∣bout. A man full of Words shall not prosper upon the Earth: Evil shall hunt the wicked Per∣son to overthrow him. The Prayer. O Lord God, the Strength of all those that depend upon thee; deliver us from evil and wicked Men: that neither their Examples may corrupt us, nor their Counsels misguide us, or their Mischief di∣sturb our Safety. II. But do thou, O Lord, cover our Heads in the day of Battle and Strife against all our Bodily and Ghostly Enemies; that though they pursue us to overthrow us, yet we may be safe on Earth under thy Favour and Almighty Protection, and at the last being removed from all Fears and Dangers, we may appear in thy sight amongst the Righteous for evermore.
Meditations for Wednes∣day Noon. HEar my Prayer, O Lord, and consider my Desire: Hearken unto me for thy Truth and Righteousness sake. And enter not into Judg∣ment with thy Servant: for in thy sight shall no one living be justified. II. For the Enemy hath perse∣cuted my Soul, he hath smit∣ten my Life down to the ground, he hath laid me in the Darkness, as the men that have been long dead. Therefore is my Spirit vex∣ed within me, and my Heart within me is desolate. III. Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy
works: Yea, I exercise my self in the works of thy Hands. I stretch forth my Hands unto thee: my Soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty Land. The Prayer. MOst Righteous Judge and dear Redeemer, hear us for thy Truth and Mercies sake; free us from the hainous Guilt of all our Sins, and renounce those Punishments due to us for the same. II. Enter not at any time into Judg∣ment with us, for in thy sight no Flesh can be justified by its own wor∣thiness. Fortifie our Souls with the Holiness of a lively Faith, which worketh by Charity, that at last we enter into thy Holy of Holies, even Life Everlasting. Amen.
Meditations for Wednes∣day Night. HEar me, O Lord, and that soon, for my Spirit waxeth faint: Hide not thy Face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the Pit. O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the Morn∣ing, for in thee is my Trust: Shew thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my Soul unto thee. II. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine Enemies: for I flie unto thee to hide me. Teach me to do the thing that pleaseth thee, for thou art my God: Let thy loving Spirit lead me forth into the Land of Righteousness.
III. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: and for thy Righteousness sake bring my Soul out of trouble. And of thy goodness slay mine Enemies, and destroy all them that vex my Soul; for I am thy Servant. The Prayer. BOW down thine Ear, O Lord, and hear my Complaint, support my weak Spirit with thy Heavenly Grace, which is sufficient for me. Hide not the light of thy Countenance from me, but replenish me with the Beams of thy Mercy and Goodness. II. Direct me in the way that I should walk in; instruct me to do whatso∣ever pleaseth thee, quicken my Soul in thy Paths which lead to Life E∣ternal; and so continue the Conduct of thy Blessed Spirit to me, that it may never depart from me, till I am
brought out of this temporal World, and am safely arrived at thy Spiri∣tual Kingdom. Amen. Meditations for Thursday Morning. PRaise the Lord, O my Soul; while I live will I praise the Lord; yea, as long as I have any Being, will I sing praises unto my God. O put not your trust in Prin∣ces, nor in any Child of Man: or there is no help in them. For when the Breath of Man goeth out, he shall turn again to his Earth: and then all his Thoughts perish. II. Blessed is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in the Lord his God. Which made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea and all that therein is; which keepeth his promise for ever. Which helpeth them to right that suf∣fer wrong; which feedeth the Hungry. III. The Lord looseth Men out of Prison: the Lord giveth Sight to the Blind. The Lord helpeth them that are fallen: the Lord ca∣reth for the Righteous. The Lord careth for the Strangers; he defendeth the Fatherless and Widow: as for the way of the Ungodly, he turneth it upside down. The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be King for ever∣more, and throughout all ge∣nerations. The Prayer. GReat God, who art King for e∣verlasting, world without end,
vouchsafe us thy Grace, and assist us with thy ready help, that we may fix all our hopes in thee; for thou alone art able to grant Deliverance. II. Lord, feed our Souls, and satis∣fie us with thy Salvation, when we hunger and thirst after thee; re∣venge our Cause, when we suffer wrong; and heal our back-slidings. Enlighten our Darkness, that we walk not in the shadow of Death, and let thy hand of Providence take care of us in all our necessities, that when our life is expired, and we return to that Earth from whence we were ta∣ken, we may reign with thee for e∣vermore. Meditations for Thursday Noon. I Cryed unto the Lord with my Voice, yea, even unto the Lord did I make my sup∣plication.
I poured out my Complaints before him, and shewed him of my trouble. When my Spirit was in hea∣viness, thou knewest my path: in the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me. II. I looked also upon my right hand, and saw there was no Man that would know me. I had no place to flie unto: and no man cared for my Soul. I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said, thou art my Hope, and my Portion in the Land of the Living. III. Consider my Complaint: for I am brought very low. O deliver me from my Per∣secutors, for they are too strong for me. Bring my Soul out of Pri∣son, that I may give thanks unto thy Name; which thing
if thou wilt grant me, then shall the Righteous resort un∣to my Company. The Prayer. THou art our Place, O Lord to flee unto, and the only Sanctuary wherein is safety: O hide us under the Shadow of thy Wings, keep us from all those Dangers which increase upon us when our Spirits are in hea∣viness, and our Bodies bowed down with infirmities. II. Stand thou evermore at our right hand, and aid us so with the power of thy Grace, that our Temptations and Enemies may at no time molest and disturb us: Grant that our Souls in thy good time may depart out of the Prison of the Body with joy and not with grief, and enter into thine eter∣nal Joy to reign with thee for ever∣more, Amen.
Meditations for Thursday Night. O Lord, thou hast searched me out, and known me; thou knowest my down-sitting and mine up-rising; thou un∣derstandest my thoughts long before. Thou art about my Bed, and about my path, and spiest out all my ways. For lo, there is not a Word in my Tongue, but thou, O Lord, knowest it altogether. Thou hast fashioned me be∣hind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. II. Such Knowledge is too won∣derfull and excellent for me, I cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit? or whither shall I go then from thy pre∣sence?
If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there: If I go down to Hell, thou art there also. If I take the Wings of the Morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea. III. Even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, peradventure the Darkness shall cover me; then shall my Night be turned into day. Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the day; the darkness and light to thee are both alike. For my Reins are thine; thou hast covered me in my Mothers Womb. The Prayer. INfinite art thou, O Lord, in Wise∣dom, and omnipresent in all pla∣ces;
thou fillest Heaven and Earth with Majesty, and the effects of thy Glory: Hell feels thy Mighty power, but thou communicatest to us thy poor Creatures thy boundless Mercy. II. And, O Lord, as thou art present with us, so we humbly beseech thee be President amongst us; teach us thy Holy Laws, and so guide us by thy Gol∣den Rule, and Divine Precepts, that we wander not in the darkness of our own Errors, but in thy Light whom no Clouds can overcast, nor Darkness eclipse: Preserve us, O Lord, from falling into utter dark∣ness, where there is weeping, and wailing and gnashing of Teeth. Meditations for Friday Morning. I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; mar∣vellous are thy Works, and
that my Soul knoweth right well. My Bones are not hid from thee, though I am made se∣cretly, and fashioned beneath in the Earth. Thine Eyes did see my sub∣stance, yet being unperfect, and in thy Book were all my Members written. Which day by day were fa∣shioned, when as yet there was none of them. II. How dear are thy Counsels unto me, O God! O how great is the Summe of them! If I tell them, they are more n number than the Sand: When I awake up, I am pre∣ent with thee. Wilt thou not slay the Wick∣d, O God? Depart from me e bloud-thirsty Men. For they speak unrighte∣usly against thee, and thine Enemies take thy Name in ain.
III. Do not I hate them, O Lord that hate thee? And am not grieved with those that ri up against thee? Yea, I hate them right sor even as though they we mine Enemies. Try me, O God, and se the ground of my heart Prove me, and examine m thoughts. Look well if there be a way of Wickedness in m and lead me in the way ev lasting. The Prayer. O Lord, thy Works are marvell for thou hast done great thi for my Soul; it is thou that hast  med me in the Womb, and thy  der care hath preserved me to  moment: Teach me to hate and hor all iniquity, und to love Counsells as my dearest Treasure,
we may be as fearfull of committing Sins in Secret, with that circumspe∣ction, as in the Eye of the World. II. Lead me in thy Truth, and guide me in the Paths of a Holy Life, that I may examine my self strictly of what Sins I stand guilty off, and earnest∣ly repent of those offences: Make me to shun all wicked ways, and conduct me into the way everlasting, through Christ our Lord, Amen. Friday Noon's Meditations. O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready, I will sing, and give praise with the best Member I have. Awake thou Lute and Harp, I my self will awake right early. I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the People: I will sing praises unto thee among the Nations.
II. For thy Mercy is greater than the Heavens, and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds. Set up thy self, O God, a∣bove the Heavens; and thy glory above all the Earth. That thy beloved may be delivered, let thy right hand save them, and hear thou me. III. God hath spoken in his ho∣liness, I will rejoyce there∣fore and divide Sicem, and meet out the Valley of Succoth. Gilead is mine, and Manase is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head. Juda is my Law-giver; Moab is my Wash-pot; over E∣dom will I ast out my Shoe; upon the Philistines will I tri∣umph. III. Who will lead me into the strong City? and who will
bring me into Edom? Hast not thou forsaken us, O God? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our Hosts? O help us against the Ene∣my; for vain is the help of Man. Through God we shall do great Acts; and it is he that shall tread down our Enemies. The Prayer. EArly, O my God, to thee will I make my Prayer and Supplica∣tion! for thy Mercy in extent is greater than the Heavens, and thy glory above all the Earth; for ever be thou exalted in thine own strength, and magnifie thy power, and thy never-failing Mercy in defending us and all thy holy Church against all our Enemies temporal and spiritual. II. Leave us not, nor forsake us, O God, who art our strong Tower and Defence, for in vain is Man's help,
unless thou strengthen us; fortifie us, and go forth with our Hosts to Battel, that we being defended and armed by thee, may perform Acts great and good, fighting thy Battels, and place our Confidence in thy Righ∣teousness only, and thy Salvation, Amen. Meditations for Friday Evening. IN Jury is God known; his Name is great in Israel; at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his Dwelling in Sion. There he brake the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, the Sword, and the Battel. Thou art of more honour and might than the hills of the Robbers. II. The proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep;
and all the Men, whose hands were mighty, have found no∣thing. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the Chariot and Horse are fallen. Thou even thou, art to be cared, and who may stand n thy sight when thou art an∣gry? Thou didst cause thy Judg∣ments to be heard from Hea∣ven: the Earth trembled and was still. III. When God arose to Judg∣ment, and to help all the meek upon Earth. The fierceness of Man shall turn to thy praise, and the fierceness of them shalt thou refrain. Promise unto the Lord your God, and keep it, all ye that be round about him: bring Presents unto him that ought to be feared.
He shall refrain the spirit of Princes; and is wonderful a∣mong the Kings of the Earth. The Prayer. GReat is thy Name, O Lord, and thy dwelling in the highest Hea∣vens; give a deep impression of a dread and reverence of thee and thy power in our Hearts: Let thy threat∣nings and judgments which descend from Heaven, and are executed upon stubborn and disobedient People; make us loath Sin, or the thoughts of it, and shun all the occasions and al∣luring baits of it. II. O let thy continued mercies, and loving kindnesses be ever in our re∣membrance; and make our Hearts still, full of smoothness and tran∣quillity, that we may not fear the ri∣gour of man, or the cruel wrath of those whose spirits thou canst refrain, lest we be hindred in our duty towards thee; but let us so fear to offend
thee, that we may press forwards from fear to love, from apprehen∣sions of thy wrath, to the sense and comfort of thy mercies. Meditations for Saturday Morning. UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks; yea, unto thee do we give thanks. Thy Name also is so nigh; and that do thy wondrous works declare. When I receive the Congre∣gation, I shall judge accord∣ing unto right. The Earth is weak, and all the Inhabitants thereof: I bear up the Pillars of it. II. I said unto the Fools, Deal not so madly: and to the Un∣godly, set not up your Horn.
Set not up your Horn on high, and speak not with a stiff Neck. For promotion cometh nei∣ther from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the South. And why? God is the Judge: he putteth down one, and set∣teth up another. III. For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is red: it is full mixt, and he poureth out of the same. As for the dregs thereof, all the ungodly of the Earth shall drink them, and suck them out. But I will talk of the God of Jacob, and praise him for ever. All the Horns of the ungod∣ly also will I break: and the Horns of the Righteous shall be exalted.
The Prayer. GReat Judge of the whole Uni∣verse, from whom proceeds all promotion and punishment, extend thy Mercy now upon us, at the hour of Death, and in the day of Judgment, when thou shalt judge all the Society of Men and Angels according to Right. II. O Give us thy powerful Grace, that we may expect thy coming in Humility and perfect Charity, and not be puft up and exalted in our Fancies and I∣maginations, but may submit to thy Will with Meekness and Holy Obedi∣ence; that when thou shalt pour forth thy Wrath upon the Ungodly, we may not be numbered amongst them, but partake of those Mercies thou hast provided for those that love and fear thee. Amen.
Meditations for Saturday Noon. HAst thee, O God, to deli∣ver me: make hast to help me, O Lord. Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my Soul: Let them be turned back-ward, and put to confu∣sion that wish me Evil. Let them, for their reward, be soon brought to shame that cry over me, There, There. II. But let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all such as delight in thy Salvation, say always, The Lord be praised. As for me, I am poor and in misery: Hast thee unto me, O God. Thou art my Helper and
my Redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying. The Prayer. THou, O God, art our Deliverer, Helper, and Redeemer, have mercy upon us, and all those which serve thee, in Sincerity and Truth; help us, O God, against those that seek to destroy our Souls: Let our de∣light be, to wait for thy Salvation, and to trust in thy never-failing Mer∣cies, that our Feet being guided by thy direction, we may remain safe under thy Providence. II. Suffer us not, O thou, who art a God of Power and great Glory, to be a Prey to our Enemies; but dissipate and scatter them, as offensive Clouds to the light of thy Gospel. Strengthen our Weakness by thy Power, pardon our Sins by thy Mercies, and justifie our Souls by thy free Grace, that we may now, and evermore with the humble Addresses of Devotion, give
thee Praise, not only with our Lips, but in our Lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Meditations for Saturday Night. GOD be merciful unto us, and bless us, and shew us the light of his Countenance, and be merciful unto us. That thy way may be known upon Earth, thy saving Health among all Nations. Let the People praise thee, O God; yea, let all the peo∣ple praise thee. II. O let the Nations rejoyce and be glad; for thou shalt judge the Folk righteously, and govern the Nations upon Earth.
Let the People praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee. Then shall the Earth bring forth her Encrease, and God, even our own God, shall give us his Blessing. God shall bless us, and all the ends of the World shall fear him. The Prayer. O God, thou great Governour of all Mankind, and judge of the whole Earth, have mercy upon us, and bless us. Thou makest the resplendent Beams of thy unwearied Sun to shine, and cast his Lustre upon all corners of the habitable World, bestowing his Light both on the Good and Bad. II. Let the blessed Light of thy bright Countenance, spread it self to all Na∣tions, and to all People: Lighten all our Darknesses with the radiant Beams of thy Divine Favour, teach
thy ways to all People, and give thy saving Health to all Nations; that all may joyn with one consent to fear thee, and praise thy Name for evermore. Amen.
EJACULATIONS UPON Several Occasions Out of the Holy Scriptures▪ In the Morning MY Voice shalt thou hear betimes, O Lord: Early in the Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up, Psal. 5. 3. My days are like the days of an Hireling. Untill the day
break, and the shadows flie a∣way, Job 7. 1. Cant. 4. 6. At going forth. The Lord preserve my going out, and my coming in: from this time forth, and for ever∣more, Psal. 121. 8. O hold thou up my goings in thy Paths; that my Foot∣steps slip not, Psal. 17. 5. Beginning a good Work. In the volume of the Book it is written of me: I delight to do thy Will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my Heart, Psal. 40. 7, 8. In good Inspirations. The Lord God hath opened my Ear, and I was not rebel∣lious against him, Isa. 50. 5. At Church. O how amiable are thy Ta∣bernacles, O Lord of Hosts, Psal. 84. 1. Before Reading. Speak, Lord, for thy Ser∣vant heareth, 1 Sam. 3. 9.
Speaking. My Heart is inditing a good Matter; I speak of the things which I have made touching the King, Psalm. 45. 1. When you go about worldly Affairs. O let not my heart be incli∣ned to any evil thing: Let me not be occupied in ungodly Works, with the Men that work wickedness, lest I eat of such things as please them. Psalm 141. 4. Deliver me, O Lord, from every evil Work: and esta∣blish me in every good word and work. 2. Tim. 4. 18. God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing; whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Before Eating. Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of eve∣ry living thing. Psalm. 145. 6.
After Eating. The Lord is to be praised, who satisfieth thy Mouth with good things; making thee young and lusty as an Eagle▪ Psal. 103. 4. In prosperity. If I do not remember thee let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I pre∣fer not thee above my chie Joy. Psal. 137. 6. Adversity. The Lord killeth and ma∣keth alive, 1. Sam. 2. 6. Shall we receive good at the hand of God? and shall we no receive evil? Job 2. 10. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his Glory? Luk 24. 26. Troubles. Surely Man walketh in  vain Shew; surely they are disquieted in vain. Psalm. 39. 6.
Calumnies. If I pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. Praises. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, Psal. 115. 1. Against vain Hope. As a Dream when one a∣waketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt de∣pise their Image, Psal. 73. 0. Pride. Whosoever exalteth him∣self, shall be abased, Luke 14. 11. Covetousness. It is more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20. 35. Luxury. Know ye not that your Bo∣dies are the Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15.
Envy. He that loveth not his Bro∣ther, abideth in Sin, 1 John  14. Gluttony. The Kingdom of God is n Meat and Drink, Rom. 14. 1 Anger. Learn of me, for I am me and lowly in Heart, Mat. 1 29. Sloth. Cursed be he that doth t work of the Lord negligentl Jer. 48. 10. Rules of Faith. Remove not the anci Bounds which thy Fath have set, Prov. 22. 28. Acts of Faith. Lord, I believe, help th my Unbelief, Mark 9. 24. I know that my Redeem liveth, &c. Job 19. 25. Hope. Though I walk through t valley of the shadow of Death
I will fear no Evil; for thou art with me, Psal. 24. 4. I will be with him in trou∣ble; I will deliver him, and honour him, Psal. 90. 15. Charity. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire in compari∣son of thee. My Flesh and my Heart faileth; but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever, Psal. 73. 25, 26. Against Worshipping of Idols. To whom will you liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Isa. 40. 18. Woe unto him that saith to the Wood, Awake; to the dumb Stone, Arise, it shall teach; behold it is laid over with Gold and Silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it, Hab. 2. 19.
If ye do return unto the Lord with all your Hearts; then put away the strange Gods, and Ashtaroth from a∣mong you, and prepare your Hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only. Then the Children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashta∣roth, and served the Lord only▪ 1 Sam. 7. 3, 4. Against Popish Tradition. For as much as this people draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lip do honour me, but have re∣moved their Heart far from me, Isa. 29. 13. In vain they do worship me teaching for Doctrines th Commandments of Men, Ma▪ 7. 7. Take heed and beware o the Leaven of the Pharisees an of the Sadduces.
Against Praying to Saints. Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Rom. 10. 13. When you pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. Luke 11. 2. Against Antichrist. Little Children, it is the last time, and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come; even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the last time, I John 2. 18. Let no Man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there come  falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition: Who opposeth and exal∣eth himself above all that is called God, or that is wor∣shipped; so that he, as God, itteth in the Temple of God, he wing himself that he is God.
And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighte∣ousness. 2. Thes. 2, 3, 4, 11, 12. Divine Breathings of the Soul, towards the Eve∣ning. AS the Hart panteth after the VVater-brooks, so longeth my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul is athirst for God, even for the living God▪ when shall I▪ come to appear before the presence of God▪ salm. 42. 1. 2. Thy loving kindness is bet∣ter than life it self; therefore my Lips shall praise thee. Psal 63. 4.
A Prayer for a Family, that may serve for Morning or Evening. O Eternal, Lord God, we thy poor and unworthy Servants, prostrate our selves before thee, in all Humility; to ask pardon for all our Sins and Offences: Thou art a God of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity, yet so infi∣nitely Gracious, that none e∣ver trusted in thee, and was confounded: Thou hadst an Eye upon us, in the Womb, and notwithstanding our un∣worthiness, thou still relievest us, giving us our daily Food, and hourly Breath. II. What can we render unto thee, O Lord, for all thy Mer∣cies which thou continually bestowest upon us: O let the
Ocean of this thy Mercy be a partition betwixt us and our Sins, and betwixt thee and thy Judgments; Remove from us whatsoever displeaseth thee; and we beseech thee be not extream in marking our Imperfections; thou hast gone along with us, and hast kept us and preserved us this Night past, from Fire,In the Morning. Water, Robbe∣ry, sudden Death, and De∣solation: Day past from wilful Snining, Frights,In the Evening. and Fears, Maim∣ing, Drowning, and Fire, from bad Company, and false Wit∣nesses, which might lay to our Charge, things that we know not, and from all other sad Accidents which might have bealn us. III. Bless our gracious Deliver∣ers, and Sovereign Lord and
Lady, K William and Q. Mary, defend their Persons, uphold their Crown, and maintain their State, give them con∣tinual Peace, length of Days, and much happiness: Bless Catherine the Queen Dowager, Her Royal Highness, the Prin∣cess Anne of Denmark, and the rest of the Royal Family: Let thy Blessing be upon this Fami∣ly, guide us in our ways, and lead us in thy Truth: Bless all our Relations and Friends, guide and govern us by thy good Spirit of Grace; and whatsoever thou knowest to be needful and convenient for us, we beseech thee grant it. IV. Lastly, We come unto thee for a blessing, for all that are distres∣sed either in Body, Mind, or Estate, especially those who suffer Persecution, for enjoy∣ing the Light of thy Gospel, and fly into this Land for Suc∣cour:
Hear us, O Lord, for them, and thy whole Church, and hear Christ for us all, in whose Name, and Word, we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, &c. A Prayer before the Communion. O Merciful Jesu, who diedst an ignominious Death up∣on the Cross for my Sins, and didst bequeath in thy last Will and Testament, this holy Sa∣crament for my Souls Nourish∣ment: My Sins, O Lord, are great, but I lament my Un∣cleanness, and renounce my Unworthiness. II. I come not to thy Holy Table, because Worthy, but Necessitous; I come to be made clean and purged from my
Dross and Filthiness; thy Bo∣dy and Bloud can make me Clean, thy Merits can make me a worthy Receiver; and here is a Conveyance of thy blessed Body and Bloud in this Holy Sacrament: Give my Sins thy Pardon, my Soul thy Heavenly Grace, and what thou dost convey, seal unto me, for thy alone sake, my on∣ly Saviour and Redeemer. A∣men. At receiving the Bread. Blessed Jesu, as thou hast given thy Flesh to be the Bread of Life and Salvation; so vouchsafe to work in me by a lively Faith, that I receiving the same, may evermore con∣tinue in thee, and thou in me, Amen. At receiving the Cup. Lord, grant, that as thy Bloud was shed to wash me a poor Sinner; so grant, that it may through a lively Faith
take effect in me, that I may become a fit Member of thee, and live, and die in thee for ever. A Prayer after the Communion. GLory, Honour, and Praise be given unto thee, O Lord, most Holy, for all thy Mercies bestowed upon me: I have now been partaker of Bread and Wine: Lord make me partaker of thy Body and Bloud: The one turns to the Nourishment of my Body; but the other, with thy Grace, is the Nourishment of my Soul. II. O let not thy precious Bloud be shed in vain for my Sins, but let my hearty Repentance, with thy Grace, fully purge me from all Uncleanness: I have
this day been put in mind of the benefit by Christ's Death; let me every day learn to die unto Sin, and live the Life of the Righteous; that at last I may become a new Creature: Unto thee, O Father, my Creator and Preserver; unto thee, O Christ, my Redeemer and Justifier; unto thee, O Holy Ghost, my Sanctifier and Instructer, be ascribed, all Honour, Power, and Glory, now and for evermore. A∣men. For the Church. WE beseech thee, O Lord, graciously to accept the Prayers of thy Church; that she being delivered from all Adversity and Errour, may serve thee in safety and free∣dom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
For the King and Queen. O Lord, we beseech thee▪ Bless our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William▪ and Queen Mary, by thy Gracious Ap∣pointment our supream Go∣vernours; enrich them with all increase of Vertues, where∣by they may be able to eschew Evil, and to follow thee, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For the Royal Family. We beseech thee, O Lord, to Bless Catherine the Queen Dowager, Her Royal High∣ness the Princess Anne of Den∣mark, and the rest of the Roy∣al Family: Grant that they may walk in the ways of thy Holy Commandments, all the days of their Lives, through Christ our Lord. Amen. For the High Court of Parliament. O Lord, Bless the great Council of the Nation, direct
The joyfull Coronation of King William and Queen Mary at Westminster Abby, April the 11th 1689.
April he 11th. 1689. Their Majesties went from  c-hall to Westminster,  Heralds being ready,  Peers in the Lords House, and the Peresses in the Painted Chamber, so that  even in the Morning The Majesties, and the wh Proceeding were conducted to Westminster-hall, where a Throne being erected,  Majesties took Their Sea and after the Ceremon was ended, the Proceeding began from Westminster-Hall to the Abby, where beind in Order, the Lord ishop of London began th the Recognition, which ended with an universal Acclamtion of Joy; then the  of St. Asaph and Banr sung the Ltny▪  ended, the Communion Service began, the Epistle taken out of the 1. Pet. 2. . 17. read by the Bishop o Carlisle; the Gospel, . 22. 16. 22. read by the Bishop of St. Asaph; then followed the Sermon by the  of Salisbury, whose Tex was 2. Sam. 23. 3. 4.  God of Israel said, the Roc of Israel spake, &c. Smon being ended, T Majesties took the Oath, ad were solnmnly anoind  Crowns placed on their Heads by the Lord Bishop of London, assisted by  Lord Bishop of Rochest upon which the Drt, the Trumpets sounded, the great Guns were fired, yet were drowned, in a many the loud Shouts and lamations of the Peopl Many other Royal Ceremo∣nies as used, too tedious to insert in this narrow  About Eight in the Eveing Their Majesties rd to White-hall.
and prosper all their Consulta∣tions, grant that what they do, may be to the advance∣ment of thy Glory, the good of thy Church, the safety, ho∣nour, and welfare of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, and their Kingdoms; that all things may be so well ordered, and firmly settled by their good endeavours upon the best and surest Foundations, that Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety may be established among us, for all Generations. These and all other Necessa∣ries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg for thy Son's sake, our Sa∣viour. Amen. For the Clergy. Almighty and everlasting God, who by thy Spirit dost sanctifie and govern the whole Body of thy Church, Graciously hear our Prayers,
for all those whom thou hast Ordained, and called to the publick Service of thy Sanctu∣ary; that by the help of thy Grace, they may faithfully serve thee in their several de∣grees, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For Friends. I beseech thee, O Lord, for all those to whom I am in∣debted, for my Birth, Edu∣cation, Instruction, Promo∣tion; their Necessities are known unto thee; thou art rich in all things; reward them for these Benefits, with Bles∣sings both Temporal and Eter∣nal. For a Family. Almighty and Everlasting God, send down thy Holy An∣gel from Heaven, to visit, protect, and defend all that dwell in this House, through Christ our Lord.
For a Friend. Almighty and Everlasting Lord God, have Mercy upon thy. Servant N. and direct him by thy Goodness into the way of Eternal Salvation; that through thy Grace, he may de∣sire those things which please thee, and with his whole En∣deavour perform the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For Peace. O God, from whom all Ho∣ly Desires, all good Counsels, and all just works do proceed, give unto us thy Servants that Peace which the World can∣not give, that both our Hearts may be set to obey thy Com∣mandments, and also that by thee we being defended from the Fear of our Enemies, may pass our time, in rest and qui∣etness, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Saviour.
In the time of Plague. Let thy Anger cease, O Lord, and be appeased for the inquity of thy People, as thou hast sworn by thy self. O Holy God, Holy and Strong, Holy and Immortal, have Mercy up∣on us. For a City. Compass this City, O Lord, with thy Protection, and let thy Holy Angels guard the Walls thereof: O Lord, mer∣cifully hear thy People. For Grace. Lord from whom all good things do come, grant unto us thy humble Servants, that by thy Holy Inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding may perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ. For Enemies. O God the lover and preser∣ver of Peace and Charity, give unto all our Enemies thy true
Peace and Love, and Remission of Sins; and mightily deliver us from their Snares, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For the Afflicted. O Almighty God, the Af∣flicted Soul, the troubled Spi∣rit crieth unto thee: Hear, O Lord, and have Mercy, for thou art a merciful God. For Travellers. Assist us mercifully, O Lord, in our Supplications and Pray∣ers; and dispose the way of thy Servants towards the At∣tainment of Everlasting Salva∣tion, that among all the Chan∣ges and Chances of this mor∣tal Life, they may ever be de∣fended by thy most Gracious and ready Help, through Christ our Lord. For the Fruits of the Earth. O God, in whom we live, move, and have our Being, o∣pen thy Treasure, in the due Season, and give a Blessing to
the works of thy Hands, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Against Temptation. Almighty God, which doth see that we have no Power of our selves, to help our selves, keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls, that we may be defend∣ed from all Adversities, which may happen to the Body, and from all Evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ. For Misbelievers and Sinners. Almighty and Everlasting God who desirest not the Death of a Sinner, mercifully look upon all that are deceived by the subtilty of Satan, that all evil Prejudice laid aside, they may return to the Unity of thy Truth and Love. For Temporal Necessities. Replenish those, O Lord, we beseech thee with Tem∣poral
Nourishment, whom thou hast refreshed with thy Blessed▪ Sacraments. Against Tempests. Drive spiritual Wickedness from thy House, O Lord, and preserve it from the malignity of tempestuous Weather. For Women in Travel. O Lord, of thy abundant Goodness, and Mercy, help thy Servants who are in great pains and perils of Child-birth; that being delivered out of their present Danger, they may glorifie thy holy Name, who art blessed for evermore. For the Sick. O God, the only refuge of our infirmities, by thy migh∣ty power relieve thy sick Ser∣vants, that they, with thy gracious Assistance, may be a∣ble to give Thanks unto thee, in thy Holy Church, through Jesus Christ.
For Prisoners. O God, who deliveredst thy Apostle Peter from his Chains, and restoredst him to Liberty, have pity upon thy Servants in Captivity, release their Bonds, and grant them Freedom and Safety: Accept of the hearty Repentance of those that are appointed to dye, and save their Souls for his Merits who liveth and reigneth with thee, and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, VVorld without end. For the Dying. Father of all Flesh, and God of all Spirits, receive the Souls which thou hast re∣deemed with thy bloud, re∣turning to thee. A Prayer before Study. O unspeakable Creatour, who, out of the Treasure of thy VVisdom, hast ordained Hierarchies of Angels, and hast placed them above the
highest Heaven in a wonder∣full order, and disposed them sweetly for all parts of the VVorld; thou, the true Fountain and incomprehensi∣ble Principle of Light and VVisdom, vouchsafe to illu∣minate the Darkness of my Understanding with a Beam of thy Light; remove the Dark∣ness wherein I was born▪, Sin and Ignorance; thou, who makest the Tongues of Infants Eloquent, loosen my Tongue, and pour forth the Grace of thy Spirit upon my Lips, give me acuteness to apprehend, capacity to retain, subtilty to interpret, aptness to learn, readiness to speak; direct my beginning, farther my pro∣gression, and perfect my con∣clusion. When the Bell tolls for a Dying Person. O gracious God, be with this Person in the holy opera∣tions
of thy Grace, and in the yearnings of thy tende∣rest Mercies; in the dreadfull Moment when the Soul shall depart from the Body, and conduct this thy dying Crea∣ture through the Valley of the Shadow of Death unto the Land of everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A concluding Prayer. Almighty God, who hast promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy Son's Name; we beseech thee mer∣cifully to incline thine Ears to us, who have now made our Supplications and Prayers un∣to thee; and grant that those things which we have faithful∣ly asked according to thy VVill, may be effectually ob∣tained to the relief of our Necessities, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
The Peace of God which passeth all understanding, keep our hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord; and the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be with us now, at the hour of Death, and at the Day of Judgment. King Edward the Sixth's Prayer against Popery. LOrd God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life, and take me among thy chosen: Howbeit not my Will, but thy Will be done: Lord I commit my Spirit to thee: O Lord, thou knowest how happy it were for me to be with thee; yet for thy cho∣sen's sake; send me Life and Health, that I may truly serve thee.
II. O my Lord God, Bless thy People, and save thine inheritance: O Lord God, Save thy chosen People of England: O my Lord God defend this Realm from Papistry; and maintain thy True Religion, that I and my People may praise thy Holy Name, Amen. For God's Mercies upon Their Majesties Forces, under the Command and Con∣duct of his Grace the Duke of Schomberg. O Most powerfull and great God, mighty in Battel, fearfull in praises, doing won∣ders; thou hast done mighty things already for us, whereof we rejoice: O be pleased still to continue thy undeserved Mercies towards us, and ac∣complish what thou hast al∣ready
begun for us: Go forth we humbly beseech thee, with our Armies against those who would make a Prey of thy People. II. Protect and guide our great Governour and Commander, whose Commission is to fight thy Battel; Guide him, and Counsel him in all his Under∣takings, and cover his head in the day of Battel; cause those that hate thy Name and Peo∣ple, to flee before him, and scatter them as the dust before the Wind; Crown him with Victory and great Success, that at the last he may return home in Peace and Safety, to thy Glory, their Majesties Comfort, his own Satisfaction, and all the Nation's happiness; this we beg for the Merits of Jesus Christ, Amen.
For Mercy to the whole Nation. O Lord God, who art full of Mercy and Compassion to all thy people, bless us, we beseech thee, from all dome∣stick and foreign Enemies, that would endeavour to ruine our Souls, and betray our Lives: Let thy goodness and loving kindness evermore watch over us to defend, pro∣tect, and keep us from all as∣saults and temptations of the Enemy, and grant that we may live sober, godly, quiet Lives, to the glory of thy Holy Name, Amen.
A Short Account OF THE MASSACRE IN Ireland & Paris. THE Popish Party in Ire∣land pretending the Eng∣lish unjustly detained their Lands from 'em, which were justly forfeited to the Laws, by their continual Re∣bellions and Treasons; they did at last resolve to stir up all the cursed Romish Faction, to shew their utmost Zeal, for the Protestant's Destruction.
When their business was well laid, in their publick Prayers, they recommended the good Success of a great Design, to advance their Ca∣tholick Cause; and to stir up the People to act this Villany, with the greater Cruelty, they publickly discoursed, that the English Protestants were Hereticks, and not to be suffe∣red to live any longer amongst them; that it was no more Sin to kill one of them, than to kill a Dog: and a mortal Sin to protect, or relieve any one of them. When their Plot was ripe for Execution, they proceed∣ed against the English in divers methods; some of the Papists only stripping the Protestants, and turn'd them out of doors naked; others murdering Men, Women, and Children, with∣out Mercy; they all agreed o root out all the Protestants
The most Reverend Bishop Usher. The Irish Rebellion, and French Massacre. The Downfall of Rome.
The Massacre in Ireland happened in the year 1641, which by the learned Bishop Usher was predicted in 1601. at which time the Irish and English Papists, by all manner of cursed Cruelties, murdered near Three hundred thousand innocent English Protestants, without the least cause or provocation given them▪ whose bloud yet cries for Vengeance from Heaven against them, and which we doubt not but the God of Vengeance will judge in his due time. The Massacre of Paris was in the time of bloudy King Charles the Ninth, the Papists used divers means to draw the Chief of the Pro∣testants to Paris, under pretence of a Marriage between the king of Navarre, a Protestant, and the Lady Margaret, Sister to the French King. Admral Coligni, a Protestant Gentleman,  invited to the Wedding, and in the Evening the Duke of Guise sent for the Captain of the Switzers, and shewed him the King's Commission, for murdering the Admiral, and at midnight the Pro∣vosts, Sheriffs, and Captains of every Ward had the same Commission shewed them; the Watch-word for the general Massacre was, The tol∣ling of the Bel in the King's Pallace a break of day, and that the Executioners should be known by white Handkerchiefs tied on their Arms, and a white Cross in their Hats; no soner was the Watch Wo given, but they felt to their Barbarity, and murdered the Admiral, and in two days there was slain in Paris above Ten thousand men, women, and children. Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power being vanquished, Rome's Idolatry must expect its downfall; the Multitude being got together begun to root out their damnable Religion here in England, by falling down, burning, and demolishing most of Their Chappels and Houses; but the utter ruine of Rome will be when she thinks her self most secure, as the learned Bishop Usher mentions in his Prophesie.
in that Kingdom; and so great was their violence, that they would not permit the English Language to be spoke, but punished all that used it; they likewise changed the Names of all English Places, killing, or maiming all sorts of Cattle, which belonged to the English Protestants. The Popish Priests gave their Sacrament to several Irish, on condition they should spare none of the Protestants, but wash their hands in their bloud. They also Excommu∣nicated those that afforded any Relief, so that many were ved and perished; their Friars and Monks exhorted them with Tears not to spare any of the English, and boasted when they had destroyed them  Ireland, they would go into England, & do the like; for they ld it as lawsull to kill an Eng∣lish Man, as to kill a Sheep or
a Dog; and that it was no more Conscience to deprive them of their Lives and sates, than to take a bone from  Dog's Mouth. The day before this bloudy Massacre; the Priests gave them admission after Mass, tel∣ling them, they had now fre Liberty to go and take possessi∣on of their Lands, and  strip, rob, and despoil all the English, of whatever they had that killing them was a men∣torious Act, and would pre∣serve them from the pains  Purgatory; which cause some of these murtherous Vlains, after they had lain multitude of the English, pu lickly to boast, That if the should die immediately, th were sure of Heaven, and escape Purgatory. They then proceeded commit all manner of Cruties and Villanies imaginabl
stripping naked Man, Woman, and Child, driving Eight hun∣dred and odd into a River, where they were drowned, and put one Hundred and Fifty into a Castle, and burned them altogether. An Abstract of their Popish Tortures, and Cruelties a∣gainst the Protestants in Ireland and Paris. A Protestant Woman being delivered in the Fields, they gave the new born In∣fant to the Dogs to be devou∣red. The Irish Women follow∣ed the Camp, and stirred up the Men to Cruelty, crying, Kill them all; spare neither Man, Woman, or Child; yea, such was their detestable Malice, that they taught their Chil∣dren to kill English Children.
An Irish Woman was very angry with a Soldier, that he did not bring the Grease of a at English Gentlewoman, who was murdered, to make Can∣dles with; which they bar∣barously did in many places. By all manner of cursed Cruelties, the Irish and English Papists, in a short time, mur∣dered near three hundred thousand Protestants, without the least cause or provocation, whose bloud yet crys loud for Vengeance from Heaven a∣gainst them, and doubt not but God will avenge it in his due time. Children have been cast to Dogs and Swine to be devou∣red by them. Women great with Child have been hanged up, and their Bellies ripped open, that the Infant has dropped out, and been thrown into a Ditch. Youths have had their
brains dashedout against Trees, and some have been trampled to death. Some Infants have been found sucking the Breasts of their dead Mother. A great Commander took delight to lea off the skins of Men, and to Head his Drums with them. Some have been driven to a River where the Bridge has been broken down, and there drowned; if any of them could swim, they either shot at them with Musquets, or knock∣ed them on the head, as they came near the Land. Some were put into Dunge∣ons full of mire and dirt, and having Bolts put on their Legs there perish'd with hunger. Some had their eyes plucked out, and their hands cut off, and so let go, to pine away in Misery. Many have been stoned to
death, and some have been stripped stark naked, and dri∣ven into the Woods and Moun∣tains in the extremity of Frost and Snow, and there starved. Some have been compelled to carry their own Parents to Execution, others to give fire to the Wood that burnt them. Mothers have been forced to throw their own Children in∣to the Water; Wives to hang their own Husbands; Chil∣dren to hang up their own Pa∣rents; and when they have done all this, in hope, and upon promise of Life, they themselves were barbarously Murthered. Some have been boiled a∣live in Cauldrons; some have been put into a hole in the ground, all but the head, and there forc'd to continue till they died. Some have been driven through the streets naked;
and if, through weakness, they kept not their pace, they were pricked forward with Spears and Swords. Some have been so rack'd and tormented, that Worms have bred in their putrified Sores; Infants have been clo∣sed again in their Mothers Bellies, which the Villains had ript up, and there strang∣led, some have been wounded deadly, and then hung upon Tenter-hooks, and others have been hung by the Arms, that the Souldiers might try their valour, and the strength of their Swords upon them. Some have been ript up, and their Guts let out to trail a∣bout their heels, others have been dragged with Wythes and Ropes about their Necks, through the VVaters, Bogs, Woods, and Streets, to force them to confess their Trea∣sure, which when they had
gotten, they were basely murdered. One hundred and four sheltred themselves in Caves, and by smoak, made with wet straw, at the mouth thereof, have been smothered. The same Cruelties we must have expected again to have aln upon all Protestants, if God in his great Mercy had not prevented them.
Strange and remarkable PREDICTIONS OF THAT Holy, Learned, and excel∣lent Bishop, James Usher, LATE Lord Primate of Ireland. THE Author of the Life of this worthy Archbi∣shop relates, That a∣mongst other extraordinary Gifts and Graces, the Almigh∣ty had bestowed upon him, he was wonderfully endued with a Prophetick Spirit, whereby
he predicted several things sometime long before they came to pass, whereof some we have seen fulfilled, and o∣thers remain yet to be ac∣complished: and though he was one that abhorr'd En∣thusiastick Notis, being too Learned, Rational, and Knowing, to admit such idle Freaks and Whimsies: Yet he profest, That seve∣ral times in his Life he had many things imprest upon his Mind, concerning future E∣vents, with so much warm∣ness and importunity, that he was not able to keep them secret, but lay under an un∣voidable necessity to make them known. From which Spirit he fore∣told the Irish Rebellion Forty years before it came, with the time when it should break forth, in a Sermon at Dublin, in 1601; where from Ezek. 4.
6. discoursing concerning the Prophets bearing the iniquity of Judah forty days, the Lord therein appointed a day for a year: He made this direct Ap∣plication in relation to the connivance of Popery at that time. From this year, says he, will I eckon the Sin of Ireland, that those whom you now embrace, shall be your ruine, and you shall bear this Iniquity. Which Prediction proved exactly true; for from that time 1601, to the year 1641, was Forty years, in which it is notoriously known, that the Rebellion and Destruction of Ireland happened, which was acted by those Popish Emissa∣ries, which were then conni∣ved at. And of this Sermon the Bi∣shop reserved the Notes, and made a Remark of it in the Margent of his Bible; and for 20 years before, he lived
in the expectation of the ful∣filling of it, and the nearer the time was, the more he was confident it was near accom∣plishment; though as yet, there was no visible appearance. The year before the Rebel∣lion brokeforth, (says Dr. Ber∣nard) The Bishop taking his leave of me, being going from Ireland to England, he advised me to a se∣rious Preparation; for I should see heavy Sorrows and Miseries before I saw him again; which he deli∣vered with as great Confi∣dence, as if he had seen it▪ which seems to verifie that of the Prophet, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he will reveal it to his Servants, the Pro∣phets. From this prophetick Spi∣rit he foresaw the Changes and Miseries of England in Church and State; for having in one of his Books, (De Prim. Eccl. Brit.) given a large Ac∣count
of the Destruction of the Britains, by the Saxons, about 550 years after Christ, he gives this among other Rea∣sons, why he insisted so large∣ly upon it; That he foresaw that a like Judgment was yet behind, if timely Repentance and Reformation did not pre∣vent it; and he would often mourn upon the foresight of this, long before it came. From this Spirit he gave mournfull intimations of the Death of King Charles the I▪ of whom he would be often speaking with fear and tremb∣ling, even when the King had the greatest Success; and would therefore constantly pray, and gave all Advice pos∣sible, to prevent any such thing. From this Spirit he foresaw his own Poverty in Worldly things; and this he would of∣ten speak of, with admiration
to the Hearers, when he was in his greatest Prosperity, which the event did most cer∣tainly verifie. From this Spirit he predict∣ed the Divisions and Confusi∣ons in England, about Religi∣on, and the sad Consequences of it; some of which we have seen fulfilled, and I pray God the rest, which he feared, may not also be accomplished. Lastly, from this Spirit he foretold, That the greatest stroke upon the Reformed Churches was yet to come; and the time of the utter ruine of Rome should be when she thought her self most secure; and to this last, I shall add a brief Account from the Per∣son's own hand who was con∣cern'd. The year before the Pri∣mate's Death, I went to him, and earnestly desired him to grant me in Writing his Appre∣hensions
of Justification, and Sanctification by Christ, be∣cause I had formerly heard him Preach upon those Points, wherein he seemed to make those great Mysteries more in∣telligible to my mean Capaci∣ty, than any Discourse I had heard from others; but by reason I had an imperfect Memory of the particulars, I took the boldness to impor∣tune him, That he would please to give me a brief Ac∣count of them in writing, whereby I might the better imprint them in my memory; o which he would willingly have excused himself, by de∣claring, his Intentions of not writing any more; adding, That if he did write any thing, it should not exceed a sheet or two: but upon my continued importunity, I at last obtai∣ned his promise. He coming to Town some
time after, was pleased to give me a Visit; where I fai∣led not to challenge the bene∣fit of his promise made to me; to which he replyed, That he had not writ, and yet could not charge himself with any breach of promise; for (said he) I did begin to write, but when I came to write of Sanctification, that is, of the new Creature, which God formeth by his Spirit in every Soul, which he doth truly regenerate, I found so little of it wrought in my self, that I could speak of it only as Parrots by rote, and without the knowledge and understand∣ing of what I might have exprest; and therefore I durst not presume to pro∣ceed any farther upon it. When I seemed to stand a∣maz'd to hear such an humble Confession, from so great and
experienced a Christian. He added: I must tell you, we do not well understand what San∣ctification, and the New Creature are; it is no less, than for a Man to be brought to an entire resignation of his Will to the Will of God, and to live in the offering up of his Soul, continually in the flames of love, as a whole Burnt-offering to Christ, and how little (says he) are many of those who profess Christianity experi∣mentally acquainted with this Work on their Souls. By this Discourse, I con∣ceived he had very excellent∣ly and clearly discovered to me that part of Sanctification, which he was unwilling to write. I then presumed to enquire of him, what his present ap∣prehensions were, concerning
a great Persecution which should fall upon the Church of God in these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, of which this reverend Pri∣mate had spoken many years before, when we were in Peace and Settlement. I ask'd him whether he did believe those sad times were past, or to come, he told me, They were to come, and that he did as fully expect it, as ever he had done: adding, That this sad Persecution would fall upon all the Pro∣testant Churches in Europe. I replyed, I hoped it might be past, as to these Nations of ours, since I thought, that though we have been punished much less than our Sins have deserved, and that our late Wars have made far less de∣vastations, than War common∣ly brings where it pleaseth God in Judgment to suffer it;
yet we must needs acknow∣ledge, that many great Hou∣ses have been burnt, ruined, and left without Inhabitants; many great Families impove∣rithed and undone, and many thousand lives also had been lost in that bloudy War, and that Ireland, and Scotland, as well as England, had drunk ve∣ry deep of the Cup of God's Anger, even to the overthrow of the Government, and the ut∣ter Desolation almost of a very great part of those Countries. But this holy Man turning to me, and fixing his eyes up∣on me with that serious and irefull look which he usually had, when he spoke God's Word, and not his own; and when the Power of God seem∣ed to be upon him, and to constrain him to speak, which I could easily discern much to differ from the Countenance wherewith he usually spake to me. He said thus:
Fool not your self with such hopes; for I tell you, all you have yet seen, hath been but the beginning of Sorrows, to what is yet to come upon the Protestant Churches of Christ, who will e'er long fall under a sharper Persecution than e∣ver yet has upon them; and therefore (said he to me) look you be not found in the out∣ward Court, but a worship∣per in the Temple before the Altar, for Christ will mea∣sure all those that profess his Name, and call themselves his People; and the out∣ward Worshippers he will leave out, to be trodden down by the Gentiles. The outward Court (says he) is the formal Christian, whose Religion lies in per∣forming the out-side Duties of Christianity, without ha∣ving an inward life and pow∣er
of Faith, and Love, uni∣ting them to Christ, and these God will leave to be trodden down and swept a∣way by the Gentiles; but the Worshippers within the Temple, and before the Al∣tar, are those who do indeed Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is honoured and adored in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him; and these God will hide in the hollow of his hand, and under the shadow of his Wings. And this shall be one great difference between this last, and all the other preceeding Persecutions; for in the for∣mer, the most eminent and spiritual Ministers, and Chri∣stians did generally suffer
most, and were most violent∣ly fallen upon; but in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God, as  Seed to partake of that Glo∣ry, which shall immediately follow, and come upon the Church, as soon as ever this Storm shall be over; for as it shall be the sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Perse∣cution of them all, and shall only take away the gross Hypocrites, and formal Pro∣fessors, but the true spiri∣tual Believers shall be pre∣served till the Calamity be over-past. I then asked him by what means or instruments this great Tryal should be brough on. He answered, By th Papists. I replyed, Th it seemed to me very impro∣bable they should be able t do it, since they were no little countenanced, and b
few in these Nations, and that he Hearts of the People were ore set against them, than e∣er since the Reformation. He answered again, That it would be, by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden Massacre; and that the then Pope should be the chief Instrument of it. All this he spake with so great assurance, and with the same serious and concerned Countenance, which I have before observed him to have, when I have heard him fore∣tel some things which in all humane appearance were very unlikely to come to pass, which yet I my self have lived to see happen according to his Pre∣diction: and this made me give the more earnest attention to what he then uttered. He then added, That the Papists were in his opinion the Gentiles spoken of in the Ele∣venth of the Revelations; to
whom the outward Court should be left, that they might tread it under foot; they having received the Gentiles Worship, in their a∣doring Images, and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many Mediators: and this (said he) the Pa∣pists are now designing a∣mong themselves, and there∣fore be sure you be ready. This was the substance, and I think (for the greatest part) the very same words which this holy Man spake to me, not long before his death, and which I writ down, that so great and notable a Prediction might not be lost by my self or others. This gracious Man repeated the same things in substance to his only Daughter the Lady Tyrrel, and that with many Tears, and much about the same time that he had exprest
the aforesaid to me, and which e Lady Tyrrel assured me of ith her own mouth to this rpose: That opening the door of s Chamber, she found him ith his eyes lift up to Heaven, d the Tears running apace own his Cheeks, and that e seemed to be in an Ecstasie, herein he continued for a∣out half an hour, not taking e least notice of her, though e came into the Room; but  last turning to her, he told er, That his thoughts had en taken up about the Mi∣ries and Persecutions that ere coming upon the Chur∣es of Christ, which would e so sharp and bitter, that e contemplation of them d fetched those Tears from s Eyes, and that he hoped e should not live to see it, ut possibly she might, for it as even at the door; There∣fore
take heed (says he) that y be not found sleeping. The same things he also r∣peated to the Lady Bysse  Wife to the Lord Chief. B∣ron of Ireland; but addin this Circumstance, That  they brought back the King,  might be delayed a little long∣er, but (said he) it will sr come; therefore be sure to look th you be not found unprepared for it. To conclude in the Wor of Dr. Bernard, speaking  this excellent Person: No howsoever I am far fro heeding of Prophecies, ye with me it is not improbabl that so great a Prophet, s sanctified from his Youth  so knowing, and emine throughout the univers Church, might have, at som special times, more than o∣dinary Motions and Impu∣ses in doing the Watch-man  part, of giving warning o Judgments approaching.
The Spanish Invion, 1558. Gun powder Treason, Nov 5. 1605. The Arrival of the Prince of Orange Nov. 5. 1688.
The Thanksgiving for the Deliverance from the Spanish Arada, was August 7. 1558. their Fleet was 150 Ships, and 65 Galleons, which were to join the Duke of Parma, who had 32 Ships of War, 70 Flat-bottoms, and 20 Boats which lay in Newport Haven, with 2000 empty Cass to chok Havens, and make Bridges: To this Design the Pope contribute a Million of Gold. November the 5 1605. was our great Deliverance from the Hellish Powder-Plot, and e miraculous finding of it out, was by a Letter sent to the Lord Mounteagle, to advise him to take care of himself, for the Parliame should receive such a Blow, and not see who hurt them: The Conirors were Everard Digby Knight, Robert Catesby Esq Ambrose Rockwood Esq Francis Tresham Esq Ro∣bert VVinter Esq Tho. Piercy Gent. Tho. VVinter Gent. John VVright Gent. Christ. Wright Gent. John Grant Gent. Robert Keys Gent. Gy Fax, and Bates, Catesby's Man: Provisions for this horrid Design was 36 Barrels of Powder, 500 Faggots, and 1900 Billets. November the 5. 1688, was our happy Deliverance from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power, by the Arrival of the Prince of O∣range, who landed with a considerable Army at Brixam Key in Devonshire, where the whole Country congratulated him, and brought Plenty of Provisions and Necessaries for the Sdiers.
Thanksgivings for God's wonderful Deliverances. From the Spanish Invasion. WE laud and magnifie thy holy Name for this won∣derfull Deliverance wrought for our Ancestors, which were surrounded with fear of Roman Slavery, and Popish Usurpati∣on, which would have destroy∣ed both Queen and Kingdom, when their Gallies and Ships came to assault us, with mur∣thering Pieces, and Instru∣ments of Cruelty, which none but Satan and themselves could invent; as Whips to scourge us, Seals to mark us, and Fet∣ters to manacle us.
II. They were full of Pride calling themselves Invincible and had hemm'd us in on every side, trusting in their own Arm of Flesh, and pursuing our ruine and destruction; then, O Lord, thou didst awake as one out of sleep, and, as a Giant, refresh∣ed with Wine, and smotest our Enemies in the hinder parts, putting them all to confusion: Blessed be thy Name for this, and all other Mercies bestowed upon us, and grant that we may never want thankfull▪ Hearts to praise thee. From the Gun-Powder Treason, No∣vember 5th. 1605. Blessed Lord, whose Eye of Providence watched over us, and didst discover to us those hellish Contrivances which were laid in the dark, but not hid from thine All-seeing eye; Rome's Factors were then busie in contriving to blow up the
Bodies of our King and Nobles with a most barbarous and un∣natural invention. II. What had they done to them to be adjudged to so strange a Death? and what had they done for thee, to be so graci∣ously preserved? as we consi∣der their inhumanity in laying their cruel project, so we must acknowledge thy Goodness in revealing the same, to whom be glory, now, and for ever, Amen. For our Deliverance from Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power. O Eternal God, who hast wrought so great a Delive∣rance to all thy People, by raising up happy Instruments for thy Glory, and our Peace and Safety, even thy Servants, our dear and dread Soveraign Lord and Lady K. William and Q. Mary, who, like Moses, stood in the Gap, between us and Phara∣oh's Cruelties.
II. Thou hast delivered us, O Lord, thou God of Mercy, when we were even ready for destruction, Tyranny, and what else their Roman Malice could invent, or slavish yoke have imposed upon us; but blessed be thy holy Name, that thou hast snatched us as a Brand out of the Burning, and hast restored those good Laws and Liberties, which our Fore∣fathers lave enjoyed; teach us to prize & value this great Mer∣cy, that all Nations may say, happy are the people, that are in such a Case, yea happy is the People whose God is their Lord. For the Relief of London-Derry. in Ireland. O Lord of Heaven and Earth, who didst in thy great Mercy remember thy poor Servants when they were in trouble, and besieged round about, being in great necessity
s race the Duke of Scmberg. The Valiant Governour Walker. The Siege of London-derry, 1688.
The Irish and French Forces being leaded by the late King James, laid close Siege to London-derry, at which time Collonel Lundy, and others,  driven away by fear, they were destitute of a Governour, the Town then consisting of about Nine thousand Fighting men, they  chose Col. VValker their Governour, and preserved the Place couragiously, enduring great extremity; but at last they were supplie with Provisions by way of the River, and the Besiegers, after great loss sustained, drew off and left them, August the 13th. His Grace  Duke of Schombergh lnded his Forces in Ireland, near Carrickfergus, and reduced divers Places to obedience, causing the French and Irish Army to retrea. Not long after, Governour Walker safely arrived in England, and waited upon their Majesties at Hampton-Court, with an humble Address from the Governours, Officers, Clergy, and Gentlemen in the City and Garison of London-Derry, at which time His Majesty was pleased, as a Mark of his Royal ounty, to order him Five thousand Pounds, with this Assurance, That it should not at all lessen his Kindness to him and his Family.
for want of Food, and other Necessaries, thou didst in thy due time send them Relief and Succour, else they had peri∣shed in their Affliction. II. And what can we render, O Lord, sufficient for these things; our best thanks we can pay, O God, are less than the least of all thy Mercies; yet in the mean time we desire to acknowledge thine abundant Goodness, and loving Kindness to us, and to praise thy Name for evermore. For the Gifts of God. I yield thee all humble and hearty Thanks, O mercifull God, that by the Death of thine only Son hast redeemed us from death to life, and hast continually a care of us, pre∣serving us as the Apple of thine Eye from the dangerous As∣saults of Satan, and providest for us all things necessary, that
more Thanks and Praise is due unto thee, than the Tongue of Men or Angels can declare. II. Accept these my Praises and Thanksgivings, O Lord, Ibe∣seech thee, and encrease in me a daily desire to praise thy Goodness, acknowledging e∣very good and perfect Gift to come from thee; to whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glo∣ry, now and for evermore, Amen. To God for all his Benefits. Most merciful God, we yield thee humble thanks for thy continual favour and kindness towards us thy poor and un∣worthy Creatures, for whose Salvation, when we were lost, thou wert pleased, even of thy mere Love, to send thine only beloved Son, Christ Jesus, into the World, taking hu∣mane Nature upon him, and
suffering most bitter pangs of Death upon the Cross, to re∣deem us again to thy favour. II. Such, O Lord, was thine unspeakable Love, for which we are never able to pay the least recompence; but give us, O Lord, thankfull and obe∣dient hearts, that we may yield thee praises not only with our Lips, but in our lives; not only in giving thy Son for us, but in leaving unto us a continual remembrance of the same thine unspeakable Love, thy Holy Gospel, wherein consists the rule whereby we are directed; and though Heaven and Earth pass away, yet not one tittle of that shall decay or diminish; for with∣out which we should have been in our accustomed Igno∣rance: accept us, we beseech thee, in thy Son, our blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen.
Christian Courage IN AFFLICTION. A Prayer before the follow∣ing Advice to the besieged Souldiers in London-Derry, under the Command of that worthy Divine and most Loyal and Valiant Commander Col. Walker. O Most Eternal Lord God, whose Providence never fails those who trust in thy Name and Word, mercifully we beseech thee to cast down thy Eyes of Pity and Compassion upon us miserable Sinners which are here met together; we do in all humility
prostrate our selves before thy Divine Majesty, beseeching thee to pardon all our Sins, and help our Infirmities; O Lord, we are not able of our selves to do any thing, but offend thee, com∣mitting daily and hourly Sins without number: but, O Lord, hear thy Son Christ Jesus for us, and nail them to his Cross, that they may never rise up in Judgment against us, either to shame us in this World, or condemn us in the World to come; bury them in the bottomless Sea of thy Mercy and Forgetfulness, that they may never appear before thee, to hinder thy Fa∣vours unto us; seal the remission of them to our Souls and Consciences, that they may not disturb or distract us in our Devotions and Duty; pour thy Grace and holy Spirit into us, that may enable us to walk before thee in Holiness, Righteousness, and in Sobriety, all the days of our lives. Bless we beseech thee, our dear and dread Soveraign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, Katherine the Queen Dowager, the Princess Anne of Denmark, and
the rest of the Royal Family: Bless the Archbishops, and Bishops, with the rest of the Dispencers of thy holy Sa∣craments, and grant that the light of thy Gospel may never depart from us. And Lastly, we come unto thee for a Blessing upon our Governours, Com∣manders, and fellow Souldiers; guide and conduct them in this Calamity, fortifie them with Courage and Strength against our Romish Adversa∣ries, that thy Name may be glorified, our Lives preserved, and our Souls Eternally saved, in the great day of the Lord Jesus, when all flesh shall appear. Grant that our Meeting at this time may be for the better, and not for the worse; to praise and glori∣fie thy holy Name, in whose holy Name and Word we put up these our imper∣fect Prayers, in that most absolute and perfect form of Prayer which Christ himself bath taught us. Our Father, &c.
Christian Courage IN AFFLICTION. A Discourse by way of Advice to the besieged in London-Derry. 2 Chron. 20. Chap. Verse 9. latter part of it. Be not afraid nor dismay'd by▪ reason of this great multi∣tude; for the Battel is not yours, but God's. THE Context runs thus, And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye Inhabitants of Jeru∣salem, and thou King Jehosha∣phat: Thus saith the Lord unto you, Be not afraid, nor dismaied
by reason of this great multitude; for the Battel is not yours, but God's. These are the words of God, which he commanded Jahaziel the Prophet to deliver to Jeho∣shaphat King of Judah. When the Moabites and Ammonites came to make War against him, to dispossess him of his Kingdom, verse the 8th of this Chapter, and may be a seasonable Text for this Auditory. Our Sins indeed are many, which have justly provoked God's heavy Wrath against us: and our Enemies are very nu∣merous which surround us, therefore now let us cry mightily unto God, earnestly beseeching him, that he would pardon all our Sins, blot out all our Iniquities, and receive us graciously; let us sincere∣ly repent and be heartily sorry for our manifold Transgres∣sions committed against him, so shall we by his Divine Assistance
be in a readiness to encounter with Roman Malice, these Moa∣bites and Ammonites, who are E∣nemies to our Lives, Religion, Laws, and Liberties; and be animated with Courage to go out cheerfully against Rome's Force and Cruelties, fighting manfully the Lord's Battel, e∣very one of us, laying his hand upon his Heart, with this comfortable Expression in our Mouths, Be not afraid, nor dismaied by reason of this great multi∣tude, for the Battel is not ours, but God's. Servile Fear is the harbin∣ger of the Guilty, and a slavish timorousness belongs not to the Strong and Couragious, but a God like Fear attends upon the Vertuous, and pro∣duces Success in their Under∣takings. Holy Job that great Proficient in God's School, and great Example of Christian Patience tells you, Job 28. 28.
The fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil is Under∣standing. This is the only su∣pream Good and Fear, which secures us from committing, shameful Acts, and creates a circumspection in our Lives; for as the shadow of the Body is followed by the Sun, so doth Glory attend Vertue in our progress to Christ. Let us then put our whole trust in God, in this time of danger, and take the Royal Prophets resolution, Psal. 118. 6. Not to fear what man can do unto us; but rather fear the Lord, who pi∣tieth those that fear him, Psal. 103. 13. It is the Duty of every one of us to be circumspect in our Lives, but more especially at this season and time of Afflicti∣on, when the hand of God is stretched out against us; when the Enemy waits even at our doors ready to devour us, when
they stand gaping ready to swallow us up quick, and none of us can prognosticate how soon his Life may be lost, or be in danger; therefore it be∣hoves us to lay hold on that Advice which St. Paul gave the Ephesians, Ephes. 6. 10, 11. Be ye strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand. So shall we be fortified with that Courage which is mentioned here in my Text, of being not afraid, or dismaied by reason of this great multi∣tude, for the Battel is not ours, but God's. Be not afraid, or dismaied by rea∣son of this great multitude, is the Command of God, and there∣fore in obedience to his Com∣mand let us humbly obey his Divine Order, and valiantly fight under his Protection. A multitude there is, and very great; what then, the Battel is
God's, and David tells us, 1 Chron. 16. 5. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; he is also to be feared above all Gods. The mul∣titude here in my Text were Moabites, and Ammonites; but the multitude which layeth close Siege to us, are Jesuits and bloudy Papists, whose damnable Principles, and hellish Do∣ctrines are to quench the light of the Gospel, to root and de∣stroy all Christianity, who blasphemously think to gain Heaven by Massacring God' People, and triumph in the effussion of shedding innocent Bloud: it is their Glory to lay Kingdoms wast, and Coun¦tries desolate, reduce Cities to Ashes, and ruine Families those which will not fall down to worship their Idols, false Gods of Wood and Stone, are fit objects of their Fury; their Cruelty is beyond what Ma∣lice can invent, or Hell ima∣gine,
and Solomon gives a true Character of them, Prov. 27. 4. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is out∣ragious; but who is able to stand be∣fore Envy? But God will pour out his Wrath upon them, and shoot at them with his Arrows, that they shall be wounded, his Ven∣geance will speedily overtake, and drown them, like harden'd Pharaob in the red Sea of Per∣dition; let him who hath pro∣voked God to Anger, lay his hand on his Heart, and now say with Nehemiah, Shall such an one as I flie? Shall I whom God hath honoured so much, dishonour him by Oaths so greatly? who am placed in an higher Sphere than others, be ei∣ther a dim or a wandering Star? Shall I who am most obliged to God by the Bonds of Wealth and Power, exceed the bounds of Truth and Ju∣stice? whom he hath made a Ruler of the People, not rule my self and my own Kingdoms according to his Gol∣den
Rule? God forbid. God will not permit their Romish poli∣cy to overthrow our Christian Piety, he will not suffer them to break the bruised Reed of the Di∣stressed, nor quench the smoaking Flax of their Necessities, he will be a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light un∣to our Path in this Extremity; there∣fore be not afraid, or dismaied by rea∣son of this great multitude, &c. We must every one of us look upon this great Affliction as sent from God, for he knows what is better for us, than we do for our selves; and that which seems most evil at present, may turn at last to our greatest benefit. None of us ought to despair of God's Mer∣cy, for when our weak Appre∣hensions of God are such as drive us from him, we over∣throw the main end of Religi∣on, which is to bring God, and our selves nearer toge∣ther. None ought to exclude
themselves from God's Mercy, whom he excludes not from it; and God excludes none, whom he invites to repent, with a promise of forgiveness, if they do it: and the goodness and long suffering, and forbear∣ance of us Sinners, is on pur∣pose design'd to lead us to Re∣pentance; so that after all this, to despair, and fail in our Courage, is only to reject the Mercy which God offers, but to question his truth and sin∣cerity, to slight his Patience, to disparage his Goodness, and to look upon him as a most re∣vengeful and implacable Be∣ing, is to admit and en∣tertain most dishonourable and unworthy Thoughts of the Best, the Wisest, the most merciful and compassionate Be∣ing in the World, who hath proclaim'd himself, Exod. 34. 6, 7. To be a God merciful and gra∣cious, long-suffering, and abundant
in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mer∣cy for thousands, for giving Iniquity, Transgresson, and Sin; that is, to all that truly repent: So that when we consider, we have no reason to despair of his Mer∣cy to us, but readily and wil∣lingly to obey his Command, and not shrink from those prin∣ciples which prompt us to his Honour and Glory, in whose Service is perfect freedom; but to rouse up our selves like Men, stand upon our Guard, fortifie our selves and be vigi∣lant, not being afraid, or dis∣maied by reason of this great multi∣tude; for it is God's cause which we fight for, and our Lives cannot be better imploy∣ed than in his Service, from whom we received all we have, or can pretend to; there∣fore let us press forwards in o∣bedience to his Command, for the Battel is not yours, but God's.
When the Lord's Battel is to be fought, we must endea∣vour to follow his holy Order and Discipline, and not our own sinfull Lusts and Appe∣tires, like brute Beasts, which have no understanding: Let us seriously consider, I beseech you, what it is we fight for? it is to defend our Religion, and oppose Idolatry? to main∣tain Truth, and beat down Falshood? to exalt Glory, and decry Shame? and to enjoy our Freedom, and not espouse Slavery? Let happy England now be our pattern for Loyal∣ty Magnanimity & Courage; then shall we arrive at that se∣rene State, which holy David expresses, Psal. 85. 10. where Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other; if on the contrary we revolt, nothing can be ex∣pected but Parisian Slavery to thrall us, and Romish Idola∣try
to attend us: Have we not felt the smarting Rod of Po∣pery for many years? yea, within a few years, when Legality was changed into Ar∣bitrary Government; Ortho∣dox Religion grosly invaded and innovated; Popish Do∣ctrines publickly preached; Crucifixes erected; Adora∣tion to Saints and Altars pra∣ctised, and Ten Ave Maria's said for one Pater Nesler? The same may be said of Ireland, as once a Reverend Divine wit∣tily said of England: Though it was but a little Place, yet there was a great deal of ROME in it. And shall not I visit for these things? saith the Lord, shall not my Soul be a∣enged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5. 9. yes surely, God will a∣venge himself, and defeat all their Policies; he will laugh a their Galamity, and meek when the  cometh, when their fear come as desolation, and destruction as
Whirlwind. Prov. 1. 25, 26, 27. he is able, and will deliver us, if we trust in him; he has pro∣mised us, who will not break his Word: Psal. 50. 15. Call up∣on me in the time of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. Therefore let us be all of one mind, and not halt be∣tween Two Opinions, but stand fast, Fear not, nor be dis∣mayed, for the Battel is not ours, but God's. Is it God's Battel we are to fight? let not sloth then seize upon us, or a supine Careless∣ness take hold of us; but let us quit our selves like Men, and fight, 1 Sam. 4. 9. securing to our selves that Religion, the Light of that glorious Gospel God hath given us, not for∣getting to take the Prophet Jeremiah's Counsel, in the 6. wap. of his Prophecy, ver. 16. pend ye in the way, and see and ask  the good old paths, where is the
good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest unto your Souls. The well compacted Hedge of our Laws was trodden down: let us therefore be diligent, and repair those breaches our Sins have made, by our ear∣nest Supplications to the Throne of Grace; so true is that Maxime, Inter Arma, silent Leges, The Voice of Law can∣not be heard for the noise of Drums, and the threatning Cannon. O let Policy now amongst us ever give place to Piety; and now let me exhort the chiefest amongst us, be∣seeching you to let your pri∣vate Affections be swallowed up in the common Cause, as small Rivers lose their Name in the Ocean. That practice of Pompey deserveth well your observation and imitation, who when his Soldiers would needs leave the Camp, threw himself down at the narrow
Passage, and bid them goe, but they should tread first up∣on their General. So let your pious Resolutions, and valiant Examples stir up the Courage of our weak Brethren; ex∣pose your selves to the worst of dangers, and endure the brut, that they may not de∣sert you; may it be your Glo∣ry in after Ages, to be loudly proclaimed, that you were the Champions of the Lord to fight his Battel; that you stood in defence of your Re∣ligion against gross Idolatry; that you promoted Peace a∣gainst bloudy Persecution; and rather choose to endure Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Plea∣sures of Sin for a Season. In our Duty in Matters of Reli∣gion, we are no farther to walk after Ruler's Commands, than they walk after God's; Fatherly power is the rise of
all Authority; and yet our Saviour tells us, He that loves Father or Mother more than him, is not worthy of him, Mat. 10. 37. Parents must be honoured, but God preferred; it is as true in regard of Regal as Pa∣ternal Authority; the Instan∣ces of the Hebrew Midwives, Exod. 1. 17. the three Wor∣thies, and Daniel, are obvi∣ous to all, Dan. 3. 18. 6. 10. That Epithete that was given to Bcn of Doctor Resolutus, in this Case well becomes every Christian. It was a just Re∣solve of Luther in divine Mat∣ters, Cedo nulli; and a remarka∣ble Speech of the Apostles. Acts 4. 19. 5. 29. That we ought to obey God rather than Men; it is true, when the supream Au∣thority enjoins what God in∣hibits, we must patiently un∣dergo the punishment inflict∣ed, but not willingly walk af∣ter the Commandment pre∣scribed.
It was a pious Speech of King Henry the Eighth to Sir Thomas More, when he made him Chancellour, Look first at God, then at me. St. Augustine's Rule is excellent, The Supream Power hath a Superiour in Heaven; for fear of one, we must contemn the other; the one may threa∣ten the Prison, but the other has ordained Hell. In a word, neither must Princes leave the People to their own Will, nor the People conform them∣selves to the Prince's Will, but both to God's Will in Matters of Religion, lest o∣therways both Prince and People be consumed. But, O Lord, we have sin∣ned against thee, and as the Prophet David says Psal. 76. 7. Who can stand in thy sight, when thou art angry? no Bounds could keep us from Sinning, and therefore God's Wrath knows no Bounds in punishin
our Transgression was above Measure, so God's Judgment is without Measure. It is St. Chrysostom's Note, concer∣ning that fiery shower which God rained upon Sodom, That as the Sodomites inverted the course of Nature, to seek Woman in Man; so God changed the Or∣der, by showring down Fire instead of Water. Thus doth the Almighty's Justice ever proportion the Smart to the Fault; so that here we may at once behold the greatness of our Sin in the punishment, and the fitness of the punishment to the Sin; Invasion, and be∣ing Besieged by Romish Adver∣saries, for our neglecting God's Commands, which ought to be our Rule, and de∣spising of his Goodness, which should lead us Sinners to Re∣pentance.
But as the Water that is poured on the Earth, can ne∣ver be gathered up again; so let us pour out all our Sins, and God will not pour out all his Wrath: let us speedily cast a∣way the filth of our Trans∣gressions, and he will soon stop the current of his Indignati∣on; let us cheerfully reform, and he will willingly assist us, let us repent of our provoca∣tions, and he will bring us out of this Calamity; may this our great work, be wisely and speedily accomplished, and by the Divine Assistance, and our weak endeavours faithfully performed, that the power of Religion may be advanced, the Name of God honoured, the fury of our Enemies sup∣pressed, the Hearts of Gospel-Friends comforted, and which is above all, and beyond all, Christ over Antichrist, in the purity of his Gospel among
us and our Posterity for e∣ver. Which God of his infi∣nite Mercy grant us, to whom be ascribed, as most due, all Honour, Power, and Glory, Adoration and Subjection, now, and for evermore. The Prayer afterwards. BLessed, Lord, who at our Strength, Hope, and Fortress, our Castle, and Deliverer, our Defender in whom we trust; how the Heavens, O Lord, come down and save us, send down thine Hand from above, deli∣ver us, and take us from the great Waters, from those Miseries and Afflictions which come upon us, by reason of our Sins, and from the Con∣dition of Mortality, and from the hand of strange Children, whose right hand is a right hand of Wickedness. Give us, O Lord, Victory and Peace, and all the Blessings belong∣ing to it, with which thou usest to adorn and beatifie the Dwellings of
the Righteous, that we may be happy in the continual descent of thy Fa∣vours; but above all, that our hap∣piness may consist in being thy People, and thou being our God, that we may be blessed for ever in so happy a Union, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer for the preservation of our most gracious Sove∣raign Lord King William, in his Royal Undertaking to Subdue Ireland, and for his safe Return to England, O Most mighty God, the great Cre∣atour of the World, and the Preserver of all Mankind; pre∣serve, we beseech thee, our most gra∣cious Soveraign Lord, King William, whom thou hast made the happy In∣strument of our mighty Deliverance:
Let thy Blessing accompany him in his Journey, and Voyage; protect him from all Dangers; visit him as thou didst Moses in the Bush, Joshua in the Battel, Gidon in the Field, and Samuel in the Temple: Let the Dew of thy never failing Mer∣cies fall upon his Head, and give him the blessing of David and Solomon. II. Be unto him an Helmet of Salvati∣on, and cover him with thy Grace, as with a Buckler against the Face of his Enemies; dissipate, and scat∣ter all those which shall oppose him, as the Dust before the Wind, and as the Clay in the Streets, direct him in all his Counsels, to the end, that being blessed with Success in this great De∣sign, he may employ all that great Power which thy Omnipotence shall ntrust him with, to the Honour of thy Holy Name, the establishment and Advancement of the True Religion, and to the Peace, and Happiness of thine, and his People, and the per∣fect Deliverance of our poor Di∣stressed
Brethren in Ireland, that they may rejoice together with us, and triumph in thy Praise. III. Grant him in this Enterprize a good Event, that he may Return home with Joy and Victory: Let his Reign be prosperous, and his days many; let Peace, and Love, and Holiness, let Justice, and Truth, and all Christian Vertues, flourish in his Time: Let his People serve him with Honour and Obedience; and let him so duly serve thee here on Earth, that he may hereafter everlastingly Reign with thee in Heaven, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.
THE CONTENTS. WHen we first awake Pag. 1. A Prayer for the Mor∣ning, 2. A Prayer for the Evening 3 Sunday Mornings Meditations 5 The Prayer 10 Sunday Noons Meditations 12 The Prayer 13 Sunday Nights Meditations 14 The Prayer 16 Monday Mornings Meditations 17 The Prayer 19 Monday Noons Meditations ibid. The Prayer 21 Monday Nights Meditations 22 The Prayer 23 Tuesday Mornings Meditations 24 The Prayer 25 Tuesday Noons Meditations 26
The Prayer 27 Tuesday Nights Meditations 28 The Prayer 29 Wednesday Mornings Medita∣tions 30 The Prayer. 32 Wednesday Noons Meditations 33 The Prayer 34 Wednesday Nights Meditations 35 The Prayer 36 Thursday Mornings Meditations 37 The Prayer 38 Thursday Noons Meditations 39 The Prayer 41 Thursday Nights Meditations 42 The Prayer 43 Friday Mornings Meditations 44 The Prayer 46 Friday Noons Meditations 47 The Prayer 49 Friday Nights Meditations 50 The Prayer 52 Saturday Mornings Meditations 53 The Prayer 55
Saturday Noons Meditations 56 The Prayer. 57 Saturday Nights Meditations 58 The Prayer 59 Ejaculations upon several Occasions out of the Holy Scriptures▪ IN the Morning 61 At going forth 62 Beginning a good Work ibid. In good Inspirations ibid. At Church ibid. Before Reading ibid. Speaking 63 When you go about worldly Affairs ibid.
Before Eating ibid. After Eating 64 In Prosperity ibid. Adversity ibid. Troubles ibid. Galumnies 65 Praises ibid. Against vain hope ibid. Pride ibid. Covetousness ibid. Luxury ibid. Envy 66 Gluttony ibid. Anger ibid. Sloth ibid. Rules of Faith ibid. Acts of Faith ibid. Hope ibid. Charity 67 Against Worshipping of Idols ibid. Popish Tradition 68 Praying to Saints 69 Antichrist ibid. Divine Breathings of the Soul to∣wards the Evening. 70
A Prayer for a Family, that may serve for Morning or Evening 71 A Prayer before the Communion 74 At Receiving the Bread 75 At Receiving the Cup ibid. A Prayer after the Communion 76 for the Church 77 for the King and Queen 78 for the Royal Family ibid. for the High Court of Parliament ibid. for the Clergy 79 for Friends 80 for a Family ibid. for a Friend 81 for Peace ibid. in time of the Plague 82 for a City ibid. for Grace ibid. for Enemies ibid. for the Afflicted 8 for Travellers ibid. for the Fruits of the Earth ibid.
A Prayer against Temptations 84 For Misbelievers and Sinners ibid. For Temporal Necessities ibid. Against Tempests 85 For Women in Travel ibid. For the Sick ibid. For Prisoners 86 For the Dying ibid. A Prayer before Study ibid. When the Bell Tolls for a dying Person 87 A concluding Prayer. 88 King Edward the Sixth's Prayer a∣gainst Popery. 89 A Prayer for God's Mercies upon their Majesties Forces under the Command and Conduct of his Grace the Duke of Schomberg 90 A Prayer for Mercy to the whole Na∣tion 92 A short account of the Massacre in Ireland 93 An abstract of their Popish Tortures and Cruelties 97
Bishop Usher's Prophecy concerning Rome's Downfal 103 Thanksgivings for God's wonderful Deliverances. A Thanksgiving for our Delive∣rances from the Spanish In∣vasion 121 From the Powder Treason▪ November the 5th 1605. 122 For our Deliverance from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitra∣ry Power 123 For the relief of London-Derry in Ireland 124 For the Gifts of God 125 To God for all his Benefits 126
A Prayer before the fol∣lowing Discourse. 128 Christian Courage in Affliction, a Discourse by way of Advice to the Besieged in London-Derry, under the Command of that worthy Divine, and valiant Commander, Col. Walker 131 The Prayer afterwards 150 A Prayer for the preservation of our most gracious Saveraign Lord King William, in his Royal Vndertaking to Subdue Ireland, and for his safe Return to Eng∣land. 151 FINIS.
