W349 12349211 59931
A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Present STATE OF IRELAND, &c.
A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Present STATE OF IRELAND, GIVING A full Relation of the New Establishment made by the late King James, as it was presented to the Right Honble the Earl of Shrewsbury, His Maje∣sties Principal Secretary of State, and others of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. With an account of what Sums of Money, Arms, and Number of Officers arrived there from France: Together with the State of Derry and Enniskil∣ling, and several other Affairs relating to that Kingdom, particularly of the Proceedings of their Parliament there. By a Person that with great difficulty left Dublin, June the 8th 1689. Licensed and Entred according to Order. Printed by Edw. Jones, for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Pauls Church-yard. MDCLXXXIX.
A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Present STATE OF IRELAND, GIVING A full Relation of the New Establish∣ment made by the late King James, &c. DURING my stay at Dublin, (which with much difficulty and hazard, I left on June the 8th,) I made it a great part of my Business to be well inform'd of the State of Affairs in Ireland, and of the most remark∣able matters that past there, which I had the oppor∣tunity of doing, as well by my own Observation, as by what I received from Persons of Credit, that I frequently conversed with; that thereby I might be enabled to give such an Account, as might be service∣able
to the Government here, upon my Arrival to be acquainted with, which in the following Narrative, I have endeavoured to do with all possible Sincerity and Impartiality. The Revenue of Ireland is quite sunk, no Money being raised, but by the Excize, that for this Year and half past, there has not been paid one Penny of the Civil List; and now the late King has been for∣ced to make a new Establishment, and gives only Half Pay, which he calls Subsistance; They grumble at it, and are ready to Mutiny: To the Foot Three pence per day, and for the Officers 'tis no matter, he makes them Content; The Dragoons have Five pence fa∣thing; and the Horse Six pence per day: He propo∣seth this, One half Money, and the other—For∣rage. The Horse Granadiers Fifty in each Troop, Seven Regiments of Horse 2750. Men; Seven Re∣giments of Dragoons, 3800 Men; The Royal Regi∣ment of Foot, Twenty two Companies 1980 Men. Forty two Regiments of Foot more 33852 Men. The total is, 42432. Of this Army, there are about 17000▪ drawn Northwards, against Londonderry, and Enniskilling, which are of the best, both of Horse and Foot, and have been so harassed, that within these ten days past, they were not in any condition of Service; there are Five thousand more gone after these, to∣wards Enniskilling, and more on their March, so that there are near Twenty five thousand gone against Londonderry and Enniskilling. Besides this, they designed two Camps by Dublin, which Camps were to consist of 14000 Men, the
first Grand Camp was to be at Ratharnam, betwixt that and Rathmines, on the South of Dublin, in the view of the Harbor. The next Camp was to be un∣der the Hill of Dunsink, near the Cabaragh, North-West of Dublin, and in view of the Bay also. Colonel Sarsefield lies at Sligoe with his Own Re∣giment, and some Dragoons, and has received seve∣ral Rubbs from the People of Enniskilling. It is said, there came One hundred and fifty thou∣sand pound with the late King, from France to Ire∣land; and Three hundred thousand pound with the Fleet, that arrived at Bantry; but by as near a com∣putation as possibly can be made, we cannot find that there came above One hundred and fifty thou∣sand pound in all, the first being Sixty thousand pounds, and the last, Ninety thousand pounds: and about Nine hundred French, English, Scotch, and Irish Officers came this last time with the Fleet, all which receive the same allowance with the Officers of the Army, proportionable to their Stations and Qua∣lities. The French Ambassador influences all Affairs, both Civil and Military, and 'tis discoursed amongst themselves, what a prejudice he has against his pre∣sent Majesty, having formerly been Ambassador in Holland; he often presses for severity to be used against the Protestants. No violence whatever, that is acted by any of the French, dares be complain∣ed of, but it is stifled immediately, and he that com∣plains is frowned on. He has influenced the passing the Bill for destroying the Act of Settlement, inso∣much, that he has said, that he would go again to
France, if it were not done, to tell his Master. Monsieur Boysloe, the Governor of Cork's Letter to the French Ambassador, was the occasion of the Im∣bargo at Dublin, on Saturday, May 18. last past. The late King is wholly at their Discretion, and Tyr∣connel is mightily discomposed, both in Body and Mind, since the King came: For the French Ambas∣sador said, If any one had served his Master as he did, (about Londonderry) in taking away the Lord Mount∣joy's Regiments, he would have lost his Head. The Am∣bassador Commands the Treasury, and not one far∣thing is paid out, without his leave, for he views the Muster Rolls, before he suffers any payments to be made so that the Design is plain French, and to bring this Kingdom wholly under them, that thereby they may divert England from annoying France: But now they are become obnoxious to the People of Ireland, who see, all that is for the French, so that great dis∣content is upon the Spirits of the Irish, on the ac∣count of the French being put into Imployments, for they generally say, and allow, that Ireland is given to the French King, in consideration of the Charges he shall be at, in helping the late King James, towards the regaining of the Kingdoms of England, and Scotland. Monsieur Boysloe at Cork, seizes the Merchants Goods, Drinks their Wines, and in short, takes away from them, whatever he has a mind to, with∣out making them any satisfaction; and says, it is a shame, that any Correspondence should be held with the Rebels of England.
The Enniskilling People have rummaged the Coun∣trey for near thirty Miles round about them, and brought in all the Cattle and Forrage they could find, and have disarmed several Companies of the new raised Irish; and 'tis talked of by the late K. and the Castle, that the Garrison of Enniskilling were so resolute, that they would attempt the raising of the Siege of Derry; the fear of which does somewhat alarm them, for about the latter end of May they came near to Kells, thirty Miles from Dublin, and Westward as far as Finnah, burning Luke Reily, High-Sheriff of the County of Ca∣van's House, with the Houses of other considerable Pa∣pists who were in Arms against them, killing only three Soldiers at a place call'd Drum, because they refu∣sed to quit their Arms; and as one Brady who is a Papist, and an Inhabitant there declares, That they were the fairest Enemy that ever came into a Country, not injuring any person that lived peaceably, leaving a Troop of Horse in the Town of Cavan, until all the Army were marched away, to see that no injury might be done to the common people: He likewise says, they drove along with them about four or five thousand head of Cattel, that had lately been taken from the English. As for the State of Enniskilling it is said, that they are in a very good Condition for Provision and all other Necessaries as yet, and that there are there, and at Bally∣shannon eight hundred able Horse besides Foot, who are brave resolute Men: Most of them being Gentle∣men out of Munster and Connaught, that fled thither, who are resolved to loose their Lives, and sacrifice all rather than yield.
On June the First there marched from Dublin Sir Michael Creagh, the present Lord-Mayor, with his Re∣giment, Sir John Fitz Gerald from Rathcoole and Lucan, with his Regiment, with several others from other parts, towards Trim, twenty Miles from Dublin, the place appointed for the General Rendevouz of the Ar∣my that are sent against Enniskilling; Coll. Sarsfield from Sligoe is to joyn them, and so to march to Enni∣skilling to attacque it, with a Resolution to bear it down: All Sir Michael Creagh's Regiment raised in Dublin, Sir John Fitz-Gerald's from Munster, and most that are gone down there, are all raw Fellows, not know∣ing how to fire a Gun. There are gone from Dublin General La Rose, Ge∣neral La Roy, Count D' Estrades, and several other of the General Officers of France, towards Enniskilling, with four Field-Pieces. They have sent before-hand to buy up all the Corn in East and West Meath, to be brought to Kells, twenty-seven Miles from Dublin, and forty from Enniskilling, which is the place appoin∣ted for their Store, for beyond that there is no man∣ner of Provision to be had; so that in all probability they will meet with the same Penury and Want that they have had these two Months past before London-Derry. Now for the State of London-Derry; it is said this morning at the Castle, they have surround∣ed it within half Cannon-shot, and taken the Wind-Mill-Hill, which the Town quitted, and had thrown up their Trenches, and drawn up all their Army on Friday last, and so modeled and divided them into two Bodies to compass the Town, placing them in their several Posts. Mon∣sieur
Pontee was to have Bomb'd it before, but he found when he came to examine, that the Fusees of the Bombs did not fit, some being to little, o∣thers to big, which he having new moulded and worked up, did as he himself said, intend to be∣gin to Bomb on Sunday the second instant. They hear that there are Ships in the River, which they believe will endeavour to Succour London-Derry; but by the help of Culmore Fort, with o∣ther Batteries they have raised, together with the Chain and Bomb they have fixt a-cross the River, they hope to prevent them. There is an Account sent up from the Camp, of the Names and Behaviour of the several Of∣ficers there, with which they make themselves sport at the Castle, particularly the Lord Galmoy, running himself into a Ditch of Briars; Lord Kingsland getting into a Bush of Furrs, together with the Valour of Sir Gregory Birne, and Sir Luke Dowdall, &c. A Dragoon that was shot into the Shoulder, and came up to his Friends near Dublin, to get Cure, said, that abundance were lost for want of care being taken of them; that he himself had ended his days, if he had staid; that he left 400 lying of their Wounds in the Church of Culmore; that they had lost near 7 or 8000 by the Sword and Sickness, since they sat down before Der∣ry. The Duke of Barwick, James Fitz James, and
Lord George Howard, are said to be in Brook-hall, at Sir Matthew Bridge his House, near Kilmore, a curing of their Wounds. They likewise give out, they are in great want of Provision in the Town, and are so crouded, that they are very noisom and full of Vermine, for that several who have been taken and killed, are found to be so. But in truth, as to the State of their own Army, they have lost as many for want of Conveniencies, as have been killed: For the Bloody-Flux, Small-pox, Feavers, and Agues be∣ing among them, they die extreamly fast in the Irish Camp; the generality of their Sustenance being nothing else but Oatmeal and Water, with some raw lean Beef, insomuch that the spirits of the men are mighty low, and very weak. There are gone down to them abundance of French Officers, that are to be prefered as Com∣mands fall, with great resolution what they will do when they come there. They did not carry any of their great Guns or Bombs over the River, but they lie on the o∣ther side, and so play over the Water at London-Derry. Since there sending the Army towards Enniskilling, the People of East, and West-Meath have raised the price of Corn extreamly. The Kerry Forces are drawn to the Shannon to fortifie all places on it, as Lymerick, Athlone, &c. All the best of the Forces are clearly drawn out
of Munster, except the Major-General's Regiment, which is now Commanded by one Monsieur Boy∣sloe, a most tyrannical French-man, who with his Regiment is now at Cork▪ where he exercises an ab∣solute Authority, that no manner of Complaint against him will be heard, though he thrust out one of the Protestant Sheriff of Cork's eyes, and swore he would make no more of blowing up all the Protestants in their Churches, than of a Child in a Cradle. He threatens to Hang any that shall be taken going away; and if four Pro∣testants be together, he looks on it as a Conspi∣racy, and sends them to Goal: They have like∣wise imployed Spies about Dublin, to see if any Protestants meet or talk together; and are mighti∣ly incensed at the Imbargo in England, because they cannot have a free Correspondence with their Friends there. June the Fifth, the late King declared, He expected in a Week's time, if the Wind served, a great Fleet from France, and a numerous Army of Land-men; that the Fleet after landing their Men, would repair to the Downs, to find out and fall on the English Fleet. Some of his Council advise him to Scotland; others to Chester with his French and Irish Forces, as soon as Derry is taken. They have lately imprisoned several persons in Dublin, on a pretence for Plotting and Correspond∣ing with the Rebels in the North, and England, &c. and in searching for Treasonable Papers and Arms, they took away whatever Money they could
find in the Houses of the several persons. They likewise threaten another Search for Arms very suddenly, when it is not questioned▪ but they will take all Money and Plate away, for they are erecting a Mint for the Coyning of Money. One thing more is to be observed, That the Po∣pish Clergy has ordered all their People not to pay one Farthing to any Protestant, but to stand it out to the uttermost, till they are compelled by Law; the Design being visible, that they would utterly Extirpate the English there. The Wind no sooner blows Easterly, but they are in great dread and fear; yet they tell us, there is Confusion in England, and that there will no Succours come from thence; that they will land an Army in England suddenly; and that Eng∣land fears an Invasion from Ireland, more than it doth from them: Their usual saying is, You Whiggish Dogs, we will make you know, that the Prince of Orange is not come yet; and we will do your business before he comes, for when we come back from London Derry, we will make an end of you all. And the Irish Tenants and Neighbours of the English, that formerly lived in amity with, and chiefly depended on them, do continually send the Souldiers to the Protestants Houses, telling them, that Whiggs live there; where they go and eat up their Provisions, ta∣king away their Horses from the Plow, and what∣ever else they have a mind to, giving them horrid Abuses besides; so that many Families who for∣merly lived very plentifully, have not now left them Bread to eat.
The Popish Clergy appear in Multitudes, and are going forward with all their Chappels and Buildings, and looking out for Abbeys and Nun∣neries, and do exasperate the King mightily a∣gainst the Protestants. The Lord Melfort is also very violent against them; and the Lord Chan∣cellor (though an English-man) worse than he. On Whitson Monday, the Town of Drogheda was alarm'd by two Officers who rid thorough it to∣wards Dublin, telling them, That the Scots were within six Miles, and had taken the great Guns, Carriages, Ammunition, and Provisions, that were going to Derry, and killed the Convoy: Whereupon they immediately planted their Guns, and shut up the Gates; having only two Compa∣nies of the new raised Men, and a few Horse of the Lord Gilmoys in the Town: An Express was sent immediately to Duleek, where the Commissi∣oners of Enquiry into the Estates of the Absenters were met, (who being busied in Swearing and Examining the Tenants of the Earl of Drogheda, and others, as to wat Rents they paid, and what Arrears of Rent were due) requiring them to Re∣pair to the Town, and bring with them what Strength they could to fortifie the Town: Some being sent out to know the truth of the matter, returning, told them, It was only a false Alarm; tho' it was generally said and believed, that several Cart loads of their Ammunition, Provision, and Arms▪ were intercepted and taken by the People of Ballishannon and Enniskilling.
There has been a Motion in the House of Com∣mons for the Naturalizing all Frenchmen, insomuch that some said in the House, that they ought to have a Day of Thanksgiving, for the coming of the Prince of Orange into England. They are preparing for another Court of Claims, and reducing the Fees of all Offices, throwing all Forseitures into the Stock of Repri∣sals; into which Stock the late King has thrown his private Estate that he had in Ireland. The old Proprietors are taking possession daily, before the Act that makes void the Settlement of Ireland passeth; some of them paying the Quit-Rent to get into possession; Eight Protestant Peers, four being Spiritual, and four Temporal, entred their Protest at the Bill passing the Lord's House, and Mr. Justice Dayly opposed it to that degree, that in his Passion he said many things that were highly resented, the substance whereof was, That instead of being a Parliament, as we pretend, we are more like Massanello's, confused Rabble, every Man making a Noise for an Estate, and talking Nonsence, when our Lives are in Danger: we expect a sudden Invasion from England, and a bloody War likely to ensue; as Persons alto∣gether unmindful of the Ruine that hangs over our Heads; and without taking any Care to prevent it, we are dividing the Bears skin before she is taken. All the Honour we do His Maje∣sty, is, by reflecting on His Royal Father and
Brother, as wicked and unjust Princes, charging them with enacting those Laws that were con∣trary to the Laws of God and Man. Which the House summed up in six Articles against him: They would have been contented with a Submissi∣on, but he refused any, saying, He would go to Jamaica rather: Yet his Friends prevail'd on him at this Juncture, to ask the Pardon of the House; and yesterday he was to have come into the House of Commons; and accordingly the the House being sat, the Usher of the Black Rod went in and acquainted the Speaker, that Mr. Justice Dayly was at the Door; upon which it was put to the question, in the House, Whether his asking of Pardon should be a sufficient Satis∣faction for them to pass by his Miscarriages; and it being carried in the Affirmative, Mr. Nugent of Carlingstown, in West-Meath, a Member of the House, was ordered to go and acquaint him, that the House was resolved to accept of his Sub∣mission; that so there might be admittance for his coming to receive Pardon of the House. Mr. Nugent returning into the House, told the Speaker that Mr. Justice Dayly was very thank∣ful, and ready to come in to make his Submissi∣on; and at the same time said, Mr. Speaker, I have other great News to tell you, viz. London-Derry is taken. Upon which there was three great Shouts set up in the House, and throwing up their Hats, cryed out, No Submission of Mr. Justice Dayly; We Pardon him, we Pardon him; being transported with joy, suffered him not to come
in, but pardoned him without any Submission at all. But afterwards some of the Members (none of Mr. Dayly's Friends) finding it false, thought it was some Trick put on them, and threatned Mr. Nugent, to bring him on his Knees before the House. They are now passing an Act that all Leases a∣bove One and Twenty Years, of any Corporati∣on in Ireland, shall be void; and it is doubted whether Dublin will be excepted▪ They are like∣wise laying fifteen Shillings a Tun Duty upon Sea-Coals: And taking away the Poundage Act, which in Corporations is the Clergies support. The Ʋlster Act for Tithes, and the Act for Im∣propriations and Augmentation Lands; that so by taking from the Clergy their Maintenance the Churches may fall of themselves. An Act At∣tainting all Persons by Name; and another grant∣ing fifteen thousand Pounds per Month, for Sup∣plies to King James. There are five new Peers created, viz. Justin Maccarty, Lord Viscount Mount-Cashel. Sir Valentine Brown, Lord Viscount Kenmare. Thomas Nugent, C. J. Lord Baron of Riverstown. John Bourk, Lord Baron Bouffin. Sir Alexander Fitton, Lord Baron Gawsworth.
A CATALOGUE Of all the NOBILITY of Ireland, such being Marked who now sit in the Irish Parliament. Dr. Michael Boyle, Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland. † Alexander Fitton, Baron Gawsworth, Chancellor. Dr. Francis Marsh, Lord Archbishop of Dublin. Dr▪ John Veasy, Lord Archbishop of Tuam. Archbishoprick of Cashell void. Richard Boyle, Earl of Cork, Lord-Treasurer. Dukes. James Buttler, Duke of Ormond. † Richard Talbot, Duke of Tyrconnel. Earls. John Fitz-Gerrald, Earl of Kildare. Henry O Brian, Earl of Thomond. † Richard Bourk, Earl of Clanrickard. James Touchet, Earl of Castlehaven. † Richard Barry, Earl of Barrymore. † Alexander Mac Donnel, Earl of Antrim.
† Richard Nugent, Earl of Westmeath. Cary Dillon, Earl of Roscommon. Thomas Ridgway, Earl of London-Derry. William Fielding, Earl of Desmond. Edward Brabazon, Earl of Meath. John Vaughan, Earl of Carbery. Luke Plunket, Earl of Fingall. Arthur Chichester, Earl of Dunegall. Richard Lambert, Earl of Cavan. William O Bryan, Earl of Inchequin. † Donogh Mac Carty, Earl of Clancarty. Lionel Boyle, Earl of Orrery. Charles Coot, Earl of Mounteath. Henry Moore, Earl of Drogheda. Charles Talbot, Earl of Waterford, &c. Hugh Mountgomery, Earl of Mount-Alexander. Roger Palmer, Earl of Castlemain. Nicholas Taaf, Earl of arlingford. † Richard Poore, Earl of Tyrone. Richard Jones, Earl of Rannellagh. † Francis Aungier, Earl of Longford. † Arthur Forbes, Earl of Granard. † William Dungan, Earl of Lymerick. Viscounts. † Jenico Preston, Viscount Gormanstown. † David Roche, Viscount Fermoy. † Richard Butler, Viscount Mount-Garret. George Villers, Viscount Grandison. James Anslow, Viscount Valentia. † Theobald Dillon, Viscount Costello and Gallen.
Nicholas Nettervile, Viscount Dorath, a Prisoner in Derry. Arther Loftus, Viscount Ely. Thomas Beaumont, Viscount Sword. † Arthur Magennis, Viscount Iveagh. Thomas Needham, Viscount Kilmurry. † Dominick Sarsfield, Viscount Kilmallock. Theobald Bourk, Viscount Mayo. Patrick Chaworth, Viscount Armagh. George Sanderson, Viscount Castletown. John Scudamore, Viscount Sligoe. Richard Lumley, Viscount Waterford. Philip Smith, Viscount Strangford. Philip Wenman, Viscount Tuam. Charagh Mullineux. Viscount Maryborough. William Fairfax, Viscount Emely. Pierce Butler, Viscount Ikerin. Thomas Fitz-Williams, Viscount Mirrion. † Maximilian O Dempsey, Viscount Clanmalere. Brian Cockin, Viscount Cullen. Tracy, Viscount Rathcoole. Francis Smith, Viscount Carrington. Richard Bulkley, Viscount Cashell. William Brounker, Viscount Lyons. Richard Ogle, Viscount Catherlagh. † Pierce Butler, Viscount Gilmoy. Nicholas Barnwel, Viscount Kingsland. Francis Boyle, Viscount Shannon. John Skevington, Viscount Mazereene. Hugh Cholmondy, Viscount Kells. Evelin Fanshaw, Viscount Drummore. † Daniel O Bryan, Viscount Clare.
Lewis Trevor, Viscount Dungannon. Maurice Berkley, Viscount Fitzharding of Beer∣haven. William Canfield, Viscount Charlemount. Foliot Wingfield, Viscount Powerscourt. Murrogh Boyle, Viscount Blessington. James Lane, Viscount Lanesburrow. John Deny, Viscount Down. † Richard Parsons, Viscount Ross. William Stuart, Viscount Mountjoy. Adam Loftus, Viscount Lisbone. † Ʋllick Bourk, Viscount Galloway. † Justin Mac Carty, Viscount Mount-Cashel. † Valentine Brown, Viscount Kenmere. Bishops. † Dr. Anthony Dobbing, Lord Bishop of Meath. Dr. William Morton, Lord Bishop of Kildare. Dr. Hugh Gore, Lord Bishop of Waterford and Lismore. —Clonfort, void. —Clogher, void. † Dr. Thomas Ottaway, Lord Bishop of Ossery. Dr. Ezekiel Hopkins, Lord Bishop of Derry. Dr. Thomas Hacket, Lord Bishop of Down and Con∣nor. Dr. John Roan, Lord Bishop of Killalow. † Dr. Edward Wettenhall, Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross. † Dr. Symon Digby, Lord Bishop of Lymerick and Ardfert.
Dr. Richard Tennison, Lord Bishop of Killala and Arconrah. Dr. William Smith, Lord Bishop of Rapho. Dr. William Sheridan, Lord Bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh. Dr. Narcissus Marsh, Lord Bishop of Fearns and Leighlin. Dr. Edward Jones, Lord Bishop of Cloyn. Dr. Capel Wiseman, Lord Bishop of Drummore. —Elphin, void. Barons. † Almericus Courcy, Baron Kingsale. William Fitz-Morris, Baron Kerry. † Christopher Flemming, Baron Slane. † Thomas St. Lawrence, Baron Hoath. † Robert Barnwell, Baron Trembleston. † Christopher Plunket, Baron Dunsany. † Pierce Butler, Baron Dunboyne. † Brian Fitz-Patrick, Baron Upper Ossery. Matth. Plunket, Baron Lowth. † William Bourk, Baron Castle-Connel. † Pierce Butler, Baron Cahir. † Theobald Bourk, Baron Brittas. Stuart, Baron Castle-Stuart. Thomas Folliot, Baron Ballishannon. William Maynard, Baron Wicklow. Richard George, Baron Dundalk. Robert Digby, Baron Geashill. William Fitz-Williams, B. Lifford. Henry Blaney, Baron Monaghan.
† Dermot Malone, Baron Glanmahur. Edward Herbert, Baron Castle-Island. John Calvert, Baron Baltimore. William Brereton, Baron Leighlin. Henry Hare, Baron Coleraine. Benedict Sheridan, Baron Leitrim. † Connor Mac Guire, Baron Enniskilling. † Claud Hamilton, Baron Strabane. Francis Hauley, Baron Dunmore. William Allington, Baron Killard. Robert King, Baron Kingston. Richard Coot, Baron Killooney. Richard Barry, Baron Santrey. Altham Ansloe, Baron Altham. † John Bellew, Baron Duleek. Charles Bertie, Baron Shelborn. † Thomas Nugent, Baron Riverstown. † John Bourk, Baron Boephin. † Alexander Fitton, Baron Gawsworth. The House of Commons consists of Three hundred Persons and upwards, only two Prote∣stants, Sir John Mead, and Mr. Coghlan: Two others that have passed in former days, but now are look'd upon to be of the Popish Interest.
The Substance of the New Irish BILL for making void the English Settlement of IRE∣LAND. IMprimis, Acts of Settlement: Act of Expla∣nation and Resolution of Doubts, void. 1. Every one to be restored to his Possession, as in 1641. 2. Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons, &c. made void, released and discharged. 3. All Records taken off the File, and Cancelled before one or more of the Commissioners. 4. Any Officer not performing this, to Forfeit Five hundred Pound. 5. Three or more Commissioners for Claims. 6. All Injunctions to stay Decrees of the said Court, void. 7. The Sheriffs refusing to Deliver possession, to be Punished.
8. Where Deeds are Wanting, the Sentence of the Commissioners not Definitive. 9. All Releases, Conveyances, &c. to be good. 10. The Old Estate of Transplanters, to be charged with the Interest of Purchase-Mony, as they sold their Interest in Connaught. 11. Reprizals for all honest Purchasers, for good and valuable Considerations, since the Act of Settlement. 12. Transplanted Purchasers, to be Reprized of equal value and purchase out of the Forfeited Lands. 13. A Rebellion is now begun, and several are gone to England, Scotland, Wales, and the Isle of Man, by which they Forfeited from the First of August 1688. All Entails, Remainders, &c. to be cut off. 14. Commissioners to Inspect into the Forfeitures, in order to give Reprizals by Commissions under the Great Seal▪ if thought necessary. 15. In Claim, to Insert the quantity, quality, and true yearly▪ value, County, and Reserved Rent.
16. To be Reprized, such as really purchased before the First of November last, but not Affinity. 17. Upon Certificate of the Commissioners, the Lord Chancellor to pass Letters-Patents. 18. Before Reprizal, to make full proof of the Original-Mony paid for the transplanted Pur∣chase. And the ancient Estate to which he is to be restored, to be charged with, &c. 19. If the Transplanted Discover, &c. to discover the Purchase, or to forfeit double the Mony; One Moiety to the Discoverer, and another to the King. 20. Provided the Ancient, &c. invested in the King. 21. Newry Restor'd to Dudly Bagnal Esquire, it being the Estate of Nicholas Bagnal. 22. The Quit and Crown-Rent Reserved, and forfeiting Lands to be Charged to Lands to be Restor'd. 23. All Original Debts in 1641, to be and stand Charged: The Lands to be Restor'd.
24. All Reprizals to be liable to the same Condi∣tions and Debts, and their former Estates. 25. All Incumbrances or Judgments due on For∣feiting Persons, and Entred before the 22th of May 1689; And where he Forfeited, to be Reprized. 26. Transplanters, Proprietors, their Reprizals or Ancient Estate, to be liable to the same Incum∣brances and Conditions, as the former Estate. 27. Lessees to continue, in case it be not the Mansion-House or Demesn-Lands, not exceeding One and twenty years, or Three Lives. 28. Whose Husbands died out of Possession, Wi∣dows to be Dowable. 29. The Lord Clanrickard, &c. That all Deeds, &c. be good, saving to all old Mortgagees.
A LETTER FROM Colonel Walker, GIVING A Full Account of the Treachery of the late Governour of London∣derry. WHen the Lord M—y left the Garrison of Londonderry, He gave private Orders to the Colonel he left Commander in Chief, That he should punctually observe whatsoever Directions he should receive from him from France. Now such were the Circumstances of that unfortunate Lord, that being sus∣pected by the late King James, and lookt upon as the Betrayer of that
Kingdom, He had no other way of insinuating into his Favour, and regain∣ing his lost Reputation with him, but by promising to make Colonel L— an Instrument to break and ruin the Protestants, and render them incapable of opposing any Army, that should March against them. The deluded Protestants in Derry, and all over the North, were extremely over∣joy'd, that they had so good a Souldier for their Head; One whom they really believ'd to be of their own Religion, and who seem'd to be so zealously and warmly Affected to Their Interest; and therefore they entirely relied and de∣pended upon his Courage and Fidelity, and submitted themselves to his Conduct and Management, never entertaining the least Suspicion of him till it was too late; thô it was Whisper'd in every Corner of the Garrison, That he had said, He would heartily Fight against Tyrconnel, but not against King James. At length a formi∣dable and regular Army of the Irish
March'd down towards the North; Our Forces then having not the least Intima∣tion of their Approach, till they came almost to the Towns where our Men were Garrison'd, which they were forced to quit in great disorder and confusion. The Colonel in the mean time sat quietly at home, neither made any pro∣vision for the Frontier Garrisons, nor gave any Orders to Fortifie and Secure them, and oppose the Enemy, before they were Blooded and Animated with Success. Soon after (without any opposition) they overrun the two great Counties of Doun and Antrim: And then the Colonel sent Letter after Letter to the Lord K—n at Sligoe, where there was good store of Provisions and Forage, to come and joyn his Horse at last with the Lagan Forces. The Lord sent him word, That if the Horse came away, the Foot would not be perswaded to continue there; and that he feared there was not such plenty of Provision for their Horse and Men in the Lagan, as they had at Sligoe. Upon this Answer, the Colonel
sends an Express to my Lord, That both his Horse and Foot should quit Sligoe, and March immediately to the assistance of Derry. My Lord wearied with these Importu∣nities, and not in the least mistrusting the Integrity of the Colonel, advances with his Forces, and was followed by all the Inhabitants of the Town. But no sooner were they come to Ballishanon, 20 Miles from Sligoe, but they receiv'd a Message from the Colonel, That there was not Fo∣rage for the Horse in the Lagan. The Enemy by this time had possest themselves of Sligoe; so that they were forc'd to stay at Ballyshanon, where both their Horse and Men were exposed to the greatest Neces∣sities, and were almost destroy'd for want of Provisions. All this while the Towns of Eniskilling and Ballyshanon had no Ammunition sent them from him, thô he had at the same time above 500 Barrels of Powder in the Pullir Store-house at Derry; neither could he be perswaded by any Argu∣ments,
to get Forage into Derry, thô the Neighbouring Country round about him had great quantities of Hay and Oats, and made a voluntary offer of them for the service of the Garrison. Besides, as if he had along design'd the Ruin of that Place, and consequently of the Protestant Interest in Ireland, he still gave Passes to every Man that ask'd them: He endeavour'd to possess them that were the most Bold and Resolute, with strange apprehensions of their Danger; and where this suc∣ceeded not, out of the abundance of his Affection, he courted and invited others to accept of Passes. Afterwards, when the Enemy made their approaches nearer Derry, He drew out a Body of 7000 Men, pretending he would fight them at a Pass they were to come over: But as soon as ever Colo∣nel Shelden (with his Horse) advanc'd, He gave him the Sign to come over, and ran away, Swearing a great Oath and saying, Gentlemen, I see you will not
Fight. Thô at the same time, they were in all appearance very zealous and wil∣ling to Engage. From thence he im∣mediately fled to the City, and then shut the Gates upon Thousands of Souls, pretending scarcity of Provisions, who all either perished for Hunger, or were left as a Prey and Sacrifice to the rage and fury of their insulting Enemies. Soon after Colonel C—and R—with two Regiments came to the assi∣stance of Derry, whom he discouraged from staying; declaring, That they had Provision but for a very few Days, and that the People who were in the City were but a Rabble. However, all the Transactions in their Council of War, as they called it, (thô none were admitted to it but the Colonels own Creatures) were managed with the greatest Secrecy; and the better to delude the Garrison, it was given out, That the Forces would forth∣with Land. And of this they were so fully perswaded, that many went Aboard
the Ships that were in the Harbour, to caress and congratulate the Souldiers safe Arrival, who were not suffered to return again; but against their Incli∣nations were brought into England. C—next Day (when on Board, and as it was agreed betwixt him and the Con∣federate Colonel) sends him a Letter, That he had discovered some Ships at a distance, which must needs be further Suc∣cours design'd for the relief of Derry; that he would fall down to the Harbours Mouth, and return again with the rest of the Fleet. This Letter was handed up and down Derry to pacifie the People, though generally they began to apprehend they were sold and betrayed: And in this their Suspicion they were confirmed by a Lady (Related to the Colonel) who had forgot her Cue, and unwarily told a Lieutenant in the Garrison, That C—did not design to Land, and that his Letter was a meer Sham. After this C—set Sail, and hover'd at a little distance, expecting the Colonel, who had pro∣mis'd
him to make his Escape, and go with him for England; but the Colo∣nel not coming according to the time appointed, he pursued his Voyage, and left us under the Apprehensions of im∣mediate Destruction. But (blessed be GOD) We have hitherto made some tolerable Defence for our selves, and still hope, to give a good account of the Place. I am Yours, G. WALKER. FINIS.
