W3611 18252725 107257
VVORSE & VVORSE: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THEIR DESPERATE condition who shall presume to Take the NEVV OATH OR COVENANT. printer's or publisher's device Printed, 1643.
CONCERNING THE OATH AND NEW COVENANT. What is Lawfull Swearing. NOthing is manifested in Scripture to be more sa∣cred then an Oath; which though made to Man and proceeding from Man, yet being made with relation to God is called The Oath of God, Exod. 22. as a Principall part of Gods Worship, Thou shalt worship the Lord and swear by his name, Deut. 10. And it is most justly called a Worship of God, since thereby the just swearer glorifieth God, by professing, First, his Omniscience, as the only searcher of his heart to know whether he sweares rightly or not. Secondly, his inviolable justice to con∣demne the unjust swearer; and Thirdly, his omnipotency and un∣resistable power, to take vengeance upon every Godlesse viola∣tor of an Oath: and Godlesse he must needs be, who observeth not all the properties of an Oath which God himselfe hath pre∣scribed; even these three recorded, Ierem. 4. Thou shalt swear in Iustice, in Judgement, and in Truth. First, in Iustice, that the case be necessary and just, whereunto I am to be sworn. Secondly, in Judgement, that I know it to be such; because whosoever doth it doubtfully condemneth himselfe. Rom. 14.5, 22, 23. Lastly in Truth, abhorring from all deceitfulnesse of speech; either by ver∣ball
equivocation, or (which is the Art of lying) by any men∣tall reservation. For although it be the easiest thing in the World to delude Man, yet the Apostle will have us know, that God is not mocked, Gal. 2 7. Thus much of the substance and circumstances of Lawfull swearing. We are to bring the new Oath to this divine Test, to trie it whether it be true coyne or counterfeit. I A.B. in humility and reverence of the divine Majesty, declare my hearty sorrow for my own sinnes, and the sinnes of this Nation, which have deserved the calamities and Judgements that now lye upon it: And my true intention is by Gods grace, to endeavour the amendment of mine own wayes.] Well then. Therefore must we take heed, least by multiplying our sinnes by perjuries and false swearing, we doe provoke God to aggravate and multiply his judgements against us; because Rash swearing is a guiltinesse, Lev. 5.4. and a false Oath is one of the greatest profanations of God's name that can be, as all Scripture sheweth; and whereof God gave a document even in the new Testament, by his visible Iudgement upon two perjur'd wretches at once, as was seen be∣fore out of Act. 5. The Oath with an exception. And that I doe abhorre and detest the said wicked and treache∣rous designe lately discovered: And that I never gave, nor will give mine assent to the execution thereof, but will according to my power and vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like na∣ture.] Which is not yet discovered unto me of what nature it is; whether it be not the same intended from the King for the Ar∣ray, which is exacted by the Parliament for the Militia. And how farre the chiefe discoverer is to be believed, is a matter of great uncertainty; seeing, after His impeachment of diverse, none as yet hath been sufficiently convicted. The Oath with its exception. And in case any other like designe shall hereafter come to my Knowledge, I will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best conduce to the preventing thereof.] None can give any
assurance of that which is Like, before he know the colour of the ensample, which hitherto is not represented, but only in generall termes, and therefore invisible and unknown to my conscience. The Oath and the exception unto it. And whereas I doe in my conscience beleeve, that the Forces' raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just defence.] Namely, of Parliament; which I cannot doe, if I may believe His Majesties often, publique, and deep a∣vouchments, that he intendeth not the dissolution of this Parlia∣ment: nor untill my Conscience be perswaded against Scripture to sweare I ought not give credit to such expressions from so Roy∣all a mouth of my Soveraigne, especially ingaging his Soveraignty and Royalty for the Truth of his Declarations in that behalfe. The Intention and Reason of the Oath from the Preamble of it, and the exceptions against it. A Popish Army hath been raised against the Protestant Religi∣on.] The intention and reason of an Oath is (as it were) the soule thereof, and concerneth the very soule of the swearer. The reason here pretended is (as the denomination sheweth) The Popish Army of the King; now the denomination of every thing is taken either from that which is greater in Quantity, or in Ex∣cellency for worth, and value. But if I should think that the Ar∣my of the Kings is therefore more excellent because Popish, this were to denominate my selfe unworthy in opposing them, or if it be meant in respect of the Quantity, as if in the Army against the Parliament the greater number were Papists; this is as disso∣nant, because the whole hoast at Oxford, both Captains and infe∣rior Souldiers (as is divulged) have taken the Oath, for defence of the Protestant Religion established. And scarce any one Troop of Papists hath been named in all the rest of the Armies on this side Trent. As for the Northern parts (if the asseverations of some may be credited) not two Regiments of sixteen can be accounted which professe themselves Popish. Therefore with what ju∣stice will they have me to sweare that Army to be Papisticall, and yet will not permit me to call their Army Anabaptisticall, which
yet consists mainly of men of that Faction? We are now to enter into the Religious consideration of this Oath. The Oath is respect of Religion and the exceptions. And I doe in my Conscience believe, that those Forces are raised by the Parliament in defence of the true Protestant Religion.] But what is signified by the true Protestant Religion, we are not cer∣tified by this Oath, and must therefore borrow a light from the former Oath of Protestation, authorized by this Parliament, both in the Preamble and explication thereof by the House of Com∣mons. In the Preamble thus, The true Protestant Reformed Reli∣gion established. In the Oath it selfe thus; The true Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the Church of England, a∣gainst all Popish innovations. The Exposition thus; meaning so farre only as it is opposite unto Popery and Popish Innovations, and not to be extended unto any forme of Worship. The first Exception. But to take up Armes against Soveraignty in pretence of de∣fence of Religion is against the very doctrine of the Church of England; as is to be collected out of the 35. and 37. Article of our Church of England, having expresse relation unto the Homi∣lies against Rebellion. The second Exception. Secondly, If I swear against all Popish Innovation in Doctrine; then assuredly against those of taking up Armes in opposition to Princes in pretence of defence of Religion. Which is so uncouth an Innovation, as that it was condemned by the Vniversall Primi∣tive Church of Christ for above 350. yeares; not only by their doctrine but also their suffering for the defence of the Faith; and so testified by their publike Apologies and glorious Martyrdomes. And that indeed this is a Popish doctrine is herein most evident, because that the now Schismaticall Preachers for defence of this Warre, use and urge the very same objections against the Army on the one side, and answers for confirmation of the others, by the same distorted expositions of Texts and Examples in holy Scriptures, which the Romish Sophisters have done, from poynt
to point: notwithstanding they could not be ignorant of the lear∣ned and irrefragable Confutations made by Protestant Doctors and published to the World. A third Exception. Thirdly, the exposition of the Protestation, professing by that Oath to oppose only the Popish Doctrines and Innovations: and the continued practice of not only connivence, but even indul∣gence also to the Brownisticall and Anabaptisticall Faction, (which threaten nothing more then the destruction of the now professed Protestant Reformed Religion) doe seeme to prejudice the inten∣tion of this Oath; and give occasion to suspect that it may fall out against the doctrine, as hath done to our Service-booke; which hath been by Sectaries torne in peeces, as it was at Durham by Papists in their insurrection in the North. And what difference can there be, whether this our Vineyard of Christ, the Church of England, be rooted out by the Romish Boare, or by other wild beasts of new and naughty Factions? From this part of defence for Religion, the Oath returneth as againe to the part Politique. The Oath and the Exceptions against it. I A. B. In my Conscience beleeve, that the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised for their just defence, and Liberty of the Subiect, against the Forces raised by the King.] In this, three circumstances are considerable; Who, Against whom, and What; ingendring as many doubts and obstructions unto the Consciences of them that are required to take this Oath. The first Exception. When we would know who it is that taketh up Forces for Warre, they tell us the Parliament, and that by their owne Or∣dinance; whereas Subjects of every Kingdome are taught by the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, that this Authority is proper to Him who is Supreme. According to the profession also of the Old Testament, and examples of their Iudges and Kings; excep∣ting only where God himselfe did expressely interpose.
The second Exception. The second Exception is Against whom; The Oath nameth not the King, but the Kings Army, as though that were not a∣gainst the King; which is to speak, Sibbeleth instead of Scibbo∣leth. And what Conscience will not be jealous when severe execution is that the King being in Campe it is both against the Power and Person of the King as Edge-Hill can witnesse; and the Oath of Protestation, saying, I A. B. Protest according to my Alleagiance to His Majesty, His Royall Person, Honour, Crown, and Dignity, &c. when as our learned Schismaticks think to dawbe up mens consciences with their untempered mortar, by distinguishing between the Naturall and Politique Person of the King. The most of England can now laugh at their fond subtil∣ty; knowing that he who killed Saul, the then King of Israel, did thereby kill the same King named Saul. And the Apostle shew∣eth that they who resist the powers sent by the King as Supreame, doe thereby resist the power of the King himselfe. Therefore these contradictory Oathes cannot well lodge in any sincere Con∣science. The third Exception. The matter For what, the Forces are raised expressed to be for Liberty of Subjects against Arbitrary Power contrary to Law &c. Notwithstanding the power of Parliament in raising these Forces is done meerely by an Arbitrary power, and against all prescription of Law; and to the highest oppression of the Sub∣jects that hath been, even unto the losse of both livelihood and lives. Alas our misery! A fourth Exception. When as the whole pretence for defence of Religion, Liber∣ty of Subjects, and Priviledges of Parliament, are no other then the King himselfe doth (I not say subscribe, but rather super∣scribe unto, avouching still that his taking up Armes is for the defence of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the Priviled∣ges of Parliament, and against all tyrannicall Arbitrary govern∣ment: must I then sweare that they are just Forces raised for
that which is so freely offered and yeelded unto them? The Oath and the Exception against it. I will likewise assist the Persons who shall take this Oath, in what they shall doe in the pursuance thereof. These words [What they shall doe] have a great latitude, and may leave the Actors unto a liberty or rather licence to urge men to take it by what means soever, be it fas or nefas. A Coroslary to the former. It may not be omitted to advertise how the Ministers and Trumpeters, sounding Alarums for Warre, and for the Autho∣rizing of this Oath, doe symbolize and jumpe with the Irish Pa∣pists in the selfe same three reasons which make for the justifying their Rebellion. 1. It is in the power of our People (say they) as to create a King, so to dissolve the Royall Government upon oc∣casions seeming good to themselves. The second is Salus Populi, the Peoples generall and necessary good, as they pretend. Thirdly, the establishing of their own profession of Religion. These so many exceptions may prove so many Corrosives to the heart of the Swearer; whether he take it with a conscience wilfull or doubt∣full.
Three QuaeREES or Cases of Conscience touching the late OATH. 1. Q. How it consists with the three-fold Conditions of an Oath in generall, 1. of Truth, 2. Iudgement, 3. Righte∣ousnesse? Ier. 4.2. 2. Q. How with the three-fold Oath taken in particular; 1. Allegiance, 2. Supramacy, and the 3. Protestation? 3. Q. How with it's own, 1. Introduction, 2. Limitations, and 3. Expressions in speciall? and a three-fold. Cord is not easily broken, Eccles. 4.12. For the first Quaeree and first Condition of Truth, 1. Which Excludes, Falshood, Doublings, Fictions, mentall Evasions, Equivocations, Reservations, &c. & requires simpli∣city and sincere correspondence to the sense and purpose of the Imposter, (i. e.) liquidò jurare. For the Second, of Judgement, 2. Which requires it should be done soberly, advisedly, dis∣creetly, reverendly and in the feare of Cod. And not unadvised∣ly, lightly, or wantonly, to satisfie mens lusts and appetites like brute beasts that have no understanding. For the third, of Righteousnesse, 3. That it be not to the hurt and prejudice of my neighbour, for any unjust and unlawfull designe. So, He that taketh it in his own private sense or reservations (and not agreeable to the plaine sense and purpose of the Impo∣ser of the Oath,) offends against the first Condition. He that takes it rashly or timorously for fear or favour of men; offends against the Second. He that takes it out of misguided-Zeal, or spirit of revenge upon his brother, offends against the third.
For these and the like causes S. Austin concludes, that Falsa iuratio est exitiosa, vera iuratio periculosa, nulla inratio secura. False swearing is pernicious, true swearing is dangerous,D. August: Ser: 28. de verbis Apost. not at all swearing is secure. Now for the second Q. How it can consist with a three-fold Oath taken in particular? and First, how with the Oath of Supremacy? For, if he be Supream over all persons in all causes Ecclesi∣asticall and Temporall, how can I sweare to subject him, or (which is all one) his Commissioners, and Power sent by him to any per∣sons in any cause whatsoever?1. Pet. 2.14. Ob. 1. But you will say the occasion of that Oath was only to exclude the Popes Supremacy. Sol. True, though that were the cheife occasion, yet it was not the only intention: but was purposely made to involve and shut up all his Subjects under the same Conditions of unresisting Obedience. Ob. 2. But the Ooth only binds so long as the King observes the Condition of his own Oath for the true Religion. &c. Sol. A lawfull Oath taken is of good force to bind us to O∣bedience even to a bad King; (much more to an eminently good Pious and Religious King) as appeares by that of Solomon, Ec∣cles: 8.2. I counsell thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God: And by example of Zedechiah's perjury and breaking of his Oath made to a Tyrant, an Enemy of the Church.Ezech: 17.1, 15.20. Shall he prosper (saith God) shall he escape that doth such things? Or shall he break his Covenant, and be delivered? As I live (saith the Lord) Surely MY Oath which he hath despi∣sed, and MY Covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recom∣pence upon his own head. In like manner Saul his bloody house was visited because he sought to slay the Gibeonites (aliens to the Common-wealth of Israell) though in ZEAL to the Children of Israel and Iuda. Hitherto of the first Ooth,2. Sam. 21.1, 2. which is of Supre∣macy. The second followes of Allegiance, Q. How can it consist with it? For I am bound by it to de∣fend
the King's Person to the uttermost of my power; and spee∣dily to discover and resist all. Treasons and Conspiracies against his Person, Crown, or Dignity; All which seem to be endangered by taking or partaking with Armes raised against him, or the Po∣wer, Army, or Life-guard commanded by Him for His defence, and that no person whatsoever hath power to absolve mee of, this Oath. And for—The third Oath. Of the late Protestation. How can it consist? For, I Protest, Vow, and promise to main∣taine the Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England,See the pre∣amble of the House of Com∣mons to the Protest: against all Popery and Popish Innovations. But this Assertion of the new Oath that (In my Conscience I doe beleive that the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their iust defence, and for the defence of the true Protestant Religion) seems to contradict the late Protestation; For, first it is against the established Doctrine of the Church of England; which is in the 37. Article which saith that The Kings Maiesty hath the Chiefe power in this Realm of England; unto whom the Chiefe government of All Estates, whe∣ther Ecclesiasticall or Civill, in All causes, doth appertaine—To rule All Estates, and degrees committed to Their charge; and to restraine with the sword; None of which can the King doe, if the Sword or Militia be taken from Him. Item, That a man may take up Armes or take an Oath when The Magistrate (i. e. Su∣pream Power) commandeth; implying that no man ought either to take Oath or bear Armes without the Injunction of The Ma∣gistrate. Item, Article 35. that the two Bookes of Homilies, (the Homilies against Rebellion amongst the rest) contain a Godly and wholsome Doctrine, to be read in Churches by the Ministers (that is, Preachers, not only Reading Ministers) diligently & distinctly; that they may be understood by the People as the Doctrine of the Church of England: For though there may be many Doctrins and many Churches in England, yet there is but one Doctrine & one church of England, contained in the 39. Articles, and Common-Prayer-Book confirmed by Act of Parliament. Thus far of the first particular of the Protestation The Second is how it can consist with that part of the Protestation, which binds me to oppose all Popish Innovations,
&c. for to take up Armes in case of Religion against a Supream Power is a plaine Popish Innovation, and a new Invention taught and maintained only in this last Age. And thirdly; how can it consist with the last particular? Wherein I vow and grotest to maintaine with my Life, Power and Estate (ac∣cording to the duty of mine Allegiance) His Majestius Person, Ho∣nour and Estate. Now the Queeree is, how I main came first His Person with my Life, Power, and Estate, if I sweare to assist an Army of men, whom He hath oft Declared (and are so accoun∣ted by many pious and sudicious men) to be utter Enemies to His Person, Honour, and Estate? Or, secondly, how can I be said to maintaine His Honour, when by this Oath I professe (expressely contrary to the word of God. Eccles. 10.20. Exod. 22.28.) not only in mine heart to curse and accuse Him, but openly with my mouth to revile, and blaspheme Him; and in effect, say in mine heart, (which is Nefandum, horrendum, and farre from the thought of an obedient Sonne, that honoureth his Father). He is an utter Enemy of Gods true Religion, a violator of all sacred Vowes, Oathes, and Covenants? And can I yet be said to main∣taine His Honour? Can I be thus presumptuous to judge Him? Am I not afraid to speake evill of Dignities? & yet maintaine the Kings Honour, or the Christian Protestant Religion?2. Pet. 2.10, 11. Did Cham honour his Father when he discovered his reall nakednesse? and do they honour their Father that impute a lying and false naked∣nesse, and cover his reall Virtues & Glory by casting on foule and fained aspersions? A Sonne honoureth his Father, & a Servant his Master; If he be a Father where is his honour? If he be our Ma∣ster, where is his fear? If this be the honour and feare,Malach. 1.6.8. goe and offer it to thy Father, to thy Master, and see if they will take it at thy hands? Nor will the after exposition serve to heale this breach; by saying, It was not to be extended to the maintenance of any disci∣pline or government of the Church of England. For, first all the or∣dained Ministers of England have subscribed and sworn to the Kings Supremacy, and all the doctrine of the Church of England; and therefore they cannot be absolved from this lawfull Oath by any power whatsoever. And Secondly, though it should not be extended to Church-Government, yet it will reach to the Civill Supremacy and
chiefe power of the Sword,See the a∣ said  37. which the expresse doctrine of the Church of England avoucheth to be only in the King. Or thirdly, how can I be then said to maintain his Estate, when I take part with them that with-hold and with-draw it from him? or that put him into such an Estate and condition as does exhaust and consume His Estate, by maintaining an Army to guard and protect His own Person and His Loyall Subjects? And hitherto of the two first Queries concerning the three Oathes of Allegiance, Supremacy, and protestation; now follow∣eth the third Querie, how this late Oath can consist with its own Introduction, limitations and expressions. First, How with the Introduction, viz. That there hath been and now is in this Kingdome a POPISH AND TRAITEROUS PLOT for the subversion of the true Religion, &c. First, how can I believe this, and believe the Kings Protestation to the contra∣ry? And Secondly, how can I honour the King and not believe Him. And thirdly, how can I call it a Popish Army, when the more principall part must give the denomination? when it is confest and manifest, that the better part by much, and the grea∣ter by farre are Protestants, and sworn contrary to all Popish Plots. Secondly, In declaring my sorrow for my sinnes past, and purpose to amend, &c. How can it consist, if in this very Oath I commit greater sinnes of Pride, Slander, Envy, and all Vnchari∣tablenesse, Blasphemy, Perjury, and Disobedience? And if the Repentance it selfe be such a sinne, it is a Repentance to be re∣pented of. Againe, how can it consist with the Limitation, i. e. In Order to the securing the true Protestant Religion? when as it is cleer by what is above said, It is directly contrary to Our Protestant Religion, or the Doctrine of Our Church (though there may be many other strange doctrines in our Church) which evidently as∣serts the King to be supreame over ALL Persons, in ALL Cau∣ses; and plainly denies any power of Armes to be used by Sub∣jects against their King, under colour of Religion. Now, what our Lord and Master said to one desiring him to divide the inhe∣ritance, we his servants may answer in the like case, Man, who hath made me a divider or Iudge over you?See Luk. 12. If any speak to us to take up Armes to vindicate the present cause as just, in raising
Forces against the King, Must answer and aske, Who hath made us Iudges over our Soveraigne? Or dividers of the Kings Inheri∣tance betwixt Him and His Subjects? Especially when he hath protested so often by all that is Sacred, and engaged all that is deare to Him, that He will maintain and defend the true Prote∣stant Keligion, and Liberty of the Subject, &c. Am I not rather silenced by that of Solomon, My Sonne, feare God and the King;See Prov. 24.21. and meddle not with them () viz. That are 1. De∣tractors, 2. Seditious, 3. Given to change or Innovators (for so the word signifies all three.) Or are we not rather disarmed, by that of our Saviour, Put up thy sword, for he that takes the sword will perish by the Sword. Thirdly and lastly the Expression; which is, To maintain and assist All persons in whatsoever they shall doe in pursuance of the same. Which is of a vast and large extent; & seems to maintain, 1. Those that hazard and oppose the Kings Person, Honour and Estate. 2. Those that goe contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England (in taking up Armes under colour of Religion.) 3. And that In all which they shall doe in Pursuance of the same. What if I should be required to help to kill mine own Father, Naturall, Civill, or Spirituall, if the King or my Parents or any Ministers shall oppose their Forces by word or deed, it seems I may and ought by virtue of these words [In pursuance of the same] assist any one that shall pursue them or any of them unto death. And we have cause to feare it will be so extended, when it is taken up or offered by some for good doctrine, that every man ought (as the Levites commanded by Moses) goe out and slay every man his brother,See Exod. 32.27, 29. and consecrate your selves every man upon his Sonne or upon his Brother, Companion, or his Neighbour, if he judge him an Idolator, or Enimy of God; (which is not very hard for malice to doe.) And that the Levites by that severe and bloody execution, did expiate their slaine of their fathers transgression. But farre be from us that , to partake of the transgression of Simeon and Levi brethren in iniquity; (ex∣cept he had the same infallible commission, and the same idola∣try to oppose) under an hypocriticall pretext of circumcision, and furious zeale of Religious Reformation, did really affect not the conversion but the destruction; not the Circumcision but ex∣cision of the Shechemites.
But Pray we rather and conclude with the true Israel of God; Oh my soule, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honour be not thou united. 49.  7. For in their anger they slew a man, and (saving their Persons) cursed be their anger for it was sarce, and their wrath, for it is Cruell; divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israell. AMEN. FINIS.
