e407_36 e407_37 99872293 160525
A DECLARATION From his Excellence Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the Generall Councel of the ARMY, Held at Putney, on Thursday Sep∣tember 16. 1647. Concerning the Delaies in raising Monies for supply of the Army, and other Forces of the Kingdome. And their humble Offers and Desires in Relation thereto. Tendred To the Right Honourable Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army, and by them to be presented to the Houses. With his Exceliencies Letter to the Commissioners concerning the same. Also a Narrative of the Souldiers behaviour towards the L. Lauderdale. By the Appointment of his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Generall Councell of the Army. Jo. Rushworth Secretary. Printed at London, for George Whittington, at the Blew An∣chor, in Cornhill, neere the Royall Exchange, 1647.
My Lords and Gentlemen, THe extreame necessitie of the Army, and other Forces in the Kingdome, together with the present pressures of the Countrey where it Quarters, for want of Moneys, as well as the delayes of them from whom you might e're this time have justly expected a better Account on this behalfe then is as yet heard of, is the occasi∣on which yesterday produced a Resolution up∣on this enclosed Paper, which I herewith ten∣der to your Lordships, Desiring it may be spee∣dily communicated to both Houses: I remaine, Putney 17 Septem∣bris, 1647. Your Lordships most humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX. For the Right Honourable the Lords and Commons. Com∣missioners of Parliament resi∣ding in the Army.
A Declaration from his Excel∣lency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Generall Councell of the Army held at Putney on Thursday September. 16. 1647. THe extreame wants of the Souldiery (both of the Army and other Forces and Garri∣sons that have concurred with us, as also the sufferings of the Countryes in respect of free Quarter, and the necessities of the Kingdome for a speedy supply of money in relation to the disbanding of superfluous forces, the sending over of others for the reliefe of Jreland, and for the supplying of those for∣ces
that are there already, so as to prevent the danger of those distempers lately raised amongst them,) are such as we are and have beene very sensible of and exceeding∣ly pressed with the consideration of them. Yet the care the Houses have so many wayes exprest for providing a present supply of monyes, in relation to all these affaires, have made us hitherto silent as to that point, in expectation to have found ere this time an an∣swerable effect thereof in actuall supplyes. But finding that notwithstanding all their care, yet through the neglect or delay of those on whom the Houses have de∣pended in that particular, there is little or nothing hi∣therto effected therein, and especially considering the delayes made by the Lord Mayor Aldermen and Com∣mon Councell of the City of London, in the advancing of that summe which the Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Arreares (so long since) due from the City to this Army and for that tax where∣upon all or most other places have long since payd in their proportions.) We are enforced to make this present addresse to the Houses in relation thereunto. First we cannot but consider the notorious readi∣nesse of that Court to the advancing of farre greater summes for the raising of a new Warre and prosecuti∣on of the late mischievous practises and designes a∣gainst the Parliament and Army. And that as their pre∣cipitate forwardnesse therein, was the occasion of the Armyes comming into these parts: so their backward∣nesse to the raising or advancing of the money now re∣quired
for the service of the Parliament and supply of the Army, hath beene and is the occasion of the Armyes continuance here: And therefore we cannot but offer it as what we humbly conceive most just and reaso∣nable. That for what time their default or delayes have oc∣casioned and shal further occasion the Armyes stay hereabouts (so much to the burden and oppression of these parts) the charge thereof should some way be layd upon them and their adherents in and about the City, toge∣ther with those persons from whom the said arreares are due, and those in whose default it lyes that they have hitherto beene either not assessed or not collected. And for that purpose that at least in case the summe required be not payd in at the time limmitted by the Houses. There may be a proportionable penalty imposed by way of daily increase of the summe required for so long time as the payment thereof shall be further delayd. Next forasmuch as the Lord Mayor Aldermen and Com∣mon-Councell, may perhaps conceive themselves not so much obliged (either to execute the authority given them by the Parliament for leavying of money upon o∣thers, or to advance it themselves by way of loane in behalfe of others untill it can be leavyed) as they would be to provide what should justly be charged upon them∣selves: We therefore humbly offer (at least) in case the summe required upon the arreares be not paid in by the time limited.
II. That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the delinquency of that Court and Councell, in those things that were lately done by them as a Court, and set such Fine upon them for the same as shall be agreeable to justice, which money being chargeable so properly upon themselves we presume they willl not have the like excuse not to provide. Lastly, since it is most evident that for the spee∣dy bringing in of the money required upō the ar∣rears there wants not in the said Major, Aldermē & Common Councell, either authority to levy it or ability to advance it by way of Loan till it can be levyed: nor do the persons from whom the ar∣rears are due want ability to pay them, but the on∣ly fault and defect lies in the want of will to the thing, both in the one and in the other, and want of power in the hands of willing men to en∣force it, without which we see little hopes that it wil in any tollerable time be effected; We there∣fore offer III. That in case the money be not brought in (by the time limited the Parliament would be pleased to
give leave and power to the Generall (with the ad∣vice and directions of the Committee for the Army) for the levying of the said arrears, together with such penalties and fine as the Houses shall find cause to impose as aforesaid, or (at least) the penalties al∣lowed by the Ordinances for that tax for the Army, and then if the moneys be not speedily brought in for the Parliament to dispose of let us be are the blame. And all these things we desire the rather, because we have grounds both of reason and evidence from the speeches of many in the City, to believe that in this long witholding of mony, the designes and hopes of the Parliaments and our enemies, are to raise the Army into distempers, and the coun∣try about us into a flame, whereby at least to hin∣der and interrupt all proceedings to the execution of Parlimentary justice, or settlement of the Kingdom, and to expose the Parliament again into tumultuous violence, of all which the dāger is ve∣ry evident and imminent, if not speedily prevented by some such vigorous and effectnall remedies as aforesaid. Putney Sept. 16. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax and the Councel of war. Signed John Rushworth Secretary
