a3322 e407_17 99860784 160510
AN ANSWER to a most pernicious and factious PETITION, framed against the SCOTS in IRELAND: Together with the Vindication of a Gen∣tleman from the false Aspertions of Major ROBERT ORMESBY: As also some serious QUERIES to be presented To the said Major in behalfe of the STATE. LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1647.
An Answer to the infamous and scanda∣lous Libel, presented by way of Petition to the Right Honorable, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his Excellency, in the name of the English now a∣bout London inhabiting, having interest in the Barronies of Raphoe and Kilmacrennan in the County of Donnegall and Kingdome of Ireland. The Petition is thus Sheweth, WHereas the English Gentry had the greatest share of the barronies of Raphoe and Kilmacrennan, and other Lands in the County of Donnegal, lying on that side of the Mountains, and were possessed of several Castles, hou∣ses and places of strength. So it is, That Sr. William Stewart, and Sr. Robert Stuart (upon the Rebellion) raising of the Scots Nation, two Regiments of foot, and two Troops of horse, have quartered them in those parts, and not suffering any but their own Nation to have Command in in their Regiments, have so oppressed the poor English by setling Garrisons amongst them, quartering upon those that live there, and absolutely dispo∣sing of all English mens Lands at their meer wil and pleasure, that the poor English are quite undone, and likely to be utterly rooted out of those parts, unless some timely provision be made to free those poor souls, that yet re∣main, from their heavy pressures, and to Countenance the English to sit down upon their own again. And Sr. William Stuart being now dead, It is the humble Request of the English now in London, who have relation to those parts, that advantage may be taken of this opportunity, to send o∣ver some deserving English Gentleman, to Command the said Sir William his Regiment of Foot and Troop of horse, and to send with him 300. English which may render him considerable, and subdue all mutinous endeavours
to oppose him; And that his head quarter may be at Liffer, which is a ve∣ry fine English Plantation, a Corporation and a considerable place of strength, within ten miles of Derry, and so very ready to second the English there; And that the rest of the Garrisons in those parts may be made and comman∣ded by him: That so the languishing and poor oppressed English may be put into some heart to live, and hope to be freed of their heavy pressures, and enjoy their own. And whereas the said Sir William Stuart was vice∣admiral of Ʋlster, it is desired the same may be conferred upon the Lord Folliot, Governor of Derry, and the Governor for the time being. The Answer is as followeth. SAith, That upon the breaking out of the horrid Rebellion of Ireland, Commissions were granted to Sir William Stuart, and Sir Robert Stuart to raise their Regiments of Foot, and Troops of horse, which being so raised were put into the establishment and Parlaments pay. And fur∣ther saith, That every word and sentence set forth in the Petition against the said Collonels, their Regiments and Troops in oppressing the English, in∣habiting in the aforesaid places, either by setling of Garrisons, or disposing of their Lands at their pleasure, to the undoing of the English, or that they made use of their own Nation, not suffering any Englishman to have Com∣mand amongst them, is altogether untruth, and a most wicked and Nation∣al aspersion. For to answer the last, First. There was not an Englishman in that Country that could wear a sword, but was imployed either as an Officer or Souldier according to his quality. As may appear by the list of Collonels, Lieutenant Collonels, Majors, Captains, and other inferior Of∣ficers of the English Nation in those parts; And to this hour none of that Nation in those parts are without Imployment, except such as retired and withdrew themselves from bearing a share, and opposing the common Cala∣mity. 2. As for oppressing them by sessing or laying Garrisons on the En∣glish; so much as was preserved from fire with the hazard and loss of many mens lives (who might have withdrawn themselves as others did, who came here to England) It was afterwards divided equally by advice and consent of the Inhabitants of the Country, as wel English as Scots, amongst the Officers and Souldiers of the four Regiments lying in those parts; As by a division under their hands may appear, for preservation of the Souldi∣ers lives, which was nothing upon the matter for such a multitude, toge∣ther with the Inhabitants of the Country. If hungry bellies and desperate necessity had not extorted both food and rayment from the Rebels, who
formerly had robbed those who were alive of both Nations. And as for those Lands that were wasted by the Rebels, and recovered again by the Souldiers, which are now beginning in some few places to be possessed and inhabited, for the ease of those few quarters that have born Souldiers these six years, and are now impoverished, and almost reduced to a total deva∣station; It is no prejudice to the owners who live in England far from dan∣ger, that some trenches and houses be set upon their land, to make them habitable, when the enemy shal be reduced and beaten out of the field; for what can men expect of waste lands, when the land which was never de∣stroyed by the enemy pays no rent at all? The Souldiers being necessitated to provide bread in some place til the Parliaments great occasions give them time to provide better for these Regiments in those parts. For if the Soldiers should have left the Country, when they got no Provisions from the Parli∣ament either for back or belly, then the occasion of that scandalous Libel had bin taken away long ere now, and the Country possessed peaceably by the Irish, til the Parliament of England should get leasure to make a new Conquest of Ireland. But if those Petitioners wil either provide bread for the said Regiments, or be Instruments to move the Parliament to provide bread, which is a reasonable desire, they shal be presently possessed of their respective Claims or holdings, whereof they were dispossest by the Rebels. And whereas the Petitioners (who are named poor souls) desire to be re∣leived from the pressures of the Scots, by taking advantage of the opportu∣nity of Sir William Stuarts death, by sending over an English man to Command Sir William Stuarts Regiment and Troop, and three hundred English men with him to make him considerable, that he may more easily suppress the mutinous indeavours of those that oppose him: As this desire is pernicious and factious (favouring of much malice) so it is unnecessary, In respect the Parliament of England hath setled the command in chief of that Regiment and of the three other Regiments in Lagan upon an English man of such integrity and worth, as that he is above envie or exception, Sir Charls Coote, Lord President of Counaught; who also hath a Commission from the Parliament, Authorizing him to dispose of the quarters and Gari∣sons of those foure Regiments and Troops as he in his Judgement shall finde most advantagious for the service. And as for sending over 300. men to oppose mutionous endeavours, It is very well known, that mutinie hath been a stranger to us in those parts hitherto, or any falling out amongst our Officers, but like an entire wall cemented together with brasse couplets, we have all of us been uni∣ted together, which with the goodness of our cause and the blessing of God
hath made us hitherto, maugre all the malice and power of the Irish, unvan∣quishable. And it is our desire tht the Doctrine of Mutinee be never taught nor professed amongst us, since disobedience is as the sin of Witchcraft. Ne∣verthelesse we concur with the Petitioners in this; That the three hundred English men be sent over with convenient provisions for their subsistance, otherwise a greater burthen will be added to those former pressures, and make the cry greater. And as for a Collonel to command the Regiment and Troope; we doubt not but Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of Connaught, Commander in chief, hath such confidence in Sir John Cunningham, Lieute∣nant Collonel to the Regiment; and Captain John Stewart, Lieutenant to the Troop, and such proof of their faithfulnesse and zeale to the service, who have served in their severall places these six years without reproofe, the Lieu∣tenant Collonel, raising and arming his Company at his owne charge, and to this hour quartering them upon his owne Inheritance (together with an∣other Company of Collonel Mervins Regiment) and who is likewise enga∣ged in great summes for Provisions for the Regiment, not as yet discharged by the Parliament. And likewise Major Arskin, whose estate in times of peace was worth 1000 l'per annum, ought to be considered. We say these men recommended by Sir Charles Coote, who have served out their severall Apprentice-ships, ought to be made Free-men, and no stranger placed over their heads, unlesse something can be proved against their faithfulnesse to the Parliaments ser∣vice; and they doubt not but the Parliament is so noble and generous to∣wards those that have deserved well, That now when they cannot well re∣ward them for their great services, they will not put dishonour upon them, by displacing them, and excluding them from that, for which they have ser∣ved almost as long as Jacob did for Rachel, both in the heat of the day, and coole of the night. As for that desire, that the Towne of Lifford may be the head-quarter. If Sir Charles Coot, Lord President, think it convenient, we submit most willingly to that Order. As to that part that the three hundred English being at Lifford, will be more ready to second the English; It is a most pernitious expression proceeding from the spirit of contention, and a son of Belial, which cannot be read nor spoken without some secret horror, by any ingenious or honest man, thereby secretly importing, that the Eng∣lish are in so dangerous a condition, that they needed seconding against the Scots, or as if the Scots had a purpose to invade them. O coelum quid ad haec non sudas, O terra quid non dehiscis; Should they who have lived so sweedy together, tyed by many relations, and inviolable bands of amity since the first Plantation, now neere fifty yeares, confirmed by interchangeable
tyes, bonds of affinity, and so mutually engrafted in one anothers affections, that they are become one Tree, though of severall stocks. As if they, we say, should invade one another, which is as impossible (or at least as unlikely) as if a man should be so mad, as to teare his own flesh. For our part, if ever such a day shall dawn, we wish it may be without perfect light. Touching that desire of the Admiralty of Ʋlster, which Sir William Stuart had during his life-time, that it may be conferred upon my Lord Fol∣liot. To this it is answered, That Sir Charles Coot procured that place to be setled on Sir William Stuart about three years since. And now the Com∣mittee of the Admiralty, having designed a Ship of force, and a Pinnace to lye upon the Bay of Sligo, Ballishannon, Kilbeggis, Do: Lochswilly and Lochfoyle; and hath given power to the said Sir Charles Coot to command those upon any designe for the Parliaments advantage, he having the com∣mand of the Land Forces in those places: The said Committee therefore have thought it most convenient for his Lordship to have the Admiralty of Ʋlster, as being most proper for him, who hath the command of the Ships, to exercise that place, and have resolved to report it so to the House. September the ninth, 1647. The Vindication of Captain John Cunningham, from the false aspersions cast upon him by Major Robert Ormesby, concerning his Troope, al∣ledged by Ormesby, never to have been raised, occasioned in taking of a List of the Officers name at Derby-house, the 28. of August last, in Master Frost the Secretaries chamber, for a dividend of some moneyes to bee given unto the severall Officers towards their journey into Ireland. 1. IN Answer hereunto, Captain Cunningham saith, That by vertue of a Commission from Generall Major Monro, he did levie a Troope, which attended the Scottish Army for one whole yeare, in the Province of Ʋlster, and amongst other good services done by him, and that Troope a∣gainst the bloody Irish Rebels in the County of Longford, Cavan, Ard∣magh, and Westmeath, that one dayes service at the bridge of Fynna may be sufficient to equall, yea over-value all the actions done by Major Ormesby since the day of his birth to this houre. 2. That the said Troope, by vertue of a Commission from Sir Charles Coote, Lord President of Connaught, granted unto Captain Cunningham, was afterwards brought into the service of that Province.
3. That it was levied, and transported from Ʋlster thither without pay or levie-money from the State; so likewise (soone after) for want of quar∣ter, means, or other encouragement from the Parliament, they dispersed, as diverse other Troopes of the like nature did, taken on by Commission from the Lord President, as by his Lordships speciall Letters and Certificats may appeare; wherein his Lordship most nobly engageth himself for them to the State, that upon the settlement of meanes upon them, these Troopes so dis∣solved, speedily to being into the Field again, and faithfully to serve the State, as formerly they have done. 4. That this Troope being so levied without charge to the State, so it dissolved without any prejudice unot the Army there, or Parliament here, by any unworthy act of Captain Cunninghams, or dishonour unto him whatsoever, which Major Ormesby so much endevoureth to lay upon him, though this same Ormesby most unworthily lost his owne Troope, foot Company, and Garrison, as followeth. That in the year 1645. the English Garrisons in the Province of Con∣naught having taken horses, and other considerable prey by force from the Rebels there; Major Robert Ormesby out of which got together about 80. of those plundered horse, from some of our own souldiers without charge to him (upon the matter;) good horses then being sould for a crowne, or noble the piece, but the most part of them he got for nothing. And having procu∣red Commission from Sir Charles Coot, Lord President, to command them as a Captain of a Troope of Horse, was by his Lordship listed and put into pay; which with that Troope and a foot Company (whereof at that time he was only Captain) he was betrusted to keep the Garrison of Toulske in the County of Roscomen. That by the strength of the English Garrison in that County, they were all put into a very good condition of livelihood, by forcing the Irish inhabi∣tants thereabouts into contribution. That by this means the said Major Ormesby had at least brought into his Garrison of Tulske, fourteen hundred pounds per annum, duly paid in mo∣ney, Grain, and other provisions, by the protected Rebels for the maintenance of his Troopes and foot Company, besides his share of preyes upon dividend, with the other Garrisons, when they joyned in parties, and marched into the enemies quarters, and besides great store of corn sowed in the ground from time to time by the Officers and souldiers, and many Families of the English, who came to reside at the Garrison of Tulske, having in the year 1645, no lesse corn and provision in store, then would have maintained all of them in that Garrison in a plentifull Condition for a whole yeare.
That about that time, the Lord Viscount Taaffe, a Rebell, came with a great party of the Linster Rebels, assisted with the Earle of Clanrickard and his Connaught Rebels, all under the command of the Lord Taaffe, au∣thorized by Commission from the Lord Marquesse of Ormond, to fall upon the English Garrisons of that Province, as was alledged, who had not sub∣mitted to the cessation with the Rebles. That upon their advance into Connaught, they did immediatly fal upon the Garrison of Toulske, in the County of Roscomen, whereof Captain Robert Ormesby (now Major) had the command with his said Foot company and Troope (consisting of eighty good horses) which the said Major kept with∣in his Trenches of Toulske, and would not be advised at a Councell of War by the Lord Presidents brother, (a gallant Gentleman) Captain Richard Coot (now Collonell of Horse) Sir George St. George, Captain King, Cap∣tain John Ormesby, his Uncle, and other Captains of the severall Garrisons all of them resolving (if Major Ormesby would joyne with them) to stand out in the field with all the Horse, to annoy the enemy, stop their Provisions, and so to preserve our English Garrisons from being beleagured, but this Major Ormesby would not adhere to their resolution (though it was the on∣ly best) and told them in plain termes. Gentlemen I have heard you all, but I will follow my own mind; they desired to know it, but he would not dis∣cover his intentions (which soone after to their great griefe was discovered) whereupon they departed discontented. That the Enemie approaching near with great eagernesse and resolution to gain so considerable a Troope, being assured it was in their power to do, seeing he kept it within his Trenches, and well knowing Major Ormesby to be a man of as great words as deeds, stormed his works and entred, fell in close to the Castle-grate (which had a strong Iron-gate on it) where this Ma∣jor Ormesby himselfe was, and might have held it to this day, but he being overcome with pusillanimity and a panick fear, came suddenly running out of the Castle, calling for mercy, delivered his Pistoll charged and cocked, to the Rebell Captain Barnwell, without either parley or quarter. Much like a silly Hare in her thicket, which though shee seeme to look big, yet with the cry of the Hounds, and noise of the hunters, shee is so terrified, that she runs and knowes not where: So this great Souldier left the strong hold commit∣ted to his charge, from whence he could not be beaten without Cannon; and ran into his enemies armes, where he behaved himself with great mode∣stie, not speaking a word but mercy, mercy, which Castle the Rebels keeps now to the annoyance of the Parliaments Forces in that Province. Thus was the considerable Garrison and Castle of Toulske most unwor∣thily
lost, where the Rebels possessed themselves of all Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, the whole Troop, Foot Company, stript both Officer, Sol∣dier, and all the English Families, who were residing and had their goods within that place for safety: Then the Rebels they carryed this brave Or∣mesby along with them upon mercy, whom they might have hanged at their pleasure, seeing he had no quarter, yet saved him upon a Design to have Castle-Coot delivered up into their hands, which they conceived might have been effected, by reason Major Ormesby's Father and divers of his neerest Kinsmen were in Castle-Coot and had the Command of the place, men, Ammunitions and Provisions good store. And the same, according to their plot, was delivered up to the Rebel Lord Taaffe, by Major Ormesbys Father, his Cozen German, Ensign James Ormesby and his brother in Law, (whilst Major Ormesby himself was in the Rebels hands upon mercy:) So that it may be conjectured, and that upon great presumptions, that the place was delivered meerly to preserve Major Ormesbies life; It having for∣merly held out 14. weeks siege (being then under the Command of Captain Richard Coote) General Bourke with 4000. men stil battering the same with his Ordnance, and was at last forced to leave it with the loss of many of his men. But to return to the matter, the Enemy being much elevated with this good success, having got so considerable a Garrison as Toulske, 80. good Horses, 100. Foot, all their Arms, one whole years Provision, all the Plunder of the English which they had put into that Garrison for safety. That the Rebels forces then drew themselves immediately before the Town and Castle of Elffynne, the Bishops seat, and Garrison of 100. men, which was delivered up to the Enemy; Also the walled Town and Cor∣poration of James-Town, a Garrison of one hundred, besides many English Inhabitants, yeelded up to the Rebels with divers others of the like manner. That all these Towns, Castles, and Garrisons, Arms, Ammunition, Pro∣visions, Men and Horses, might hitherto have been preserved from the Re∣bels, if the said Major Ormesby had been advised by the rest of the Com∣manders of the several Garrisons before mentioned, especially those who were, by much, his superiors; which not only occasioned the loss of these considerable holds by his wilfulness and pusilanimity, but also Castle-Coote▪ the chief house of Sir Charls Coote, Lord President of that Province, a most gallant, active and faithful servant of the State, so much prejudiced by Ma∣jor Ormesby and those of that name, that so delivered up Castle-Coote, (to the great grief of Captain John Ormesby the Majors Unckle, and Lieut▪ Charls Ormesby the Majors brother, both wel-deserving men, who have done very good service) and who merit encouragement from the State,
whose Father and self were servants unto the Lord President and his ever re∣nowned father old Sr Charls Coot, and made up under them to some fortune of Inheritance, and rendred capable by their favor of the place of Justice of peace in the Country. And since these troubles, by Sir Charls the Lord Presidents favor in hopes of better carriage in the service, This Ormesby was made Captain and Major of Horse by his Lordships several Commissions. Yet so ungrateful to his maker is this Ormesby, that upon all occasions he striveth to put particular prejudices, as much as lieth in him, not only on the whole family of the Cootes, but also upon several persons of honor, worth and action, in affinity most faithful, near and dear to Sir Charls Coote, and most zealous in the service of the State, as their sufferings can wel witness. Yet this Major Ormesby with a seeming shew (though in a bold, il-bred, blustring way) of agitating for the publick, and therein ma∣keth use of Sir Charls Cootes name, when on the contrary, nothing is more certain, then the working of his own particular ends, as may evidently ap∣pear by his high and unmerited hopes and demands from the State. And the said Ormesby, by the former losses aforesaid, occasioned also the loss of the Abbey of Boyle, Sir Robert Kings house, the Fort of Carrickdrumcouske belonging to Sir George Lisedoorne, Knockevicker, with many other holds, and consequently the whole Province of Connaught; But what since thereof hath been regained by Sir Charls Coote Lord President, with the Parlia∣ments Forces under his command, since his Government there. All which may most evidently appear against Major Ormesby, if questioned at a Coun∣cel of War in that Kingdom before the Lord President, at once with Lieut. Roukesby (to which purpose it is desired that the said Ormesbies person be secured here and he sent over) which Roukesby, who is apprehended in this City, and is by Order of the House to be sent over to Sir Charls Coote to a∣bide tryal for his betraying and delivering up of James-Town afore-menti∣oned, with other matters there to be laid to Major Ormesby's charge con∣cerning the last defeat given by the Rebels to our Connaught horse, neer the Castle of Roscomen, wherein he was Actor. Yet notwithstanding all which apparent agreat prejudice done to the Parli∣ament, by the loss of a Province occasioned by Major Robert Ormesby as aforesaid, put many good English Protestant Families a begging in this Kingdom, and many in that Kingdom, who have not wherewithal to carry them hither to be relieved; the loss of so considerable a Troop, Foot Company, Garison, and plentiful Quarters, Arms, Ammunition and Provisions in the several stores, which wil cost the Parliament grat summe of money, besides the loss of many English men before those holds and Province
can bee regained, which by his meanes meerely have beene lost. And his own quarters being unworthily lost, as we before related, hee came with his wife, father and family, to the Lagan, where he was scarcely well setled, till he and his father began to pry into the secrets of the country, and look for Custodiums, as if the severall Collonels and Officers who had fought for the preservation of that country had deserved none, but al been hi∣therto reserved for him who lived an hundred miles from thence in another Province; and by importunity procured a Custodium from Sir John Clot∣worthy, and Sir Robert Merideth of Castle Bliaen, and of six quarters of land, which entertaines eight score souldiers, which after the rate of fifteene pence a week, amounteth to five hundred and twenty pound a year, for ten pound to be accompted to the State, which will put him in a condition thrise so good as ever he was in his life before; beside his employment, having a Troope of Horse, being Major of a Regiment and a foot Company, when hundreds of better men then he & morefaithful to the State, have not bread to put in their mouths, or to cover their nakednesse; neither these eight score Souldiers who have faithfully served in many bloody battels against the Re∣bels, have not any means to releeve them, if this Ormesby take away their quarter upon any pretext whatsoever. That Major Ormesby neverthelesse, as if no such matter had ever been done by him, applyes himself to the Parliament here, with impudence and bold∣nesse. First, importunatly desiring from my Lord Lile, then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, a Commission, to command a Regiment of Horse, made up of the several Troopes raised and armed in the beginning of the rebellion, by my Lord Cleandeboys, Sir William Stewart, Sir Robert Stewart, and Sir Willi∣am Col, without the which Troopes to attend the Regiments, they would be almost unprofitable. This desire his Lordship most prudently put off to the determination of a Councell of War, as being unwilling to discourage him, being a stranger, but his Lordship (by the advise of the said Councell of War holden in Salissbury House) found it dangerous to grant that request, which might prove prejudiciall to the service, by giving an Irish man, bred in the most remote and barbarous parts of Ireland, the command of so many men of Honour, all of them being Collonels, one of them a Lord Viscount, the o∣ther three Knights, and some of these Privy Councellours and Barronets. And secondly, He likewise Petitions the Committee of Star-Chamber, set∣ing forth how that his Father and he had disbursed 4000 l. in the Parlia∣ments service, and in raising, arming, clothing and maintaining of that Foot
Company and Troop of Horse, procures Certificates on his behalf, gets an Order of that Committee for a Report to be made in the House for this 4000 l. to be granted unto him, demands a new Troop for himself, and the Command of a Regiment of Horse, and aims at greater matters with as much confidence as if he had left both Troop and Company in the service, nor never had the said 1400 l. per annum out of his quarters of Toulske for maintaining and clothing of them. Let therefore the premises and particulars herein contained be taken in∣to serious consideration by all wel-affected people, whether Major Robert Ormesby doth deserve the granting of this 4000 l. unto him by the Parlia∣ment, or such additions of greater imployments to be conferred upon him, until he be first tryed and cleared at a Councel of War for the same, or ac∣cording to his demerits punished, to the terror of others to commit the like hereafter. For if such incouragements should be conferred upon men so highly pre∣judiciall to the State, and others who have been lately here having faithfully served them, and been very fortunate bygiving many great defeats and over∣throwes to the Rebells, without the least spot or dishonour whatsoever, and have suffered extreamly in their estates, deeply ingaged in severall sums of money, for raising and arming of their severall Regiments, Troops, and Companies, who have humbly Petitioned the State to be releeved of their engagements, having exhausted themselves by long attendance, in which time some of them were Arrested for the engagements of the State, others for old demands before these troubles, and could neither procure their per∣sons protected, releived, nor any part of their Arrears given unto them whereby to subsist. Notwithstanding they never had any pay from the State six years, but three moneths means in commodities. That above forty of those Officers of Ireland had onely of late about 300. l. divided amongst them to carry them away, some of them having attended the State here above 15 moneths, others a lesser time. Then let the world judge what such who have served faithfully and have not received any manner of encou∣ragement from the State shal think, when this Major Ormsby who hath done them so great dis-service shall receive the 4000. l. he is now a Petitioner for, and great imployments conferred upon him, and who hath received as much as any one of those Officers upon this dividend of the 300. l. to carry him into Ireland and yet not gone, besides 100. l. in ready money which he received at his comming over.
Articles whereupon Major Ormesby is to be tryed at a Councell of War. 1 WHether or no did the said Major in June 1645 (he being best acquainted in Connaught) vvhen the Brittish in Ʋlster vvent thither, go along with those Forces, and was he not used as a guide through Connaught to the Castle of Shrewl? did not the said Major hinder the Eng∣lish & Scots who resolved to fight the Rebels being drawn up in their vvay, And did he not alleadge, That those Rebels vvere the Earl of Glanrikards friends and Kinsmen, vvho had not then declared himself in a hostile vvay? And for the truth hereof let Collonel Conway vvitness, Sir James Mount∣gomery, Captain Anteill, Captain Kilner, and many other Officers both Eng∣lish and Scots, vvho vvere onely strangers in that Province, and directed by the said Major. Yet nevertheless the British vvere reproachfully bran∣ded vvith that neglect vvhereof he vvas the cause, meerly to save some of his Country men and acquaintance, neighbours and Kinsmen, he, his fa∣ther and Ancestors living amongst them, and allyed to them by many gene∣rations, and whose Estate, if he have any, is amongst them yet in that Province? 2. Whether or no the said Major by his Covvardize rendred himself Prisoner to Captain Barnwell in his ovvn Trench, and so basely lost a Troop of good horse, though they cost him nothing, a Foot Company vvhich shel∣tred themselves in Tulske, and all the goods belonging to the English there, and in Generall did not the said Major occasion all the losse? 3. Did not the said Major occasion the losse of Castle Coote, vvherein his Father and some of his friends vvere chief Commanders, to save his life, vvho submitted himself to the mercy of the Rebels without Quarter, and might have hanged him when they pleased. 4. Did not the said Ormsby lose the battell of Roscomen, by giving a vvrong vvord, and flying himself first, and vvas never seen for 10 or 12 miles, vvhen as others vvhom he blames and calumniatess, kirmished all the time in the Reer, receicing the charges of the Enemy till the spent horse vvere gone and recovered breath: And in this manner most of the Officers behaved themselves in a body near 20 miles together, but he vvas never seen, alledging that he vvas shot through the Arme, vvhen a Bullet onely grazed on him, as by the skar may yet be seen, his bones being all vvhole?
Queries to be put to Major Ormesby by the Lord President of Connaugh concerning the 4000. l. he Petitions the Parliament for. 1 WHere this 4000. l. was in the time of peace, it not being known to his neighbours that he was worth 100. l. of ready money? 2. When gave he out this money for the Parliaments Ʋse? 3. By whose Direction was it and who undertook to pay him? 4. For what commodities to the Parliaments use was that money disbursed and which way could the Parliament be bettered 4000. l. by him? 5. What is become of those penniworths, and who disposed of them or made use of them to the Parliaments advantage; For if a Merchant give an account he must set down a list of the Commodities, and who received them, when and where, the day of the moneth, and year of God? 6. Why did the said Major presume to mis-informe men of honour, quality, and known integrity, who could not be privie to all his Actions in procu∣ring a certificate from them, which certificate he uses as a principall ground to strengthen his Petition for the said 4000. l. Which is to be re∣ported to the house of Commons; And also under colour of that certificate be assumes the glory of the services; performed in Conaught, to him∣self, when as others far more deserving are past by with silence. Now, if Major Ormesby shall passe free, notwithstanding what can be said against him, or be rewarded for doing nothing, It will be far more favour then the L. Moore, L. Convvay, Lord Chichester, Claneboyes or Ards, have had, though all Noblemen: and any of them have suffered more by the Re∣bellion, & disbursed more then he & al his generation are worth: yet al of them either want their Regiments, possession of their Estates, or their persons lye in Captivity many moneths for their service to the Parliament; And yet their Petitions, it read, be not granted. But indeed this brave Ormsby takes a better course then any of those Noblemen to atchieve his ends, for he is of every Nation and every profession as may best serve his turn. Amongst the Presbyterians he is Presbyterian, amongst the Independents he is an Inde∣pendent, amongst the Irish he is an Irishman, and that is true indeed; amongst the English he is an Englishman, if he were not betrayed by his Irish accent and breeding; and amongst the Scots, if his God dam-me may be taken, he loves them above all the world. And for his valour, if you beleeve his own
report, it is above that of Achilles and his Mirmidones whereof he had a great purpose to have given sufficient proof with the Venetians against the Turks, had he not been informed that Prince Rupert was to be Generall of their Army, who hath conceived such indignation against Major Ormsby (as himself reports) That the Prince hath vowed he never shall have quarter if he get him in a field: and the reason is, the name of Major Ormsby strook such terror in the Irish, that they durst not send over the ten thousand they promised the King, for fear of him, least he had destroyed the whole King∣dome of Ireland in their absence. And to conclude, it may appear by this preceding discourse, that this man lies aming at great promotion, great sums of money, but as yet he is onely possest by hope; howsoever he deserves this Epitaph. Here lyes the lusty Phaeton, which took in hand to guide, His Fathers Chariot, from the which although he chanc'd to slide, Yet that he gave a proud at tempt, it cannot be denied. FINIS.
