a3886a 99896563 136879
Articles to be diligently enquired of, and particularly answered unto in writing by the High Constables in every Hundred, and by the petty Constables and Tithingmen in every several Parish, Town and Hamblet, at the Assises to be holden for the Coun∣ty of 1 YOu shall enquire and truly present the names of all Popish Recusants within every Parish, who do forbear to repair to the Church according to the Law, in this manner distinctly you shall set down the names of the Masters and Mastresses, or Dame of the Family, and the names of the servants by their Surnames and names of Baptism, the names of Sojourners, and above the rest, the names of all the Schoolmasters. You shall present the names of all such as do not resort to Divine Service every Sunday according to the Law, and certifie whether the twelve pence on the Sunday forfeited be required and received, and duly imployed for the poor, of whom it hath been received, and of whom neglected. 2 You shall enquire what Felonies have been committed within your several Hundreds, Parishes and Towns, which come to your knowledge, by whom, against whom, and of what kind and nature, and who hath presented the same, and what concealment or connivence hath been, and by whom in the prosecution of any such felonies, and if any Robberies since the last Assises hath been committed, you shal certifie whether Hue and Cry hath been made, and the same hath been duly prosecuted by Horsemen and Footmen, or in whose default, or by whose negligence the same hath failed to be duly prosecuted, and also whether Watches have been duly kept for the apprehension of Felons, and Vagrants, and by whose default the same have been neglected. 3 You shall certifie what Vagrant persons, or Rogues have been apprehended within the several Parishes since the time aforesaid, and what let passe, not apprehended, or not punished, who hath been sent to the house of Correction, when, and how they have been delivered from thence, and by whose negligence the same hath happened, and who hath relieved such Rogues with meat. 4 You shall enquire and certifie what Cottages have been erected, by whom, and by whose means, contrary to the Statute of Eliz. and what in∣mates entertained in Towns not Corporate, and by whom. 5 You shall certifie how many Taverns, Innes and Alchouses, and Tippling houses there are within every several Parish, who keep the same, and how long they have kept them, and which of these Alchouses are licensed, and which not, and whether they sell their Ale and Beer according to the Assise or not, which of these entertains Neighbours, as Ale-houses, who have been drunk within the said Parish since the last Assises, and in what Inne or Ale-house the same hath happened, and who hath maintained any unlawfull games there; and whether the number of any such Innes or Ale-houses in any one Parish be burthensome, and more then is convenient, and which of them may be best spared, and whether the houses stand in conve∣nient places, and which of them be scituate in nooks, by lanes, woods, or other secret places, and like to be dangerous to the people in respect of en∣tertainment and shelter of Thieves, Robbers, and other lewd company. 6 You are to present whether lawfull weights and measures be used within your Hundred, and whether the lawfull Assise of bread be kept and obser∣ved, and to present all persons within your severall Precincts that offend herein. 7 You shall enquire who are or have been since the time aforesaid, Ingrossers, Forestallers, or Regrators of Corn within the said County, or any o∣ther County, who dwell or reside within your Precinct, and what kind of corn, and grain, of what quantity they have been Ingrossers, Forestallers, or Regrators, and who are Maultsters within your Parish, to sell their Mault again, and who use common Brew-houses for Ale or Beer within every seve∣ral Parish, and which of them sell to any unlicensed Alehouse. 8 You shall certifie all the names of the Petty Constables and their abilities, and by whom they have been made, nominated, and chosen, to the end that men of ability and good discretion may be chosen to those places. 9 You are to enquire and certifie what servants have been put out of their service, or have put themselves out of service, their Terms not being expi∣red, where this hath happened, and what is become of such servants; and what unmarried persons of able body lye out of service, and whether they have means to live without labour, if they do labour for their living, who sets them on work. 10 You shall enquire what bridges, causies, and highwayes are in decay in every several Parish, and through whose default the same hath happened, and who ought to repair them, if you doubt whether side, present both. 11 You shall enquire and certifie what stocks are provided in every Parish for setting the poor on work, and how, and by what means the poor are set on work in every Parish: what Apprentices have been placed, or bound forthwith in every Parish, and who hath refused to receive and keep any Appren∣tice so ordered to be put forth by the Justices of Peace: what bastards have been born within every several Parish, who the reputed Father, how they have been punished, and how the bastard provide for. 12 You are to present all profane swearers and cursers within your Hundreds and Liberties, and whether they have been punished according to the Law, and the Penalties levied, and distributed to the use of the poor, as the Law requireth. 13 You shall enquire what riots, routs, and unlawfull assemblies, batteries and affrayes have been committed, raised and done in every Parish within the time aforesaid, by whom, and when, and how the same hath been punished. 14 You are to enquire what Constables neglect to punish Rogues and wandring persons, and to do other things belonging to the duty of their Of∣fice, especially who have neglected to bring in their presentments. ff. Ad Assisas & general. Gaole deliberat. tent. pro Com.  apud  in Com. pred. die  die  Anno  Caroli Regis, Whereas there hath been great neglect by the Chief Constabled & petty Constabled within the County of  as also in divers other Counties within this Circuit for want of due execution of their several Offices in not presenting the offences and misdemeanors committed within their several Townships and hundreds: It is therefore ordered by the Court that the several Chief Constables of every hundred, and petty Constables of every Town within the County of  and other the Counties of the same Northern circuit, do henceforth make answer upon their several oaths unto the several Articles hereunto annexed; And the chief Constable are to present the same at every Asissed, as they receive them from the pettif Constables unto the grand Inquest, upon oath; together with what they know of their own knowledges. And it is further ordered that copies of the said Articles be forthwish delivered unto the several chief Constables, who are to give notice of the same to the several pettty Constables accordingly.
