B6278 99896786 133216
In the Strand near the Middle Exchange in Salisbury Street, at the Second House on the Right hand where a Barber's Pole hangs out, Liveth John Butler, An Expert Operator and Oculist. YOu may find him there from Seven in the Morning till Twelve, And then he goes into Sweeting's Alley, to that which was Joseph's Coffee-House, now called the Flanders Coffee-House, next Door to the Sign of the Horse-Shoe near the Royal Exchange, there he stayes till Four of the Clock, who (by Gods Blessing) Cureth the Distempers following, (Viz.) He Cureth Blindness by Couching of Cataracts, He taketh Specks off the Eyes, and Cureth Defluxions of Rheums in the Eyes; He hath singular good Skill and Knowledg in Curing of Deafness, when the Party comes to him, he will tell them the cause of their Deafness, whether the Deafness be Internal or External, or whether curable or no. He Cureth Noises, Singing or Buzzing in the Ears; He cureth Bursten Bellies, he cureth Ulcerated Legs, and Itch in any part of the Body; He hath an Excellent Art in drawing forth of Corns out of the Feet and Toes with the whole substance in length and similitude of a Clove, and drawing no blood, nor putting the Party to any pain at all: And by the Operation of a Plaister to kill them, that no other Corns will ever come again in the same places. He is none of those which you call by that Vulgar name Corn-Cutters, could he perform it no better than such persons, he would scorn to set it forth in Print. For every Corn he draweth in his Chamber is Six pence; if any person sends for him to their dwelling places, he expects Twelve pence. If any person doth conjecture that other Corns will come again in the same places, upon Consideration he will admit of a Years trial and take nothing for the present; And if other Corns do come again in the same places within the Year, then he will expect nothing. Alderman Rugg dwelling in St. Albans in Hertfordshire, he was very Lame with Corns, he had Five and Fifty Corns taken out 26 years ago by this Professor, and never any other Corns came again in the same places. Capt. Body dwelling in London-Street in Ratcliff, had Thirty Corns taken out Three years ago, and never any came since; he was so troubled with them, that he was forc'd to Ride up and down to do his business; but now goes very well without any pain. Mr. Morgan a Herald-Painter in Thredneedle-Street near the Royal Exchange, he was much troubled with Corns, I took them out Two Years ago. And he was never troubled with any Corns since that time. Mr. Peck now dwelling in Noble-Street, he had Fourteen Corns taken out by the Professor hereof Four and Twenty Years ago, and was never troubled with any Corns since. He can give Testimonies of some Hundreds of Persons more that he hath Cured of the Particulars abovesaid, since his come∣ing to London, which will be too Tedious to Insert here. He cureth many other Distempers not here mentioned. This Oculist has a Large House and Shop wherein he now dwells, known by the Sign of the BELL in Pye-Corner near Smithfield, which he is willing to Sell, Lett, or Exchange for another of the like Value in or near the City. If any Person please to send for him, they are desired to leave a Note at his Chamber.
