B73 E561_11 99865225 117462
The Crafts-mens Craft. OR The Wiles of the Discoverers. In abusing and incensing Authori∣ty and the People against innocent and harm∣lesse Men, by false Accusations, and Sophistical Suggestions: viz. because they are not Formalists they are Atheists: because not Superstitious, therefore Irreligious: be∣cause they are against Tyranny and Oppression, therefore they are against Government, Magistracy, and Laws: because for good and equal Laws, therefore for no Order or Distinctions, and for equalling mens Estates. &c. And these Delusions are here cleerly manifested. By H. B. And they consulted together that they might take Jesus and kill him. Mat. 26.4. And the Jews which were of Asia moved all the People, and said hands on Paul, crying Men of Israel Help, This is the man that teacheth all men every where against the People, and the Law, and this place. Act. 21.27.28. Be not a witnesse against thy Neighbour without cause; for wilt thou deceive with thy lips? Prov. 24.28. Go not forth hastily to strife, lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof when thy Neighbour hath put thee to shame. LONDON Printed by J. and J. M. for W. L. at the signe of the Black∣moor, within Bishopsgate. 1649.
THE Crafts-mens Craft. BE a cause never so good, and the men never so innocent that pro∣mote it; yet if it cross the stream, and be in dis-favor with Au∣thority; it shall be sure to bear the brand of the worst Design, and be clothed with the foulest and most deformed shapes that Ar and Malice can invent. This is so far from being a new thing, that almost every Age, History, and Country, gives abundant instances thereof: So that though the present Op∣pressed Party (usually, but opprobiously, called Levellers) suffer much, yet they suffer no more then what the Prophets, our blessed Savour, his Apostles, the Martyrs, the Protestants in times of Popery, the Anabaptists, Puritans, Presbyters, in times of Episcopacie, the Separatists, and Independents, during Presbyterie, have endured before them. And why should not we also taste of that cup, so many, and so good having drunk deep draughts of it? The Potion may indeed be bitter, but 'tis medicinal, and will (by making us watchful and circumspect in all our waies and actions) preserve us (I hope) from many frailties and infirmities we might otherwaies through the pravity of mans nature, be apt to slip into: So we may say with King David, It is good for us that we have bin afflicted, for otherwise we had gone astray. However, the Guilt of Josephs Brothers, in going about to Murder him, was neer the less, because it prov'd the means of making him the Preserver of Gods People in Aegypt: the Rods (though Instruments of Chastisements in the Lords hand) are commonly thrown into the fire. And in Testification of this also, History, and our own Experience, is very copious. The times are necessitous, and rewards are to be had, Is it to be supposed therefore, that officious, needy, or ambitious men will be wanting to them∣selves in this particular? what way so easie to wealth, advancement, offices? The labors of a mans life cannot produce so much, as a weeks time in a hand∣some, well-wrought, artificial fiction: Alas! what's thirty pieces now? 'tis nothing; every Spy and Intelligencer that is but any thing his Crafts-master, proposes a greater largess for the Traps and Pit-falls he makes for innocent and harmless people: And therefore, what wonder is it that our Friends in the Tower, before their close Restraint, had almost every day some Visitants, that under the disguise of Friendship, came to Ensnare and Betray; and that it is already come to that pass, that a man dare hardly trust his Bosome-Friend, nor communicate himself to any man, without fear and inward reluctance?
What wonder is it that a busie and subtile People, should make it their work to vilifie and reproach us; to mix with all companies, and scatter false reports and forgeries of us? hoping thereby first to possess mens minds, knowing how difficult a thing it is (eradicare errorem) to remove a Belef (though never so slightly grounded) that has took root in them? For when a scandal is once entertain'd, 'tis afterward reported; and the Parties reporting, are thereby engaged, not onely to stand to the justification of that, but then greedily to suck in all new calumnies, so to keep down the injur'd from ever haing opportunity to right themselves. What wonder is it to see book after book to fly abroad (like the Spirit of Delusion amongst the false Prophets) to furnish every mans mouth with a false Accusation aganst Us; and, as we have endeavored the good of all, to make us hated by all; to take away first our Reputations, that so they may the more easily take away our Lives; to mis-guide and incense Authority, and the People against Us, by falsly charging us with such things as are of greatest abomination to Us; that so they may the better cry out, Crucifie, Crucifie, Away with such Monsters from the Earth, it is not fit they should draw breath amongst us? And why all this? But because we are faithful to the sublike interest, and will not shut our eys, and stifle our Consciences, but dare still urge for those good things have bin so often declared for, and pro∣mised; and can by no baits, threats, or allurements, be drawn there-from. Much time hath bin spent already, and much hath bin said for our Vindi∣cation; but there are some men, who hearing, will not hear; and seeing, will not understand; whose work it is, not to believe, nor to suffer others to be rightly informed; they should then (lum, & operam perdere) lose their La∣bour, and peradventure the Recompense of their Reward too. They have now sumd up all in a Book call'd the Discoverer, which is for the most part of it, the old Scandals new modell'd; Calumny clothed in a more Scholastical Habit, and confident (as the Custom is) of easier admittance, because of its finer Apparel. At first it was usher'd into the world by the Recommendation of the Councel of State; I know not whether that Honor was really conferr'd, or fictitiously imposed, because in the Copies last Printed, the Councel of State is left out, and the Authors only (and those unknown too) substistuted in their rooms: But admit the first, 'tis very usual, all know, for Authority to be mis∣informed, especially when they have as yet only heard but the Accusing Party: When the Iews had said many (and those grieveous) complaints a∣gainst Paul; questionless, the Spirits both of the hearers, and of his Iudges were very much incensed against him; but after he had pleaded for himself, the tyde was turnd; Festus found nothing worthy of death in him, and A∣grippa was almost perswaded to be a Paul. For my part, I make no doubt, but if the Pariament and Councel of State will in time see how exceedingly we have been inued by the malevolent Reports of bad men, and that both the Ends we aime at, are in themselves good and beneficial to the Common-wealth; and the means we have used for the accomplishment thereof, very lawful and justifiable: Which that they may, I shall make bold to do the
best I can to discover our Discoverer, his Wilts and Fallacies I mean; in do∣ing whereof, I shall not trace him in every politick and extravagant excur∣sion, to which I shall only cursorily and occasionally speak, but as my main drift, extract so much out of him, as is most material, and whereto he seems to ring's proof; the rest every un-prejudiced Reader will (I suppose) of himself see thrugh, and take, as the customary Stratagems, that Designing-men use to make others odious. But before we come to his Particulars, we also shall make one Observation, as givng light to our present Discovery. Prudential and ood men do well observe, that when a People or Party prove Obstinae, that is, constant to their Engagements, and resolute in the promotion of those things that tend to the good of the Common-wealth; and can by to means be taken oft, or with-drawn, to the promotion of another Interest; that then the common and politick cuom is, to make them odious, that o (since they will not assist) their complaints and opposition shall be as in-efectual and inconsiderable as may be: And in making them odious, there particular Waies and Methods (amongst many others) are used. 1. To aggravate every weakness and frailty of any particular man, and impute is to the whole Party. 2. To contrive, and confidently affix such Scandals upon them, as are most distasteful to the People, and most difficultly disproved. 3. To impose upon them the deviations of other men, not of their Party; and yet make the World believe they are. 4. To Interpret their Intentions, and make indirect Inferences upon their Words and Actons; as, that because they are against Tyranie and Oppressi∣on, therefore they are against Magistracy and Government; because they are for an Isonomie, Impartiality or Equality in the Law, therefore they are for no Order of Distinction, and for Equalling mens Estates. 5. To cry down, and charge them with Hypocrisie, but in the highest and most visible manner exercise it themselves. 6. To evade the point in Controversie, or the real Difference; and divert every mans thoughts there from, by false Accusati∣ons, and Reports, for that end raised, and taken up. 7. To up-braid them with their poverty, and intimating false and groundless surmises thereupon. 8. To invent nick-names, importing that of which they are not guilty: To charge them with Heresie, Atheisme, Anti-Scripturisme, Sedition, Treason, &c. and any thing that is of ill Report among men; That these, even all of them, and many more, both have bin, and are taken up, and made use of by the Dis∣coverer, and others against us, is as cleerly to be seen, as was Gehazie's lepro∣sie on his fore head; which shall more cleerly be manifested in the following Treatise; and we do desire the Reader to take good notice of it: For doing so, he shall the beter know the Tree by the Fruit. That we have urg'd the Removal of Tythes, Excise, Free-quarter, and other Taxes, and Grievances, is as the Discoverer saies, very true: and 'tis as false that we have done it either to Ingratiate our selves, or to make the people dis∣affected towards the Parliament. If he could truly enter into our hearts, as he takes upon him to do, he would find, that the onely motive engaging us to press for their Removal, is our sense of the burden, and our compassion tow∣ards
those that are more prest (especially by Free-Quarter) then our selves. We see not but that the Parliament may remove them; and their Declaring so often that they will, is a motive to us (it being not done) to press them for the doing thereof. During their Session, what hath bin more usual almost in every busness that s in demur or suspense? Why should that therefore be justifiable in all others, and condemnable in us? 2. For the impossibility of removing them, by which the non-removal is justified: Under favor, he must excuse us if we see it not: We both see that it may be done, and how it may be done; and have many things to offer in order thereunto, but that we can have no favorable acceptance. 3. He urges, That 'tis by our means burdens are continued. 'Tis easily said indeed, but most difficultly (we may say impossibly) proved; for what is not true in it self, cannot be proved. If one hundred thousand pounds, and twice the sum too, be spent upon Intelligence, are we to be blamed for it, that have no other weapons but Prayers and Petitions; and put the Common-wealth to no other trouble or charge, but what goes to the reading and de∣bating our humble Addresses? For the passages urg'd out of The Picture of the Councel of State, the Letter of Lieut. Col. J. Lilburn, and R. Overton, to the General, and other writings that concern men so able to write in their own Vindication, I purpose to leave them to the Defence of their own pens; onely I could wish that they and the Discoverers were upon even terms; and that the one for speaking were not in hope of a reward, and the other in fear of a punishment. For those harsh Expressions which have past some of our Friends writings, though we could wish they had not bin provoked thereunto, or that being provoked, they had forborn; yet Affliction, Oppression, and that hard mea∣sure they judge they receive in their Sufferings, may well excuse that heat and tartness that many times comes from them; and we could wish likewise they had no cause. But on the other side, Has it not bin with Interest return'd by their Adversaries upon them? And does it not strike deeper too? Amount∣ing to no less than an endeavor to take away their lives: We will agree with you, if you please, to perswade with our Friends on both sides, to forbear all bitter language; and desire you that you would press them likewise with those four Argumens which for that end you urge upon us. Sir, We know very well the disadvantages wely under, in that most of you are Politick men, that have studied the Behaviors and Rules of other Politicians, and have ac∣quired thereby, an Art of Commanding your Passions; Whereas we engage out of the Plainess and Singleness of our Hearts, and Desires of Good to the Nation, and have no Arts of Concealing our Intentions or Passions; Our Spirits presently rise when we see things done to the prejudice of the Com∣mon-wealth; and in this regard, haply we may have somwhat disadvantaged our selves. Your Story of Duron, you might have spared; for you know well, our Expressions were higher before the restraint of our Friends, than since; onely I see, you are willing to show u (though not the railing of your Tongue, yet) the Rancor of your Heart. You are very pleasant with your Fables in other
mens calamities; and like the Harpiae, that sing at the cries of Mariners, and a Shipwrack, so do you sport your self at the sad afflictions of your Bre∣thren; and are very Poetical in your Malice, but very ridiculous withal; for otherwise you could not imagine, that the vehement and hasty Expressions of our Friends, can be supposed by them to be a means to get themselves out, since in natural consequence, they must rather be judged the means to keep them longer in: From whence you may conclude, that they flow from them rather by instigation and necessity, than any Designe. For the relinquishment is spoke of in the Manifestation, of many good things proposed; it relates most to the Army, who have relinquisht many good things presented in their Agreement: Neither do we so much press for Speed in the doing them, as Assurance that they shall be done. And though our Impatience be often urg'd upon us to our prejudice, yet we could instance a Time, and a Declaration (which the Discoverer has for∣got) wherein these very Grievances of the People, which are not yet removed, were said to be so pressing, that but so many (and those very few) daies, could be allowed for their Removal. Sed non videmus ie manticae quod in tergo est. In other mens faults we are like Linceus, in our own Sand blind, and cannot see at any distance. You are pleased to give your guess and interpretation of our thoughts, what we mean by good things: and contrary to your own Rules, p. 27. In∣terpret all to the worst. We mean by good things, not what you Surmise; but we Express in our Petitions, Representation, and Agreement: He that but conjectures at that which is not, when he may be ascertained from that which is, must either be a weak, or a wicked man. We are neither for Delay, where it is Dangerous; nor for Hast, where it makes Wast: But as for good things, so for a fit and convenient season, which we judge to be now; and if it is not, let us have good reason for it, and we shall be satisfied. You next come to Particulars, whither I will make bold to follow you. You urge, that though you know we profess, and urge our Manifesta∣on for it, that we believe there is one Omnipotent God, the Author and Preser∣ver of all things in the World, &c. yet you suppose us Atheists, and say in our Profession we are Hypocrites. Alas! How fain would you have us worse than we are? How sorry are you that we are not so bad as you would have us? What pains you take to make us seen to be what indeed we are not? Atheists. If so plain and candid a Profession we have made, and you have recited, and our endeavors to square our lives answerable thereunto, be not sufficient to confirm men in a Belief of our Acknowledgement and Submission to a Deity; what else can be? I profess I know not. What greater Testi∣mony can you give us, of your not being Atheists? But you have reasons to believe us to be Hypocrites: I pray, let's examine them. Alas, how you deceive the World! They are Citations out of a Book none of us own, called, The New Law of Righteousness: What an Inference is here! A cer∣tain man to whom we have no Relation, has wrote a Book wherein are many particulars: From whence you infer the denyal of a Deity (and that but falsly
too, as he will tell you) and therefore we are Atheists. Good Sir, Speak no more of Incongruities in us, so long as you can pass this over in your self. But you further urge M. Overtons Book, denying the Immortality of the Soul. Si, if you had perused the Book, you would have found, that though he as∣serts the Mortality of the Soul with the Body, yet he grant, also, and affirms that the whole man rises again, and both Body and Soul comes to judgement. So that the whole controversie in his Book, is only of the nature of the Soul; And his opinion therein, though different from the common strain, yet when tken together, and not in piece-meal, it implies, and presupposes a Deity, and a Resurrection: And therefore here also you demonstrate, either your igno∣rance, in not examning his Book, (which since you take upon you to judge, you ought to have done) or your wilfulnes (to say no more) in making a false concluson, that the premises no way will hear. Lipsius in his Politicks, and Livie in his History, and some other of the Heathens, tell you (you say) That Religion, and Gods Worship, is necessary for te Safty and Prosperity of a Common-wealth. You ae inform'd well; nei∣ther do we think otherwise; But what's your inference hence? Nothing ver∣bal, but tacitely you imply, and you would have the World believe, that we are wore than the Heathens; because we would have no Religion: you sup∣pose you have prov'd it before; whch whether you have or no, let the world judge. The Presbyters are against Toleration, though the Indepen∣dents are for conformity; cleerly this is your Argument; for there it as geat disparity between the opinions of those he cite, and us; as between the Presbyters and Independent. Tis true indeed, we are not so much for the Formal, or rather Suppotious part of Gods Service, further than is cleer and evident unto us; but for the real and practical part of his Worship, we wish we could more exactly sqare our lives thereunto; and I hope it will be every day more and more our endeavors that we may: But where we have not sufficient grounds, and certainty in the things, and judge the essential wanting, whoe we cannot take things upon rus, and a traditional convey∣ance, as others can; there we suspend our practise; and from hence, because we will not be superstitious, we are said not to be Religious. The Ordinances were intended for the Comfort and Confortation of man; and therefore, cer∣tainly for our own sakes, we would not neglect any of them, where we have plain and certain grounds for exercie thereof; But for conforming our lives and conversation according to the Rules and Dctates of Scriptures, which are plain, obvious, and ndisputable, (which S. James define to be Pure Re∣ligion) this is prncipaly to Honour God; viz When our Light doth so shine before men that they seing our good works, may glorifie our Father which is in Heaven. Truly Sir, we ever took good life not for the smoke, as you ex∣press it, but the substantial part of Gods Service: Neither do we neglect, or have any other than precious eeem o the Ordinances, all things essential to ther practise being present; You do us exceeding wrong therefore, and your self too, to shew so much weakness, as to brand us (and that upon so slight grounds, and no proof) with Atheisme; especially considering how far the prejudice of such a slander will extend against us. A Atheist is not
fit for humane Society, for he has noty upon him, nothing within to check him from rushing with greediness upon any evil his lust or advantage can prompt him o; He will say any thing of any man, do any thing against any man to proft himself; No Law holds him, no Promises, no Engagements, where they may safely, and for his commodity be broken: He saies not one∣ly in his Heart, but n all his Actions, There is no God: And according to this Descrption (which certainly comes neer the matter) The greatest Atheists are Politicians. Not such as out of singleness of heart do ther Countrey Service, and for that end, expose themselves to all hazards, neglect the Pomp and Va∣nty of the Word; and count it better to suffer affliction for a good Cause, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season. You have words no questi∣on, and fine stories; and can by a cuning contexture thereof, make any thing of ny thing; but when a right judgement is made, and matters cloely lookt into, without the Spectacles of Prejudice, and the false Opticks of your Imagination; we doubt not to stand right in the opinion of all good people, that take things as they are; not as they are gloss'd and painted over, with such colours as your ends and interests engage you to set upon them. But you have one nail more to fasten Atheisme upon us, and that is, That in all our Agreement, there is not one thing proposed for the holding forth, and furtherance of Gods Worship and Service; whereas in all other Plat∣forms, you say, though drawn up by Heathens, Religion alwaies had the first place and pre-eminence: And the implied conclusion from hence must be, That we are men of no Religion; for that you are undertaking to prove. Answ. 1. That the same complaint lies against the Agreement of the Army in this particular, as against us; For Religion had neither the first place there, nor was there any plat-form for the holding forth of Gods Worship and Service, more there than in ours: So that mutatis nominibus de Vobis Fa∣bula narratur: His Excellency, and the Officers of the Army, by the same in∣ference, must be his Atheists. The Parliament has already established a Form and Method of Reli∣gion; which as they have power to do, so is there no Restriction in the Agreement, but that they may at all times have the like; For, where they are not restrain'd, there they are impowred. When are we like to have an Agreement, if there must be in it a Plat-form for Religion? Considering the unversal difference and discordncie in mens sprits about matters of Religion: We have done as much (we think) in that particular, as is necessary; in making necessary Cautions and Reserves against Compulson and Enorcement; Further we could not go, wthout the hazard of having no Agreement at all, if we had put that into it, to which before-hand we were certan the people could not agree. For the Parishoners chusing their own Ministers, 'tis no more but what in most places they may do already; and where Patrons are that impose, is there not the same likely ho that they may impose a Turk, or a Jew upon a Parish, as that the Parishoners should chuse one? Will a Patron think you, be more careful of them, than they are of themselves? Every straw (I see) must be brought to your Building: Note also what your Infer∣ence
must be hereupon; We would have the People chuse their own Mi∣nisters, therefore are we Atheists, and would have no Religion: And to itch up this pitiful Argument, the Anabaptists of Munster (Levellers you now call them) must be brought in: The old trick of the Bishops, and of every body else, that have Designes on foot; Where Proof is wanting, there Resemblan∣ces are insinuated in their stead; and Comparisons made either in such things as are true of neither, or ese, the Party that is to be made odious, is likened to such as are alredy odious, in some particulars not material; and yet there∣by is suggested a similitude in all the rest. You have their proofs that we are Atheists; which though they promised you should be cleer and certain, out of our own Books; yet you see, when touched, they fall to dust; like the fair seeming Apples of Sodome, and re∣main rather as proofs of their rancor and spleen against us; or else, of their Stratagems and Designs upon us: Non ut Probant loquntur, sed ut Decipiant: They speak not to prove, but to deceive. Their next work is, to make us Levellers; In order whereunto, they cite two passages in the Manifestation, page 4. As, First. We profess, we never had it in our thoughts to level Mens Estates; it bring the uttermost of our aime, that the Common wealth be reduced to such a pass, that every man may with as much security as may be enjoy his Propriety. And Secondly, Ʋnder∣standing by levelling, an Equalling of mens Estates, and taking away that Right and Title that every man hath to what's his own: To attempt an enducing the same, is most injurious, unless there did precede an Ʋniversal Assent thereunto, from all, and every one of the People. Thus far the Manifestation: From whence they make this Paraphrase; Disc As if they should say the thing is good, onely wanting means and power at present, it must be left, till there be fur∣ther opportunity to do it. What is in these mens brain, or what in their hearts, that they can so confidently abuse us, and the World, yea, and themselves most of all? For apparent falshood, are like Arrows shot upright, that fall down upon the head of the Shooter. What Bars and Bolts have we put against levelling, in our Petitions, Agreement, and all our Writings? How have we declared it to be without the Power of Parliament it self to do it, an∣swered the Objections concerning the Primitive Christians Community? Every thing we have brought to light, our Proposals, Articles, and Provisi∣ons, do all cleerly, and evidently imply and relate to Propriety; and yet to see, when it concerns men that the World should believe us to be Levellers, how against all light, and apparent certainty of the contrary, they can urge it upon us. But they have further proofs, viz. Expressions our of our Writings, that do imply it as cleer as day. I confess the Citations they have brought there, do not onely imply, but express it; But the Expressions cited, and the Books out of which they cite them, are no more ours, or owned by us, then by them that cited them: And what dealing I pray is this, to lay other mens infirmi∣ties upon our shoulders? His Inference is, Wests horses came into Gladmens Grounds, therefore Fields Cattel shall be pounded. This is such a way to make men guilty, as was never heard of before, I think: A sure way, for allowing
it, no man can be innocent: This is so far from taking doubtful actions in the best sense, and to make the Fairest and Noblest construction in things dubious, which is the Discoverers rule, p. 27. that instead thereof, where Actions and Words are plain, and no waies dubious; he puts a contrary sense upon them, and will force upon us, things which we utterly disclaim. Two leaves he has spent in citations of this nature, which we shall not speak to, because they concern us not; but shall onely desire, that the Infer∣ences and Applications which are made thereupon, may (and we know they will) by all ingenuous men, have no reflection at all upon us. But before they leave this, they be think themselves, that our profession against Levelling, is very plain and sgnificant in the Manifestation and there∣fore they have found a device to enervate and weaken it, as they thnk; and that is a special one; you shall hear it. When we say, that Levellihg is in∣jurious, unless there did precede an Ʋniversal Assent in All, and Every One of the people: First, they object, that we imply that the thing in it self is good. 2. That by All, we mean All Restrictively; that is, Some and those the poor Commoners. To the first we answer▪ that we cannot suppose, nor do we think any Rational men do believe the thing unlawful in it self; for then the Primitive Christians d unlawfully: But we say, it is unlawful and inurous for any sect or sort of men, to impose or enforce it; but that to make it lawful, there must be an unanimous and ndividual assent of every man thereunto: And for a further Vindication in this point, we refer to our Manifestation. The second Objection is the most absurd and groundless surmise, that ever any men took up; That we should mean by All, onely Some; God defend us from such contrarety between words and meaning; between the Tongue and the Heart: May our das be shortned, and the course of our lives expire before its natural Term, rather than we live to such a degree of Imposture, and wicked Reservation: There is not any thing our souls do more abhomi∣nate; and we desire al men to consider, how extremely in this particular we are abused. It our writings that are permanent, be thus wrested to a sense con∣trary to what in themselves they import; how much more will they, and how much more indiscoverably may they abuse us in our Speeches and Discourses, which ae semper in trans, nhing remaining of them to cleer themselves, and evidence the falshood of the Report. How careful were the Manifesta∣tors to express themselves so plainly, so fully, as to put it past being mis-un∣derstood; Ʋnless there did precede an universal assent from all and every one of the People: Three bolts they made, as if they had fore-seen an intention in the Discoverers, to force a passage here, into their Reputations; and yet all will not serve the turn: Paul must be a Pestilent Fellow, Our Saviour a Perverter of the Nation; and therefore, let them bear themselves how they will, and say what they can; the Bow is drawn, and the Arrow must fly abroad. However, the Wold may see by this, that 'tis not Truth that guides these Discoverers but Design; a handsom Fiction will go as far (they think) as Verity, till it comes to be laid open, and then (as in tricks of Legerdemain) the wonderful Art is but cleanly conveyance, and slight of hand: So here, the
whole Accusation amounts to no more, but a Fiction well mouded, a Fable artificially contrived, and told by a voluble Tongue, and an inventive brain▪ 'Twere well though, that somthing else were the subject matter of these mens dexterity, and not their Brethren Lives and Reputations. We have done with their two principal Discoveries; viz. That we are Atheists, and Levelles: which though at first they promised to demonstrate by Reason and Proof abundantly; yet have they (as many confident Mer∣chant▪ use to do) failed in the performance, and made it evident to all, that thereby they intended onely, to pre-occupate the peoples understandings, that men might piece up the defects and deficiencies of the Discoverers Rea∣sons and Arguments, with their willingness, and easie credulity. The next charge is, our Sedition, and raising Discontents, and Differences amongst the Souldiers, and incensing them against their Officers; by com∣mending the Goodness and Fidelity of the one, and decrying the Apostacie, Ambition, Perfidie, and Cruelty of the other; and by making the People out of love with the Parliament. To ths we answer; That the proofs urged for the making of this good, are many of them out of books not owned by us, and therefore of no validity against us. The places that are cited out of some of our Books, are cited but piece∣meal, without the preceding and subsequent passages, necessary for the clear∣ing our intentions, and manifesting the grounds and reasons of those passages: Allowing this Liberty; it is an easie matter by the Armies writings, to make them Traytors to the Parliament. Is it so unpardonable a crime for Inferior men to find fault with such as are in Authority, as to be judged therefore Traytors, Seditions, Mutineer▪ &c. That they must therefore suffer death for it. Disc. p. 33. Be cut asunder alive: ibid Be Hanged up in the most noted places of the Land: Nay, and be kill'd by any body that meets them? Certainly this Doctrine is but of a late Stamp and Coynage: At New-marker it was otherwise, at Reading, Hammer smith, and many other places: If it be considered how much good hath arisen to this Common-Wealth by some irregularties that in probability but for them, we had bin ruined; such complaints certainly as the Discover∣er mentions, which are far short of forcible Opposition and Resistance, which has by others bin exercised, would find a gentles, and more favorable sentence. If a General turns his Canon against the Souldier, or the Pilot steers upon a Rock; the Souldier may resist the one, and the Mariner; prevent the intend∣ed mischief of the other: So say the Declarations of the Army; and make themselves Iudge of the Parliament: Declar. Novemb 30. 1648. p. 5. I see Beams are but Motes in some mens eys, and in other some, Motes are made Beams. I wish to God there were no ground of just complaint, and that eve∣ry jealousie may be presented by an actual performance of Promise, and the many good things declared: Would it be so, I should judge it the happiest time that ever came to England, and the best way to secure all men that have served their Country, to allay all differences and discontents, to answer all scruples and objections. And I do likewise wish, and heartily desire of that party (for so it will be
called) of which I am, that they would Interpret all things to the best; and allow, that though they see what things ought to be done; yet that they may not see that onely so much, as things stand, can be done; and accordingly to bear themselves. I speak not this, either for fear, of infrmations much less to administer an excuse for neglects or miscarriages; but onely out of my de∣sire to chalk out to both a way to union, if it be possible; which I think is of greatest concernmet to both, and to the Common wealth that may be. For Expressions that have bin Bitter of either hand, it may be I may be mi∣staken, but I judge it best that they be remited and forgotten by both: I speak without commission, but I think, not without reason, and a due regard to both. If words have bin high from some of us, the provocations considered, and that their speeches have not bin altogether causless; considering like∣wise, that the men so speaking, have spent themselves for their Country, and cannot in truth be said to have other ends, than its Freedom and Safety; ha∣ving never either kept the Tract, or used the means to make themselves great or rich, but slighted both; which is no small badge of their Integrity: These things considered (I say) it will be no bad advice I believe Recepini canere; to found a Retreat▪ and bethink our selves of the impossibility of a perfect in on, unless there be some Remssion of all hands, of the dangers of our dif∣ferences, in case the enemy ever appear again: and of many other particulars that might be urged, but tha some will be apt to surmise, that this proceeds from the apprehension of our present condition and not from a desire of peace, and strengthning the Nation by a good and well joynted union▪ However, it has ever bin counted good advice to the wisest States, to stint and moderate their fortunes; and in greatest successes, rather to look back∣ward than forward; and rather to stop the current of dangers ensuing, than to follow the stream of that Victory, by which they may be more encreased▪ 'Tis Tacitus advice, Securitati potius, quam potentiae consulere; to consult rather our Security, than propose the increase and inlargement of power: This Ad∣vice haply will be dis-relisht; and who can help it? However 'tis given. But we urge against Martial Law, and so endeavor the breaking of the Ar∣my; For how can an Army subsist without Discipline? and where is Disci∣pline, if there be no Martial Law? Answ. That what the Law is express against, that we may urge against: But the Law is express against Martial law in time of peace; Ergo▪ Our Ance∣stors it seems knew very well the rigor and severity of that Law that aptness of its being extended beyond the camp, a chlamyde ad Togam; from the Soul∣der to the Citizen; and many other inconveniences of it; and therefore have expresly provided against it▪ exercise in times of Peace. And cerainly, other men ought not to plead for that the Law provides against: Nor ought our Desires to be so slighted and condemned, that are grounded upon express Law. And whereas the Discoverers urge, that we have made hurly-burlies, and therefore by our own Arguments it may be exercised now; We answer, First, That he is mistaken in his major, and takes that for granted, which we later∣ly disclaim, and is in it self false. 2. That allowing it to be true, yet our pleas against Martial Law, were before the hurly-burlies. 3. His consequece
is very infirm; For the meaning of Times of Peace, is according to Sir Edw. Cook, When the Courts of Justice are open; in whom is to be had Iustice against all Faults and Offences. Some other Excursion, and Expostulations are made hereupon by the Discoverers, which we onely desire may be read: we conceive there needs no answer. For the remaining part of their Book, 'tis spent in confutaion of the first and second part of Englands New Chains Discoered: In doing whereof, I command their wisdoms for caving out the most, and most considerable parts thereof▪ as ut  fothy, and impertinent passages: they have as safe a combat of this▪ a he that fenc'd with the ree, and need not fear any steping from behnd it: Tis a handsm predicament we are in, beng made Traytors for holding our peace; for what can't Art and Sophistry do? and we should hardly scape he lan or Treason, if in this case we should speak. 'Tis a me∣ritorious work indeed, and a gloriou conquest, firt to hold our hands, and then to bufet us; To ag, and then ree us: Howeer, we had thought these times, and men pretendng to Freedom▪ woud never have found fault with some things therein; which have from the bginig of these Distracti∣ons bin justified by the ablest and most ingenuous men. But when is it a bet∣ter time to condemn thngs good then when no man dares appear in their ju∣stification? I wish some other way might be found to untngle thoe chains; Non respondendo, sed arndo▪ not by anwerng, but doing: Herodian.— The Ey are Credulous, when the Ears are not. The Paper will remain, and when compar'd with the Aners in the Dicoverer, disgusts I fear, and dis-atsfa∣ctions will continue; as finding that the Childs Shoe cannot cover the mans foot: The things desired, are generally confest to be good, but the season is dislikt, and haply the expression: For the last, let the strong bear with the weak: For the first, Tis not good to be overmuch fixt and peremptory: Let assurance be given that they shall a a better reason be done, and see whether that will not satisfie. Consider however, that eght yeers waiting may beget some impatience; and on the other side, that they that have waited eight yeers, may tarry a little longer: Thus it will become us all, one sort and an∣other, to be indeed rather umpires, than parties; to press for those things that are desired; not as engaged men, or as particularly concern'd, but as Agents or Factors for the Common weath; not with heat, but reason; not with reviling, but perswason; The one makes parties and sets us at variance, the other begets Love and Concord, ad will make it appear one to anther (though I would have it be in reality, and not onely in appearance) that though we may differ in the way, yet we really intend one anothers good. I pray God in the first place, to incline my heart exactly to folow ths Councel; and I think it will be needful also for all and every one of all parties; and above all things, to intend unon; for as the Discoverer observes, M Walwn well know, That by Concord▪ the least things encrease; By Discord, the greatest come to nothing. And though it's said of us, that we follow the rule of Divine & Impera, Devide and Reigne: yet all impartal men cannot but impute the following of that cursed maxime to any, rather than to us. For we not onely have declin'd all means of rule, having never put our selves forward,
or bin eager in the pursuit of Offices; but our principles also do so bound all Officers to Express Rules, Limits, and Accounts, as that the gain will not much over-poe the labor; and we could wish it at that pass, and question∣less it would be so, were it not for the large Revenue, opportunity of corrupti∣on, &c. that instead of hunting after them, men should rather desire to de∣cine them, and that the discharge thereof, should be taken as a Favor, and acceptable Service to the Common-wealth. Other Scandals there are dispersed through the Book; but because they are hereoore answeed by us, we shall not need to say any thing particularly to them, but refer the Reader to the Manifestation, the Fountain of Slander open∣ed; the Charit of Church men; desiring onely that notice be taken, that where answers be given (as in that slander against M. Walwyn of perswading the Woman to make away with her self) the answers are not considered and disprovd, but the slanders afresh reported; as if satisfaction were not desired, but rather slighted, as a means to prevent the intended work of making us odious. And so we have done with the first part of the Discoverers; onely we shall make one observation; that what our party principally stick to, they altoge∣ther decline; viz. Our Maniestation, and the Agreement: By the one, unjust Aspersions are wip'd on, and we manifest what we are not; By the other, we evidence to all the World what we are, and what we seek for. Other papers are personal, and concern haply this or that man, as they have bin by occasion and provocation necessitated from them; but these do more generally concern us all, and are ownd by the Party: And therefore, it will do better hereafter, that men make not excursions a causa, ad non causam; from the cause, to the accident: In the last, we say we center and acquiesce, especially in a constant and frequent Representative; and shall even judge it our duties to press for the Establishment thereof. And so till the Second part of the Discoverers, we shall take respite; desi∣ring that they may well consider the evil effects which have proceeded from Officious mens incensing and mis-guiding Authority; And that Ahassuerus had never bin so violent against the Jews, but for the instigations of Haman; Nor Pauls Companons suffered so much at Macedonia, but for the Cove∣tousness of Demetrius and his Crafts-men. FINIS.
