C3840 669.f.17[68] 99870472 163316
A REMONSTRANCE TO THE CREDITORS OF THE COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND, Concerning the Publique Debts of the Nation. HIS Excellencies New Representative being now Dissolved, and their Supream Power envolved in him, as the sapp of a Tree runs to the root in cold Winter; It is not for the Creditors of the Common-wealth of Eng∣land to despaire of their due Debts, and think themselves undone by what is done, but rather turne their present fears into future hopes, considering that the late diseased, and deceased Parliament before their dis∣solution in their last Will and Testament, made their Noble Generall who is now our Lord Protector their sole Executor, whom I hope will be carefull to see you satisfied, and the grievances of the people removed. In him therefore you must confide, and render that honour, worship, and fear which is due unto his Highness under God, and to him and his Counsel repaire and Petition for Justice, and due satisfaction of your just Debts, according to that way and manner prescribed in my Remonstrance of the 22 of June last, and much more abundant, that you may not run in vaine but obtaine your just desires. For preparation hereunto, it is meet that you be throughly sensible of what the late Parliament hath done for you. That well pen'd Act for Ireland, of the 26 of Septemb. last, you ought not to forget, considering that therein they have granted Lands to you at an easie rate, for your Publick Faith Bils and Debenters, which I suppose will be good Accomoda∣tion for those who intend there to inhabit or plant. And it is remarkable what speciall provision they have made therein for desolate Widows, &c. But to speak as the truth is, they have not therein made Provision for stating your Debenters, who have not served in Ireland, only they doe (in a manner) promise it Yet by the Act of the 19 of October last, they have impowered the Committee of the Army, to cause the Accompts of all Officers and Souldiers that either are or were in the Service of this Common-wealth at any time since the 15 of January, 1647. to be stated, audited, and cast up. But not for those that were disbanded before. Neverthelesse though some were contented to accept of Lands in Ireland, the rest would not be so satisfied, but expected payment of their Bils and Debenters, from the Forrests and Chases, which was given by the old Parliament, for Collaterall Se∣curity, in the Act of the 17 of July, 1649. But incontinently this late dissolved Parliament have put the Publick Faith upon doubling thereupon, wherein it is to be feared there will be double dealing, and that the needy Creditors will be exposed (as it were) to be sold for a little silver, and the poor for the price of a paire of shooes; for they being not able to double, must be constrained in the midst of their great extreamities to sell their Publick Debts at an inconsiderable value, with many sighes and tears into the bargaine: And of all the Forrests they have reserved but four for the Collaterall Security for the Souldiers Bils chargeable upon the late Kings Lands, and that with such delatory Conditions, whereby their expectations are frustrate, though they earned their Wages with the hazard of their lives and dearest blood. The Act of the 7 of Octob: last, which is for Publick Creditors to bring or send in their Claimes of their Debts to the Com∣missioners therein named, is said to be for the due stating and clearing of Publick Debts in order to their payment. It also pro∣miseth payment to the discoverer of his own proper Debt: But as the Act of Marriage is deficient, without telling how long they shall hold together, So this Act is lame in divers respects: It tels you of stating, and of paying, but not by whom, nor when, Therefore it is not amisse for you to Petition for an additionall Act, or that the remaines of that Bill which was read, & Ordered to be read againe by the old Parliament, Nov: 30▪ 1642. may passe for your better Security. And the 12 Undertakers be sufficiently impowered, upon this, certain men have ingag'd to discover 500000. l. for payment of publick debts. I know many of you are very necessitous, and others, though more able, cannot spare money out of their Trading to double. You have waited many years with much patience, & I have laboured many Months, & attained experience of the said Calamities of the people more then before, I have in my progresse seen a dissolution of a Golden Parliament, coveting profit, And a Parliament choyce as silver, labouring for Credit, consisting (as was said) most of religious and conscientious men, in whom the best affected had hopes of good, But a house divided against it self cannot stand. The Newes of this will goe to Rome, but let not the uncircumcised in heart rejoyce and triumph. Most men upon this dissolution take occasion to cry Aha Aha, and to speak their pleasure, but prudence may teach them when and how to speak. Indeed the occasion of their dissolution is known to many, but few do rightly consider the cause to be That in matters fundamental they laid aside Gods most righteous Law, and leaned to their own: wherefore their dissolution was of God, who saith, I will have mercy & not sacrifice. It proceeds from the Lord of Hosts, who hath determined to stayne the pride of all glory, & to bring into contempt▪all the Honorable of the Earth▪ God Grant Repentance to Sinners. God Protect the Protector of his Saints. God Preserve the Peace of the Common-wealth. AMEN. From my House in Bow-lane, London, the 19 of December, 1653. S: Chidley.
