C5217 E538_27 99865246 164883
Collections of Notes Taken at the KINGS Tryall, at VVestminster Hall, On Sa∣turday last, Janua. 20. 1648. AND THE Charge of High-treason Read against the KING. VVith the severall Speeches made by the King, the Lord President, and the Councell which exhibited the Charge against Him. Which Notes were taken by H. WALKER, who was present at the Tryall that day. January 20. 1648. Imprimatur THEODORE JENNINGS. LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, neer the Queenes-head Tavern, 1648.
Collections of Notes, Taken at the Kings Tryal at Westmin∣ster Hall, On Saturday last, January 20. 1648. COllonel Fox led twenty Gentlemen with half pikes that were brought frm the ower, from the painted Chamber, to the place prepared for the High Court of Justice in Westminster-hall, and then the Ushers, Messengers, and Cryer of the Court went all bare. After them, Collonel Humphreys with the sword, and Serjeant Dendy with the Mace, came before the Lord President; and after him, all the Members of the Court tht were then present, who took their places upon the Benches. And Proclamation was made, and Westminster hall gate set open. Ho yes, ho yes, ho yes: All manner of persons that have any thing to doe in this Court, come in and give your attendance. Ho yes, Every man keep silence upon pain of imprisonment, and hear the Commission
of this Court read, which is authorized by an Act of the Commons of England in Parlia∣ment assembled. The Commission was then read, and 68. which were the Commissioners of the Court then present, answere to their names. After the Commission was read, Serjeant Dendy was sent with the Mace, with ten of the Gentlemen, with the halfe pikes to fetch the King into the Court, and immediately they returned ushering the King (his atten∣dance with him to the Court) to the place, where a chaire, and a little Table was set for the King, at the Barre, before the Court. Then the Lord President made a Speech to the King, under the name of Charles Stuart King of England, letting him know that the Commons of England in Parliament assem∣bled are sensible of the many Subjects that have been slain; and that they are resolved to make inquisition for this blood, other means having failed, they have erected this Court, Then the Counsell exhibited the Charge against the King, who as he was offering it to the Court, the King lapped on the shoulder with a wand which he had in his hand, bidding him to stay, but the Coun∣sell proceeded. And declared thus to the Court, that
he did in the name of the Parliament and Commons of England, exhibit a charge of High Treason, and o∣ther High crimes and misdemeanors against Charles Stuart King of England, then present before the Court The King again lapped him with his stick, and bad him hold. The Lord President of the Court then spake thus: Sir, This Court commands the Chare against you to be read, and then you may be heard what you have to say. Then the Charge was read, all being bare, but only the Commissioners of the Court, and the King, who sate in his chaire at the barre. The charge, consisted cheife on the late war, and many thousands that have beene slain by Trayterous leavying war against the Parliament, and was present at the severall fights at Yorke, Nottingham, Edge-hill, in Kenton-field, Branford, Oxford shire, Glo∣cester, Newbery, Leceister, Nazeby, and other places, where he caused thousands of his good Subjects to be slain, and forreigne forces to come over, and gave Commissions under his hand and seale to murder his good Subjects. And since again caused war in Kent, Surrey, Essex and other places, caused enemies to come in by sea, fire, and civill hostility against his people, whereby much innocent blood hath been spilt, houses burnt, places wasted, &
Commissions granted to Act with the Irish Rebels, whereby the said Charles Stuart hath been the occasion, authour, and continuer of this civill war, by which much blood hath been spilt, And rapine and out-rages on his good Subjects committed. And that they do proceed against such a Tyrant, Traitor, and Murtherer, as shall be agreeable to justice. These are some heads of the Charge then read by the Clerke against him. Then the Lord President sitting in his chaire spake, declaring to the King, That now hee had heard the Charge read against him, the Court expected his answer. The King then stood up and spak, deny∣ing the authority of the Court. And affirm∣ing that he was to give Answer to no power, but the supream power above. And severall other things in this nature was spoken by the King, to all which the Lord President made, full and excellent answers. And still answers and replyes were made on each side. The sum of the Speeches were thus, 1. The King required to know by what Authority they lat there to try him? Answer was made by authority of the Parliament of England,
And that if he had marked what was read he might have understood that before. Then the king said, they had not a lawful authority, and that he saw none of his Lords there. The Lord President told him that they sate by the authority of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled who had chosen him to be their King, and to whom he must give an account. The King denied that hee was chosen by the people, But that hee had it by inheritance, and said that it hath been heridi∣tary above a thousand yeares. And the King said that if they did not show a more lawfull authority for their sitting there, he would not give them any answer. The Lord President told the King, That hee had beene told se∣verall times, that their sitting is by authori∣ty of Parliament, And that if he will not give them an answer, the Court knows how to proceed against him. The King said that if hee did know that they were warranted by the word of God, the Scriptures, that hee would deliver his Answer, but else hee will give no Answer. The Lord President told him that if he would give no further answer, the Court knew how to pro∣ceed legally against him. And in the mean time those that brought him thither, should take charge of him
backe againe. Then the King pleaced an appeale to the God of Heaven, and that hee was intrusted with the Government of the Kingdom, and pleaded the li∣berties of the people, saying, that it is as great a sin to lay down that power wherewith hee was intrusted, as to commit a crime, saying, that if he knew the autho∣rity of the Court to be lawfull, he would give his an∣swer. Then the Souldiers and the people cryed out Justice, Justice, Justice. The King turned about thereat, and looked towards them, but said nothing to them. The Lord Presidnt having fully declared the pow∣er of the Court, advertised the King, how well satis∣fied they are of their authority, and the lawfullnesse thereof, and bad him to consider further of it against Munday next. For if hee will give no answer, they must proceed legally against him. The King then made a short speech, but still not owning the power of the Court. After which the Lord President told the King that the Court had heard him what he had said. And then the King was carried backe to Sir Tho. Cottons. After which Proclamation was made Ho yes, Ho yes, Ho yes, All manner of persons that have any thing more to do at this Court, ye are to depart at this time, And this Court doth adjourn it selfe untill Munday morning next, at 9 of the clocke to meet in the Painted Chamber, and from thence hither again. FINIS.
