D1093A 669.f.6[74] 99871112 160935
A true Copy of the Lord STRANGE His Warrant, for puting in execution the Illegall Commission of Array in LANCASHIRE. To all and every the High Constables in the Hundred of  Amounderves. WHereas his Majesty by his Proclamation dated at Yorke the 12 day of this moneth of August, hath declared; that an Army of Horse and foote is in a That is a lye. Rebellious manner raised in the South parts of this Kingdome by The Com∣misiners of Array may ap∣ply that to themselves. il-affected persons who are now Trayterously and Rebelliously marching in Battaile Array against his Majesty, contrary to their duty and allegiance, and that he intendeth upon Munday next, being the 22. of this instant August, to set up his Standard Royall: and whereas his Majesty by his Commission under his highnesse great Seale, hath au∣thorized and appointed me Lieutenant Generall of this and other Coun∣ties, to raise forces of Horse and foote Souldiers, to attend his Majesty, for the defence of his Majesty and the true Here let the world judge whether Pa∣pists will de∣fend the true Protestant Re∣ligion, and whether base and beggaly Caviliers that have nothing to loose, but hope to raise themselvs by ruines) will maintaine the Subjects liberty and property; and whether Delinquents (that are great incendiaries) would maintain the being of Parliaments, that dare not looke the Par∣liament in the face. Protestant Religion, their Liberties, Properties, and the very being of Parliaments; These are to require and command you, that you summon and warne all Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Free-holders, within your severall divisions, chargeable with Armes, and all such as are of abillity to provide and maintaine Armes, and are well affected to his Majesties Service If they be not Popish Recusants, they may thanke the Pope for it, who hath given dispensations to take the Oath of Allegiance & Supremacy, that they might doe the more hurt with lesse suspcion. (Popish Recusants alwaies excepted) that they be at Preston upon Tuesday next, being the 23 of this instant August, by 10. of the clocke of the fore-noone, where I intend if it please God to be there, further to acquaint them with the particulars of his Majesties Commands, and to confer and advise with them of the best and speediest way to advance and further his Ma∣jesties Service in this behalfe, which I doubt not, but I hope and believe all good Subjects will not. all good Subjects will readily and wil∣lingly performe, and that they will in the meane time consider and take into their thoughts, what ayd or assistance they or their neighbours, tenants and friends can and will by their meanes yeeld to his Majesty in this needfull occasion, and will prepare to have the same in readinesse: faile not as you tender his Majesties Service, and will answer the contrary at your perills. Given under my hand and Seale, at my Mannor of Lathum this 17. of August, Anno Dom. 1642. Iames Strange. At LONDON Printed, Anno Dommini, 1642.
