D1318 E607_13 99865120 165683
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mistris Macquerella, a Suburb Bawd, Ms Scolopendra, a noted Curtezan, and Mr Pimpinello an Usher, &c. Pittifully bemoaning the tenour of the Act (now in force) against Adultery and Fornication. Bawd. O wretched times! Our Trading quite is undone: Curt. No Bumbkin, Swordman, or a Cit' of London Dares give refreshment. Bawd. We must now be parting: Pimp. For feare of stigmatizing, Bawd. Or a Carting. Now, in the name of Fate, What Saint is she That keeps a shop of publike Brothelrie, Harbours the sharking Lawyer for his pence, And (Martyr-like) consumes his Evidence, Nuzzles the damned Atheist, makes him curse Nature and Fortune, that his thin-lin'd purse Sho'd be devoid of Crowns? D'yee aske what Saint? This Saint was sent from th'fierie Regiment Of Sodoms Apples, a lascivious staine To Vertues habit, or a Whore in graine. A Purple Strumper, Gangrene to the State, Earths curse, Hells blisse, Soule soile, and Angels hate. LONDON, Printed for Edward Crowch. 1650.
Macquerella, Scollopendra, Pimpinello. Macque∣rella. MIstresse Scollopendra, I joy to see you, with all your lineaments about you; a whole Nose, a quick eye, (and I dare be confident) not defective be∣neath the Navell: whither are you bound Lady? Scol. No matter whither, I cannot be out of my way, we may een hang up our Harpes, now no more melody: By the faith of my body, I swear to you (Mistresse Macquerella) I have not had a Cullee worth half a Crown to me this half a score dayes. Macq. Ah wicked world, that I should live to see this day; a fine Age y-faith, when procreation must doe pennance in an Halter; well fare the memory of the men of former times, who made wholsome Lawes for the protection of Handsome wo∣men; men are now clean degenerated. Blessed be thy Soul de∣ceased Sardanapalus, who mad'st Lawes in favour of the Female sex, had'st thy whole leash of Beauties charrioted after thee in all thy progressions; and in honour of long Coates, didst wear a womans Habit. Pimp. Well met Mistresse Macquerella, and Mistresse Scollo∣pendra, you are happily encounter'd. Scol. Pimpinello, thou seest the sadnesse of my condition, I was not wont to walk thus accounter'd by Venus: I, yesterday, was fain to engage my upper weed (the Tabby Gowne thou knowest Sir Matthew Mintz gave me) for a dinner of Green Cheese and Chibbals; and to day (if I will eat) must I put off this Petticoat. O the world's strangely alter'd (Pimpinello) time was (thou knowest) when I allow'd thee thirty pounds a yeer sterling but to wait on the stair head to prevent the ap∣proach of strange faces. Macq. I, I, then, was then, but now's now; not a penny stir∣ring:
we, the Citizens of Sodome, are like those Apples said to grow near that lake occasioned by a showre of Brimstome, a childs touch will moulder us into powder; we may keep centry at our dores, and Hem till our lungs ake; aske every one that passes by what's a clock till we have brought the naturall day to a period: All our sugred Speeches, and alluring Gestures, prove to no effect. The Act, the late Act against Fornication, and o∣ther Veniall sinnes, 'tis that hath undone us all. Pimp. Farewell all former Joyes: as for eating, and drinking, I despise them both, my mouth may be sow'd up for any use I am like to have of my teeth, and (save that I desire to die, (as I was borne) crying I would play Oedipus, and pull out my mine own eyes that I might might not behold the misery that is fallen, and yet like to fall upon the poor pentioners of the Placket: I have not the least imployment, not a Gentleman now that dares, or cares to tell me, when the toy takes his bloud, and desire a cast of my office: All's gone, all's lost, I'le ene hang my selfe up∣on the next tree that stands in my way. Macq. Be of comfort man, this is but a paper pellet, a nine dayes wonder at the most. What, Mistresse Gigglesby holds up still, and Mistresse Tatchet, and Mistresse Fulsome doe still retain their domestick Doxies, and are as well custom'd as ever, Ile as∣sure thee, only a great disaster hapned lately to Mistresse Tatchet, to the great discredit of her occupation. Scol. What was that for Heavens sake? Macq. Marry thus, you know the little Tib whom she took from the Charity of the Parish, to maintaine at her own cost, till she should be of years to repay her expence, by the sweat of her—for want of looking to, hath so pittifully sing'd Master Mentula, that he lookes like a cold Codling, as much breath as would cause a Leveret to leave her hold, I'le undertake, will dis-member him: oh he's rotten roasted. Pimp. Such accidents must be expected sometimes, flesh will not alwayes keep sweet though you keep it continually buried in Salt. Macq. Pray thee tell me (Pimpinello) for I am sure thou knowest, who of our profession hath the late Act put to the rout, and who have stood, and are like to stand the shock;
God forbid but some should be wiser than some. Pimp. To answer your question, let me see: In the City Mistresse Clark. Mistresse Purser. Mistresse Maunge. defunct. In the Su∣burbs. Mistresse Filth. Mistresse Puddle. Mistresse Froth. Mistresse Crack. run away. Mistresse Blear Mistresse Earwig Mistresse Dive Mistresse Pick Mistresse Front Mistresse Fawne Flourishing. But the last of the first rank (sweet Mistresse Crack) ah, that name would crack any heartstrings made of wire: dear [Mi∣stresse Crack] in thy ruine my fortunes are for ever buried. Scol. Alas poor Pimpinello: but sirah, prithee tell me under what penalty doe we lie, what pennance is allotted us in the late Act. Pimp. Pennance, say you, a small slight punishment, I wot, hanging, burning, carting, whipping, or so, matters of small mo∣ment, triviall things these. Scol. Alas, poor women, who are suspended from that pri∣viledge the very Cats enjoy, who play and sport with their Tails, and yet fear no censure for so doing. Pimp. Now you talk of Cats, you put me in minde of some Verses that one gave me yesterday. Macq. For Gods love let's hear them. Pimp. These are they, A song. O the sad and heavy dolour That the world hath cause to make: Were I Democritus his Schollar, I could not, but of teares partake, The ancient priviledge of Cats, With their Tailes to be sporting: If a woman trie, She's sure to die, Her paramour consorting. Woe is me, for the old decoyes, And young Madamoysellas, Who unto sale expose their toyes, Alas poor Macquerellas.
No fee, for—now to be had No halfe peece for a beauty, Nor for you Sir Pimp, Your feet to imp. And doe your Baudy duty. Macq. Out upon thee (Pimpinello) this Song is made in dis∣grace of us, and our profession, prithee wipe thy posteriors with't. Pimp. Nay, hear it out, (for Martin Parkers sake) the last makes amends for the first. Now what remaines Ye smock coat Swaines So wedded to Devotion; But with each eye, to peepe and prie And take a speciall caution How you doe deal In Lamb or Veal, Raw, or ready roasted, You know your Fate, and the doom of State, As the noble Act hath boasted. See the Chambers where you sinne Have neither flaw, nor cranny, No hole for any to peepe in; For if witnessed by any That he did you see, and rem in re At the work of generation, By Cupids Bow, y'are hang'd, I know, For example to the Nation. Macq. Well, well, (Mistresse Scollopendra) he that should have told me this seven years ago, I should have spet in his face as the errantest lyar ever spoke with a tongue: For mine own part, since I must needs be honest against my will, I resolve to practice temperance, with my will; some convenient well scituated Stall (wherein to sit, and sell Time, Rue, and Rosemary, Apples, Gar∣like, and Saint Thomas Onyons) will be a fit Palace for me to practice pennance in. Oh! I hate the thought of being branded with the letter B. 'tis ten times worse then the Mark of the Beast I'le maintain it. Pimp. Oh! oh! now could I be contented to be thrown out
of some window, though it were three stories high; to stand in a Pillory day, by day, for a twelve moneth together; or to re∣ceive the Lash from Charing-Crosse to White-Chappell, so there∣by I might call back the dayes of Yore. Oh 'twas a brave world when my Clients were so rich, and so many, that I knew not what to aske, or whose turn to serve first. When the Priests came simpring in Macq. Resolv'd to turne the pin. Scol. When Lords and Knights of Fame To dance Levaltoes, came. Macq. When Citizens each day Scol. Were glad to pray and pay: Pimp. Most eager for to sease Scol. Ʋpon the French disease. Macq. When Sack o'rewhelm'd the house, Pimp. While we did Healths carrouse; Scol. And Musick in our ears Macq. Beyond that of the Spheares. Pimp. All's gone. Scol. All's lost. Pimp. Now trading now for me, Death is the Guerdon now of Venerie. Macq. Now I think on't, there might be a way found out to hold up our trade in spight of all the Acts in the world. Pimp. For Heavens sake how? Scol. How? sweet (Macquerella.) Macq. Marry thus, it is but doubling our dores, and provi∣ding thick Curtains for the windowes; for the Act saith, that Oath must be made against the parties ere they can be lyable to Censure; this will encrease thy number, (my Pimpinello) and therewithall your wages: every door must have its Guardian, and those Guardians so politically dealt withall, that themselves (having they a will to be betray their trust) shall have no cause to swear truly: For example the parties entred into the Cham∣ber of Delight lock the door; and lest any peep through the Key-hole, some other door near that (being likewise lock'd) shall give it a broad side. Scol. Thou hast talk'd much to no purpose: the substance of all
is, things must be carried cunningly, clandestinely, and obscurely, and then a fig for all the Law in the world; and by this meanes, what is intended for our detriment and obloquie, shall prove to our profit and glory; for if the old maxim be true, that the worst books of sale, when once called in, sell the best; this edict will much enhaunce our prizes, thou (Macquerella) hadst but half a piece before for thy permission, now a Jacobus is as little as can be given; thou Pimpinello hast had (commonly) hitherto but two Georges for thy purveyance, now half a Piece, or nothing. Pimp. O rare Projectresse, let me kisse the sole of thy shooe. Scol. My own sallary trebled to my former rates; and this mu∣tation we may well justifie, alledging the hazard we run, and the inevitable danger of our persons in case of a discovery. Pimp. O rare, beyond expression, this discourse is as cordiall a comfort to my heart, as Clary and Eggs hitherto to my back, sweet Lady adopt me your sworn servant, in ordinary; I vow, if I stay one day longer without finding some imployment for my teeth, I must ene Mill some Ken, or prig some Prauncer, and then I know Newgate and Tyburne are not far assunder. Scol. Alas Pimpinello, all I can doe for thee is to pitty thee, my self am resolved to be far enough off from the reach of this Act, so terrible to all our tribe; I intend to set saile for the fa∣mous City of Venice, where I may use mine own, cum privilegio; nay, and be thought no ordinary servant as well to the Popes Holinesse, as to the Dukes Mightinesse; there I will goe clad like Cleopatra, fare like Flora, drink like Drusilla, and die like Da∣movilla. Pimp. I see then I cannot avoid my destiny, a short life and a merry cry I, welcome be the grace of Fortune. Farewel Mistresse Scolopendra, adieu Mrs. Macquerella, pray Mrs. Macquerella when you see me take Cart, let me have your best Character. Macq. Now by all the flesh of my body (Pimpinello) I pitty thee, but cannot help, poverty parts good company: I must to my Ware-house, adieu dear Mrs. Scolopendra. Scol. Farewell (my loved Macquerella) have a good heart woman, the Golden Age may once again return. Macq. Never, never, mother Shipton hath denounced the con∣trary; Venus hold her hand over you where ever you go. Scol. Adieu, adieu. FINIS.
