D1720 E157_6 99871884 156887
THE DIVINE DREAMER: OR, A short treatise discovering the true effect and power of Dreames; Confirmed by the most learned and best approved Authors. Whereunto is annexed The Dreame of a young Gentleman, immediatly before the death of the late Earle of STRAFFORD. Printed in the yeare 1641.
TO THE VERTVOVS CARINDA. MADAM, IT was your pleasure not long since to admit me into your Ladiships presence, where I tooke the bold∣nesse to begin a discourse of the Planets, and to declare the pow∣er of them: which conference dd arise from the death of Sir Thomas Went∣worth, who departed this world in his Clymacte∣ricall yeare. A friend of mine being at the place of execution, heard a pittifull Lady warble forth a mournfull duty; and as soone as her eyes be∣held his head parted from his shoulders, she utte∣red these words with teares in her eyes, (O what wit, treson, harmes) which being examined, were the true letters of (Six Thomas Went∣worth) without adding or taking away of a let∣ter. Well might she confidently affirme what she said, since none will deny, but that the cutting off the head spoyles the wit. I have according to your Ladiships command, sent you this dream
of the Lord of Strafford, in regard formerly you have been pleased to lend an eare to my tedious relation; the which is included within a small treatise, stiled, the Divine Dreamer, together with the service Of your Servant GONZALO.
The severall Heads. 1 THE definition of a Dreame. 2 How Dreames presage good or bad for∣tune. 3 That sad Dreames and joyfull proceed from a good and bad diet. 4 That Dreames doe predestinate sicknesse and diseases, and that by severall causes. 5 That some Dreames are as well grounded upon the grace of God, as naturall causes. 6 That some Princes have been admonished by Dreames, both of their owne and peoples welfare. 7 A Dreame of Sir Thomas Wentworth, Lord Strafford; wherein his nature and fortune is gathered, from his name and title, and made knowne by a Dreame.
The Divine Dreamer. IN the first place I shall set downe the definition of a Dreame: A Dreame is that which appeareth to us while we are sleeping; not by the function of the eyes, but by imagination. Some Dreames leave a man joyfull and well disposed at a thing: Contrariwise, there are others sad and offensive, that for divers dayes after such dreames, procure a melancholy languishing both in Soule and Body, making a man unable to receive any delight. Many have presaged by these dreames both of good lucke and bad, which soone after should happen unto them. Some ignorant people have not spared to say, that they are the soules of deceased persons, or Angels, that doe advertise men of such things as shall ensue unto them. My purpose is not to dis∣course if the sonles of the deceased have at a∣ny time returned into the world, I leave that to be decided by learned Divines; but will discourse of the causes naturall, both con∣cerning
pleasing dreames, and such as are tur∣bulent and offensive. Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen say, that there are divers kindes of meates which doe in∣gender and cause sorrowfull dreames, as Beanes, Pease, Coleworts, Garlicke, Oni∣ons, Leekes, Chesnuts, and all opening roots, the flesh of a Boare, or old Hare, and Beefe, all water-fowles, as Duck, Goose, and the like. All troubled wines; nor is there a∣ny doubt to be made, but that commonly, ac∣cording to such meates as wee use in our fee∣ding, raising humours answerable to their se∣verall qualities, that dreames are begotten of the same nature. All these meates before mentioned, with many others, which I have omitted, doe ingender evill humours, and are cholericke, phlegmaticke, and melancholy. It is necessary then, that the body that hath been used to such kindes of meates, should likewise bee of the temper of the said hu∣mours, and that the manners and actions of the soul, should follow the temperature of the body, Galen is of opinion, and hath written a booke thereof expresly. Likewise such men as have sustained some great losse, either in their honours, body, goods, parents, kindred or friends, and oftentimes in their dreames they have very strange, fearfull and mournfull
apparitions: For many times it comes to passe, that men dreame in the night time, seeming to speake, see, understand, negotiate in the precedent dayes affairs, or else on some thing whereto they beare much affection: But by meates that are easily digested, causeth plea∣sant dreames. Such as eate anniseeds after supper, or when they are going to bed, or have fed with Saffron, or dranke with Bur∣rage or Balme, he will not onely have a sub∣till spirit, but also will dreame very accepta∣ble things. There is a certaine Unguent prepared by Apothecaries, which is called Populeon, in regard of the juice of Poplar leaves, if the temples be rubbed therewith, and chafed with the liver, veines, the branches of the great Arteries, and the soles of the feet, it is not onely the provocation of sound sleepe, but it causeth also delightfull and fa∣cetious dreames. Cicedamus saith, that him∣selfe made an oyntment compounded in this manner: the fat of young infants taken out of their graves, the single of Persley, of Aco∣nitum, of Pantaphilon, wherewith if some women and weake persons had chast their braines, it is almost incredible to speake what and how many things they did perswade themselves to see; one while matters of delight, as Theaters, Gardens, Fish-ponds,
Ornaments, & the like; so they imagined they lay with him or her of whom they were most desirous. Otherwhiles they seemed to see Kings and Magistrates with their guards and attendants; yea, all the glory and pompe of mankinde, with many other excellent things, as wee see in paintings farre greater then ever Nature made them. At other times they did see heavy sights, as Ravens, Scritchoules, Prisons, Dens, and Torments. Having spoken concerning the qualities of Dreames occasioned, and proceeding from sustentation, and also some things ex∣ternally applyed, I will now speake of such as doe predestinate sicknesse and diseases, and that by naturall causes. Hippocrates saith, that if a man doe dreame that he seeth fe, it noteth the Dreamer to bee abounding in Choler, or of a Cholericke humour and disposition, whereby hee is very apt to fall into hot and burning diseases. Hee that drea∣meth he seeth smoake or mists, or profound darknesse, is much disposed to melancholy sicknesses. To dreame of raine and moysture betokeneth the abounding with good hu∣mours. To dreame of storme, haile, or ice, signifieth the redundance of phlegme to to be most cold, the constitution of the aire hath such power over humane bodies that it
impresseth both in the body and the soule the present qualities and dispositions there∣of. Galen declares that a man dreamed that his left thigh was transformed into a Marble stone, and within a short while after by a dead Palsie hee lost utterly the use of that member. A Wrastler dreamed that he was in a vessell full of bloud, and so deepe there∣in that scarcely the top of his head could bee seene. Galen gathered by this dreame that hee had great neede of taking some bloud from him, by meanes whereof he was cured of the plurisie. Others dreamed that they were bathing themselves in a Bath of hot water. The Physitian prognosticated upon this dreame, that the Patient must be freed from this disease by judicatory swimming which thereon followed, and thereby he won great reputation; whosoever dreameth that he is pressed with a great burthen, there is no doubt but his animall faculties are oppressed by a great multitude of humours: contrariwise, such as dreame they flye in the aire, runne, leape, and dance, denoteth a light body ex∣empt from the superaboundance of vitious humours. Such as dreame that they are in dunghills and such like filthy places, they must needes bee possessed of noysome hu∣mours, but they to whom it appeares that
they are conversant in pleasant, sweete, and delightfull places, good humours doe a∣bound in them, and it is a signe of health. Besides these forenamed dreames, I will not here insert that there are none but such as are grounded upon naturall causes, but on the grace of God, especially hee giveth ad∣vice to some men to expresse such things for the benefit & good of others: as hapned to Galen the Physitian, who had a man under his care that had an artery in his ancle bone halfe cut in sunder, whereby hee lost all his bloud before any remedy could be applyed to him: hee writeth that hee was advertised in his sleepe that hee should cut the artery in sunder and the ends would retire to each side, and so locke together againe, when hee a∣waked hee executed what his dreame had re∣presented to him, & by that meanes hee cured the man. We read likewise of an Angell that appeared in the form of the goddesse Pallas to Antonius (Physitian to Augustus) admo∣nishing him that though Augustus was sicke, yet hee should not faile to bee present in the battell, which was on the morrow to be gi∣ven by Brutus and Cassius, and that he should there abide in his tent, which he would have done, but that the Physitians perswaded him to the contrary, for it came to passe that the
enemies souldiers wonne the tents, where questionlesse they had slaine Augustus if hee had beene present there; So by this dreame he prevented his death, wonne the day, and remained sole Monarch of the Roman Em∣pire: under his Reigne was borne the Redee∣mer of the World. Quintus Curtius declares in the life of Alexander, that when he main∣tained his siege before the City of Tyre, hee being entred for succour of the Carthagi∣nians, who said they were descended of the Tyrians, concluded to raise his siege as dis∣payring ever to surprize it, but in a dreame a Satyre appeared unto him, after whom hee followed, as hee fled before him into his Chamber. His Interpreters told him that this was a certaine forewarning to continue his siege for longer daies before the City, and that hee should surely take it, which fell out to be true; and this long before had beene foretold by a Prophet who said that a Greek should governe in the Country. The Scriptures are full of Dreams where∣by divers Princes have beene admonished both for their owne and peoples welfare, as Abimelech King of Gerar, who was possessed of Abrahams wife, supposing she had been his sister, onely hee was fore-warned sleeping, that hee should attempt nothing against her
modesty, lest he incurred the judgement of God, and he obeyed. Another Egyptian King by Dreames which Ioseph interpreted to him whilest hee was in prison, found ne∣verthelesse the assistance of God to shun his owne ruine, and the death of his people, by a barrennesse in his Kingdome, which should continue for seven yeares; after as many years of rest: by reason whereof he made such pro∣vision of graine, that he had sufficient to serve the people during those fore-told seven yeares; whereas else hee had wanted provisi∣on for his people. Katherine de Medicis, Queen of France, and wife to Henry the se∣cond, dreamed the very same day before the said King was wounded to death, that shee saw him very sickly, holding downe his head as he walked downe the streets of Paris, be∣ing followed by an infinite company of his people that lamented for him: hereupon shee most earnestly intreated him (and as is said) with wringing hands upon her knees, not to adventure into the ranke of Tilters on that day; but hee giving no heed to her words, the last day of the feasting for the marriage of Madam Margret, sister to Emanuel Philli∣bert, Duke of Savoy, for her honour; and turning to breake a Lance against a bold and valiant Knight (to wit) the Count of Mont∣gomery,
happened to bee wounded: for in the Lances breaking on both sides, a shiver or Splinter entred by the sight of his Hel∣met, and strucke very farre into his head. The King died soone after of this wound, a∣ged about 40 yeares, leaving his Kingdome lamenting his losse: wee may observe the dreame of this great Princesse, and how it happened, whereof doubtlesse God gave premonitions by his good Angell, both for her good, and the whole realme of France; but the King more desirous to follow the va∣nities of the world, then the good advertise∣ments of his wife, by his decease the people of France suffered many calamities. His son Henry 3. three dayes before he was murdred at S. Cloa, beheld in a dream all his royall or∣naments, to wit, his linnen vesture, Sandals Dalmatium robe, mantle of azure Sattin, Crown and Scepter, bloudy and made foule with the feet of religious men, and other peo∣ple, and that he himselfe was angry with the Sexton of the Abby of S. Dennis; & albeit all good advice was given him, according to the danger of his dreame, stands securely upon his guard; yet so it fell out as a thing permit∣ted by heaven, that hee could not avoyd that fatall chance, but was slain, whatsoever strong guard was there about him.
Calphienia wife to the adopted father of Caesar, having dreamed that she beheld Caesar slaine and massacred, gave him notice thereof, but he instead of converting of it to his benefit, dispised the dreame, and went to the Senate house, the day following where the dreame sorted to wofull effect. I cannot omit the dreame and revelation of Ioane d'Arke, the Virgin that dreamed, that shee her selfe should be the only meanes to put Charles the seventh in possession of his Kingdome. After he had acquainted her father and mother with her dreame, she is brought to the Lord Baudi∣cate, and habited like a man, is presented to the King. The matter seemed ridiculous to the King, he takes upon himselfe the habit of a Country∣man, this Maid being brought into the Chamber goeth to the King, and salutes him with a modest countenance, and delivered to him the charge which shee had received of the God of heaven, and told him that shee should be the meanes to place the Crowne upon his head, and relieve Orleance that was besieged by the English. The King was perswaded to give her a Troope of one hundred, and a good horse. She puts her selfe into a mans habit, and like a valorous Captaine goeth toward Orleance, and relieveth the Towne with victualls without resistance. After shee was in Orleance, shee sends a Letter to the King of ENGLAND, and his
Troopes, and wisheth them to depart without shedding any more innocent blood. Ioane d'Arke a second time relieveth Orleance, and brings in fresh provision, she makes choyce of 1500 men, and enters the Fort of Saint Loope, the virgin in the formost of the ranckes, crying Saint Denis, the next day they tooke two other Forts, on the third day, the English made the French recoyle, but the virgin incouraging her men, and marching couragiously was shot in the arme; (tush saith she) this is a favour, no∣thing amazed, she takes the arrow in one hand and her sword in the other, and enters the Fort, in these three dayes the English lost eight thou∣sand men, and the French not one hundred, and as a remembrance of their victories, the Statues of Charles the seventh and Ioane d'Arke, are pla∣ced upon the Bridge of Orleance, kneeling be∣fore a Crucifix. Charles the seventh is crowned at Rheins all Champaigne yeelds unto him, and the King that was in great danger of loosing his Kingdome, is now an absolute King. I shall in the last place relate a Dreame of a young Gentleman, which of late hapned, the truth of which is fresh in my memory, this Gen∣tleman being disquieted with the thundring of Peeces, which his Imagination told him was in the ayre, and not upon earth, looking towards the heavens, he did conceive that he saw a great
Army ready to encounter with another, and ob∣serving the Leaders, he perceived one to be a tall blacke man, the other low of stature, the tall blacke man ran with his Rapier against the same, and transported thus with fury, he stumbled and fell, and as he fell divers arrowes were shot, some out of the North, some out of the South, some out of the West, some out of East, as if all the foure quarters had blowne no other blasts, after this appeared divers like ghosts, walking with Crosier staffes who seemed to harden and incou∣rage the Souldiers, yet their arguments could not win them to give battle, these in the twin∣kling of an eye lost their pure whitnesse, and shewed themselves in blacke with Miters falling from their heads, next to these followed a troop of Shavelings, some carrying Crosses, others praying with Beads, but on the suddaine a pil∣lar of fire appeared, and they vanished, and all the heavens seemed to be disturbed looking downeward hee saw a grave old man sitting in a Chaire of State upon the top of a mountaine, having a Septer in his hand, with a Treple Crowne on his head, having with him diverse habited in long roabs and red hats, that seemed to hold the chaire, whilst his eye was bu∣sied in the view of them, a thunder-bolt fell and cleft the mountaine which swallowed them up, then he seemed to passe through pleasant fields, and the first he met with was a young Cavalero,
the next he met withall was a poore souldier, now thovght the young gallant that he should learne what was the variance betweene these troupes, but before the gentleman could speake to him, the souldier made towards him, and like a bold ruf∣fian demanded his purse who was a little unwil∣ling, yet having no remedy to prevent the taking thereof did deliver it, and in requitall, the soul∣dier said, Come you to heare newes? in briefe it is thus, our Generall being dead our armies were disbanded; and having uttered the words, vani∣shed, and in his roome entred a poore Countrey man who was very desirous to learne whether he met with any souldiers that had driven away his cattell, for hee pitied this poore man, but could give him no comfort in regard his money was taken away from him: the gentleman passing on, came to a great house that was fortified with bulwarks, trenches and well man'd, and on the side of it was an arme of the Sea, but in re∣gard hee could not give the word hee was not admitted: as hee passed by hee percei∣ved one that was looking under a tree to take the true height of a Starre: falling into confe∣rence with him hee told him what a vision he had seene, and would neeeds know what this blacke man was that fell from heaven; the Astronomer told him if he would have a little patience till he had laid his Mathematicall Instruments aside hee
would shew him his full proportion: whereup∣on drawing forth a small glasse out of a box that expressed such curiosity, as if many Artists had assembled together to compose it; no sooner was the box opened, but the beauty of that which was contained therein, made the young Gentle∣man stand and admire whether that which his eye beheld, was the worke of Art or nature, or both. Having taken a smal ribband which was of a skin colour, from the sides of the box, he drew forth a glasse in an Ovall frame, set round with Dia∣monds and rubies, the middle thereof was made of Topaz, and so exactly cut, as it sufficiently expressed the skill of the Lapidary. On one side of the glasse he could perceive this tall man habi∣ted like a Prince, on the otherside like a mour∣ner, and by him an executioner, with this inscrip∣tion over his head in great letters (worser rul'd not traytors head must off) now Sir said the Astro∣nomer cast up each Letter of this inscription, and you shall finde out his name and title, the which hee presently and readily under∣tooke, by transplacing the Letters, and found it to be Sir Thomas Wentworth Lord Strafford: It was no small wonder to him, to see that his Lordships name and title should so true∣ly divine his nature and fortune, no sooner had
this astronomer shewed this glasse, but he vanish∣ed, and making a horrible noyse at his departure, the Gentleman awaked, and sell againe into a sweet slumber, and soone after gave this Relati∣on to divers. I am of opinion with Volaterans, that many times a person going to his rest, not cloyed with bad affections, nor superfluity of food; but be∣ing vertuously minded, and healthfully disposed, his soule in sleeping may foresee things to come▪ for the soule, which of it selfe is divine and ce∣lestiall, being not offended with any evill cogi∣tations, or over-bad meats, is at free liberty, and best performeth her actions when the body slee∣peth, not being busied with any other matters. FINIS.
