D58 E445_32 99864256 161762
THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS OF THE NAVIE With the Oath which they have taken, concerning an Ad∣mirall for the Seas, and who they made choice of for the present. A Message from the Kentish-men to the Lord Generall, and his Answer thereunto. A thousand of them come in, and Dover Fort taken. With the taking of Chepstow Castle by storme, the Gover∣nour Sir Nicholas Kemish, and others slain; with the number of Officers and prisoners taken. As also another Petition to the Parliament, from the City of London, and what is desired therein. London, Printed by B. Alsop, 1648.
A LETTER From Sandwich in KENT: SIR, FOr the prevention of false informations, I shall communicate to you the most certain intelligence we have in these parts. On Fryday last Vice-admirall Rainsborough came ashore at his owne Castle at Deale, the occasion was, because some of the Ken∣tish men had endeavoured to get the possession of the Earl of Warwicks Castle of Sandon, the castle of Warbrough, and this Castle, which are all three
within a mile and a half one of the other. And when the Vice Admirall had done his endeavour to se∣cure them he went in a small Pinace to his command a∣gain at Sea; and when he came to the ship which was under his immediate command, those which were in her forbad him to come aboard, saying they would obey him no longer, but would have the King brought to London, &c and told him if he came aboard, it was at his pe∣rill, but if he pleased, he might depart in the Vessel hee was in, and after many threats, and other uncivil car∣riages towards him, he came for London; when hee was gone, they hung forth a flag, which signified, that there should be a Councel held, and the respective Captaines in all other ships, were to appear aboard on the Vice ad∣miral, and divers of them met accordingly, but Captain Penrose came not. Whereupon they sent him three or four Canon shot, and afterwards sent a message to him, commanding him, in the name of the Vice admirall, to come to the Councell: whereupon he returned answer that he knew the Vice-admirall was not there, and therefore conceived, they had not power to call a Councell, or com∣mand him to come thither, and therefore hee was resol∣ved not to go. This Message was carryed back, and upon the receit thereof, about 40. men went with their swords drawne,
and other weapons of war, came to him in another ship, and told him, that they were sent by the Admirall to fet him. Captain Penrose asked who was that Vice admi∣rall, they replyed, that his name was Lenoall: then captain Penrose said, he knew such a man to bee a Bo∣stons Mate, but no otherwise, and was resolved not to go with them; then said they, we must force you: the cap∣tain now addressed his speech to his owne men in the ship saying, Gentlemen, will you stick to me, and we will defend our selves, and not obey this ille∣gall command; but contrary to his expectation, hee found a division amongst his own men, and many of them cryed out, Go, go, this being so, captaine Penrose for the better prevention of further mischief, went along with them, and when he came aboard the Vice admiral, he was died to sign a Petition, which he refused to do, and finding him whom they for the present, hd chosen to be Vice Admirall, to be this inferiour man, which was but a Bostons mate. Capt. Penrose said, I will not joine with you in this Petition no approve of your course in refusing to be commanded by the Vice-Admirall which was put in by the Parliament. And, I pray, do you quite cast off all subjection to them.
to which they generally replyed no, they were for King and Parliament: then said he, it were fit that you should mrke choice of some honourable per∣son, that is true to both, for this is a place not fit for any other, &c. hee had no sooner spoken this, but one of them named the Earl of Warwick,and all the rest cryed out presently, a Warwick, a War∣wick: then they agreed to send a Letter to his Lordship, & another to the Speaker of the house, setting forth their proceedings, and that if the E. of Warwick came to them, they would live and dy with him, in defence of the cause for King and Par∣liament, according to the first principles; and they made choice of capt. Penrose to bring these Let∣ters, & before his coming away, he told them, that it might be when he was gone, they would make choice of some other; and to give satisfaction to the contrary, they all took an oath, not to receed from this choice untill the E. of Warwickcame to them, &c. On Fryday last the Kentish men took the Fort neer Dover Castle, whereof capt. Bethel, a very de∣serving Gentleman, had the command, they shot many pieces against the Castle, but finding no pro∣bability of doing any good against it, they gave it over, which is all at present, from Sandwich 28 May, 1648. Your assured friend, M. D.
May 29, the Parliament taking into considera∣tion this busines of the Navy, and voted the E. of Warwick to be Admiral; wherevpon his Lordship took his journy thither on Tuesday morning: the Parl. debated on a letter which they received out of Kent, and passed a vote, that the busines concer∣ning their taking up of arms should bee referred to the L. Gen. and as for that part of their petiti∣on, concerning the King, the house will doe that therein, which shall satisfy them and the whole Kingdom: whereupon his Excellency with a bo∣dy of horse and foot, marched this 30. of May to Black-heath, where the Kentish-men said they in∣tended to keep their Randevouz, who at sight re∣treated to a Village, lining the hedges with mus∣quetiers, and presently after sent a trumpeter to the Gen. desiring a teeaty; but the answer was, he would send an answer by a messengr of his owne. About 12. of the clock the same day cae letters to the Parl. that 1000. of the Kentish men were come in to the Gen. with their arms, which they laid down to him, and declared, that they were deeply sensible of the errours they had committed, &c. the ret of the Kentish men are retreated back to Rochester, and desire a treaty by way of pacifica∣tion.
A Capt. brought Letters to the house the 29 of May, certifiing that Chepstow Castle was taken on Thursday last the manner thus, those in the Castle Wednesday, the 26 of May, hung forth a white flag desired a parley which was granted, at which parley those in the Castle, stood for con∣ditions, and upon tearms, which were denied on the other part So the parley was soone over and when it was taken of Lievtenant Generall Cromwells men stormed it, and by their batteries made a large breach at which they entred and upon their for approach the souldiers called quarter which was granted, but Sir Nicolas Kemish the Governour refu∣sed to take any, and by that meanes ended his dayes there. There were 21 prisoners taken about, 20 Officers, and 150 Armes, the Capt. which brought the newes, and did good service in the action had 50 l. given him for his paines and charges in this journey. Tuesday May 30 A Petition was presented to the Com∣mon councell of the City of London, subscribed by many persons of quallity, the said City desiring the approbation of that honourable Court to a Petition to the honourable houses of Parliament, praying that there may be a present treaty with the kings Majesty, and that for the better safety of the Parliament City and peace of the Kingdome there may be an association of the City and severall Counties ad∣jacent, which petition was approved of and, ordered to be presented to the Parliament at the next opportunity. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott. FINIS.
