d623 e154_31 99860776 156835
A DECLARATION OF SIR IOHN HOTHAMS Proceedings AT HVLL. And how to prevent an Army comming a∣gainst the same, he hath drowned foure miles round about the Towne. VVhereby he stands in opposition against all forces whatsoever, in defence of the same. As also a Relation how the County of Lin∣colne hath sent in to their reliefe fifteene Carts loaden with victuall, Iuly 5. 1642. Ordered that this be printed. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com. London, printed for George Thomas. Iuly 8. 1642.
More strange Newes from Hull. Being a true Relation of a mar∣ching towards Hull with a thousand Men. SUch hath been the Malignancy of evill affected persons about his Majestie, that they have under many faire pretences, in defence of his person, and against all, as they say, that have stood in defiance of the Lawes of the Land, against the Kings Majesty, which they have very contemptuously, and against both the Houses of Parliament, the City of London, and in fine all parts of the Kingdome, who are op∣posers to their so cruell and witched Tyranny, which if not prevented by the great mercy of God, wee are like to undergoe the hazard of all that is dearest unto us; some ill affected persons have been so obvious to the good of their Coun∣trey,
which hath a long time flourished in gr peace and Tranquility, which now is exposed to the hazard of ruine: they have sent to the Lord Digby, the Lord Finch, Windebancke, Piercy, and Iermine, who are neer to Yorke to fight, as they say, for their King, although tis probable they have since their beginning of their promotion to preferment been the chiefe disturbers and raisers of this combustion, which hath already begun, and doth daily encrease, to the terror and affrightment of all his Majesties good subjects: They are now grown to so insolent a head, and so bold aspiring thoughts of honour and greatnesse, that they have wholly exposed themselves to all danger whatso∣ever, so for their owne private ends, though with the ruining of this Kingdome, they gaine their desires, they have already, as making no doubt but to bring all men under their girdles, and to bee at the commands under a Tyrannicall Government, disposed of all mens goods which they bare most grudge to, and especially the Parliament men, their goods and Lands have they shared, and most part of the City of London by nomination of their names, swearing with bitter and damnable oathes, damne and sink them, they will have their swords sheathed in the dearest heart bloods of all those men whom they tearme Round-heads: and in this manner beganne they their divellish designe, seeing so many stratagems of their wicked inven∣tions, to be frustrate of that which they expected
the event would have beene, with a great deale of bloodshed of their enemies; but it hath fallen con∣tray, by the great mercy of God, as hath plain∣ly appered by their dealing in Lancaster, Leice∣ster, orke, ad new Castle, and also many other adjoyning Counties. Yet for all these, their failing in their expectati∣on, the Divill the arch enemy to mankinde, hath not left their thoughts free from conspiracy against their Countrey, as this week appeared by their de∣signe against Sir Iohn Hotham, and to have taken the whole Towne of Hull, and to that end came 1000. strong marching neare to the Towne, to the terror and affrightment of all the neighbouring places, but was by none opposed, for they mar∣ched not altogether, but in severall Troopes for feare of any opposition, and was to have met neere the Towne of Hull, where it was by them inten∣ded to have trenched the Towne round, and to have taken whom they thought good, and to have disposed of them at their pleasure, but so it pleased the omnipotent providence of God, that they were discovered by Sir Iohn Hotham, and soone discom∣fited by his drowning foure miles round about Hull, which the Cavilleers soone perceiving, with a great deale of amazement, ran immediately some one way, some another, some thinking it were the immediate hand of God to punish this their hai∣nous offence, others swearing damne and sinke them yet to be revenged without the wonderfull
mercy of God, they had been both damn'd and sinked into the water, which almost flowed upon them. It is not yet certainly known whether any were drowned or no by reason of their fleeing one from another in such a manner of distraction, but it is thought that many of them never went to Yorke yet, nor never intend more to goe, seeing nothing but destruction on all those that seeke the desolati∣on of a whole Kingdome, which God in his good time open all their eyes that they may see their own destruction either in this world or the world to come, desiring also a happy union betwixt his Majesty and his high Court of Parliament, and give him a sight of these, and all his wicked counsellors, and the utter desolation which come by a cruell warre, of which we have had a reasonable foresight of our neighbouring Coun∣tries of late, Germany and others, which losse there will not be recovered in a long time, if it please God to send peace. Such hath been the love of the County of Lin∣colne to assist the good cause of Sir Iohn Hotham that since this assault upon Hull, they have sent in fifteene Cart load of victuall, with promises of their best aid and assistance with their lives and e∣states to support him, against any opposition. Whereas severall Proclamations, Declarati∣ons and Papers, in formes of Proclamations,
have issued in his Majesties name, comman∣ding Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Sheriffes, Majors, Byliffes and other Officers, to publish and pro∣claime the same, being contrary to Law, and to divers Oders, Ordinances and Declarations of both Houses. Be it Ordered and declared by the Lords and Com∣mons in Prlmet, That no herff, Major, Bayliff, Parson Vcar Curate, or other Officer, shall from henceforth pubsh or proclam, or cause to be proclai∣md  publshed, any such roclmations, Declara∣tions or Papers which are or shall be contrary to any Or, Od dnance, or Declarations of the sid Houses of Parliament, or tending to the scandall or drogtion of their proedngs, but shall use all lawfull waies and means to restran and hinder the proclai∣ming and publishing thereof. And all Sheriffs, Ma∣jors Bayl ffes, arsons, Vicars and Curates, or other Officers that have forborn or refused, or shall forbear or refuse to publsh or prclaim any such Proclamati∣ons Dclaations, or Ppers as aforesaid, or have or shall hinder the publication thereof, shll bee pro∣tected by the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament. Ordered by the Commons in Parlia∣ment, That this be forthwith Prin∣ted and Published. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Par. D. Com. FINIS.
