E1366A 45097678 171277
A DECLARATION Of The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament. Concerning his Maiesties advancing of his Army towards London, with directions that all the Trained Bands and Voluntiers bee put into a readinesse, that so the Kings Army may find opposition in every place as they Martch. Also how Sir Iohn Hinderson urged one David Alex∣ander, a Scotchman, to kill Sir John Hotham, and blow up the Parliaments Magazine, to whom his Maiesty gave Money, and he received it. And that no man shall presume to weare any colours or Markes of Division in the City of London. Whereunto is added severall Votes of the Lords and Com∣mons, for the searching of diverse mens houses in the City, and for the staying of the Kings Reve∣nue, and all the Bishops, Danes and Chapters Rents and profits whatsoever. Sabbathi, 15▪ Octob. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration and Votes be forthwith Printed and published. John Browne Cler. Parliam. Octob. 17. London Printed for Iohn Wright. 1642.
A Declaration of the Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in PARLIAMENT. THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, considering with much tendernesse and compassion, the miserable condition of this Kingdome, distracted, and distempe∣red with many present evils, & imminent dangers, and brought now to such an height of extremity of misery, that two English Armies are neere together, even ready to joyne in a dreadfull and bloody encounter, through the violent and wicked coun∣sell of those, who have captivated both the Person and the power of the King, to their owne impious and Trayterous de∣signes, doe thereupon thinke good to publish and declare the same to the Kingdome, together with some directions and pro∣visions which may prevent that utter desolation and ruine, both of Religion and liberty, already overwhelmed and sup∣prest in the intention and hope of those Rebels and Traytors about the King, to which purpose it is desired by both Houses, that all wel-affected Subjects may take notice of these particu∣lars. That the King by the help & assistance of the Papists, the Pre∣laticall and corrupt part of the Clergy, the Delinquent No∣bility and Gentry, and by the confluence of some notable Traytors from beyond the Seas, the Lord Digby, Oneale, and others, and of many desperate mercenary and ill-affected per∣sons from all parts of the Kingdome, hath raised an Army, armed, clothed, and fed, for the most part with the spoyles of his Subjects, giving them liberty to plunder and rob all sorts of people; to exact money and plate from Corporations, by threatning fire, and sword, if they should refuse it. That this wicked counsell doth not onely hinder his Maje∣sty
from exercising the justice and protection of a King to∣wards his people, but even that honour which is observed be∣twixt Enemies; for by a confident instrument of his Majesty, Sir Iohn Hinderson a Papist (as we are credibly informed) one David Alexander was urged to kill Sir John Hotham, telling him it would be a good service both to God and the King, which he refused to doe, saying it was the worke of a Butcher, and not of a Souldier; This Alexander being a Scotchman, of a ve∣ry poor fortune, and of a mind fit for desperate attempts. The King sent for him 2, while he was at Beverley, and when he came to his presence, he spake to him publikely in the field, and ap∣poynted a sum of money to be given him, which he received. After which another proposition was made to him by the same Sir John Hinderson, that he would put fire to the Magazine of the Army raised by the Parliament, & to gain the better op∣portunity to effect it, that he should labor to get some imploy∣ment in the train of Artilery, which he accordingly undertook, & endeavoured to obtain; But before he could effect his mis∣chievous intention, he was discovered, apprehended, & exami∣ned, and thereupon confest the practise, and undertaking, the particulars whereof are referred to the examinations thereup∣on taken. That the King doth send out Letters to borrow great sums, professing that those who will not lend him mony, doe give him just cause to suspect their duty to his Person, and the peace of the Kingdome. And this will be a sufficient reason to make them lyable to be plundered and spoyled of all they have; but such is the violence of the Kings Army, that their friends are in little better case then they who oppose them, and those who escape best must yet feed and billet the Souldiers for nothing. In those places where the trained bands are willing to go forth to serve in his Maj. Army, yet for the most part their Armes are taken from them and put upon those who are more mercenary, and lesse interessed in the Common Wealth, and so
likely to be fitter instruments of Rapine and Spoyle. By these great violences and oppressions they have so exhau∣sted those parts that his Majesty cannot stay long about Shrews∣bury, and it is the earnest desire of the Cavaliers that he would march forward towards London, those rich and fruitfull Coun∣tries in the way being like to yeeld them a supply of their ne∣cessities, and the wealth of London a full satisfaction of their hope, where they likewise thinke to find a party which upon his Majesties approach may make some disturbance, and facili∣tate their designes upon the City. That if the Kings Army prevaile, the good Subjects can ex∣pect nothing but that their lives and fortunes will be exposed to the malice and rapine of those ravenous Souldiers, who of∣ten talk of cutting the Throats of honest and Religious men, & have long expected their goods & estates▪ as the rewards of their service; the Kingdome will againe fall under the government of those mischievous counsells, who before this Parliament, had even brought both religion and liberty to ruine; and wee shall have no hope left of any more Parliaments, but such as shall beconcurrent and subservient to these ends. The meanes of curing and preventing these evills and dangers, we conceive to be these. That good provision be made by loane and contribution for the Army raised by the Parliament, under the Lord Gene∣rall the Earle of Essex, which is no whit inferiour in Horse and Foot to the Kings Army, better armed, full payd, restrained from disorder and Rapine, as much as may be; well provided of all outward necessaries; but above all, well incouraged and instructed in the goodnesse of the cause, by the labour of many godly and painfull Divines. That this Army bee allwayes ready to attend the re∣moves of the Kings Army, either in one body or divi∣ded as there shall bee occasion, according to the wise con∣duct and direction of the Lord Generall, that so no op∣portunity
of fighting upon advantage be lost, nor the greedie Souldiers of the Kings Army suffered to range, and spoyle the Country at their pleasure. That the Countries through which the Kings Army is to passe doe associate themselves, and draw all their Forces toge∣ther, for the mutuall defence of their persons and goods from Oppression and Spoyle. That those Counties be required to send in all their Horses fit for carriage and for Dragoones as well for the Assistance of the Lord Generall, for which in convenient time they shall re∣ceive satisfaction, As likewise that by such meanes these Hor∣ses may be kept from being imployed by the Kings Army. That command and direction be given to all Lieutenants of Counties and deputy Lieutenants, that all the Trained-Bands and all Voluntiers be put into a readinesse to be brought to such Randezvous, and to be obedient to such Commanders in chiefe as shall be appointed by the Committee for the safety of the Kingdome, or by the Lord Generall, that so the Kings Army may find opposition in every place as they passe, and the Inhabitants may have at hand a sufficient protection & defence, and the Lord Generall may strengthen his own Army with these Forces, as he shall see cause. That Powder, Munition, and Ordnance, with all other necessaries be prepared for these forces, that so without any trouble or confusion, they may be brought together, and fit∣ted for service upon all sodaine Occurrents. That all those who in the City of London, or any other place, shall weare any Colours, or other markes of division, where∣by they may be distinguisht from others and known to be of the malignant Party, shall be examined, searcht, and disarmed, as likewise all others, who being able, shall not lend or contri∣bute towards the publike safety of the Kingdome, in this time of so great and imminent danger. That it be commended to the serious consideration of those in the Kings Army, and of all other that intend to assist and
succour his Maiesty in this impious and unnaturall warre, a∣mong whom it may be hoped there are some honest men, and Protestants, what it is that moves them in this Quarell. Is it for feare of some Innovations and alteration? of Reli∣gion or Church Governement? let such as are possest with this vaine and causelesse apprehension, know, that nothing is in∣tended or desired, but to take away the government by Bishops, which hath bin so constantly, evidently, mischievous, and dan∣gerous to the Church and state; and such other things as shall be found to be iustly offensive, and nothing to be setled and In∣troduced, but by authority of Parliament after consultation first had with an assembly of learned and reverend Divines. Is it to uphold the authority, prerogative, and Honour of the King and to preserve the safety of his Royall Person? sure∣ly the Parliament is and ever hath beene ready to doe any thing that belongs to them to secure all these, which they have often testified by many humble petitions to his Maiesty. If there be no cause for any of these respects, to seeke the destruction of the Parliament and the blood and ruine of their kindred, friends and acquaintance, what remains then to be the matter of the quarrell, and the motives of such great combust∣ions, and the effects and consequences of their victory if they should prevaile? That Priests, Iesuits, & the Popes Nuncioes may domineere & govern in the Kings Counsel as heretofore, that the Arch Bishops of Canterbury and Yorke and their Suffragans may suppresse diligent and powerfull preaching, and bannish and oppresse all the most pious and best affected Subiects of the Kingdome, & introduce the Popish Religion under a protestant profession, till they have strength and boldnesse to cast off the disguise, and openly appeare that which indeed they are, and would not seeme to be. That the Earle of Bristoll, and his Son the Lord Digby, Mr. ermin, and other such Traytors may possesse the great places, and governement of this Kingdome; and be the arbiters of the
affaires of State, and distributers of preferments, and disgraces, to such as shall further or oppose their designes. That the delinquents, oppressors, and destroyers of the Kingdome, may not onely escape the iustice of the Parlament, but triumph in the spoiles of all honest men, good Patriots; and that through out troubles, and divisions, the Rebels in Ire∣land may prevaile; that we may cease to be a free Nation, and become the obiect of cruelty and oppression at home, and of scorne and infamy abroad. And if there can be no other fruit of their hazard and ende∣vours on that side, let them then consider, whether by adhe∣ring to the Parliament, they may not expect effects more suta∣ble to the desires of honest men, The glory of God, in the pre∣servation of his Truth, The peace of the Church, by securing it against the pride, avarice, and ambition of the Clergy, The honour greatnesse and security of the King, by freeing him from false and Traiterous Counsells, and establishing him in the hearts and affections of his people, the prosperity of the whole Kingdome by the blessing of good Lawes and a righte∣ous governement.
Die Sabbathi 15. Octob. 1642. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament. THat such persons as shall not Contribute to the charge of the Com∣mon wealth in this time of imminent necessity, shall be held fit to be secured. Resolved upon the Question &c. That such persons as shall not contribute to the charge of the Com∣mon-wealth in this time of iminent necessity, shal be held fit to be Dis∣armed. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Lord Major & Sheriffes of the City of London shall forthwith search the houses and seize the Armes belonging unto M. Nathaniell Iefferson, M. Austin, M. John Bedle, M. John Batty, M. Ralph Long, and M. Robert Lewis, all of Broadstreet Ward, M. John Blunt, of Limestreet Ward, M. Ald. Wright of Colemanstreet Ward, M. Roger Drake, M. John Walther, of Faringdon within, for that as it appeares by the report from the Committee they have not Contributed as they ought to the charge of the Common-wealth, in this time of imminent necessity. Resolved upon the Question &c. That the fines, Rents, & profits of Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, and of such notorious Delinquents who have taken up Armes against the Parliament, or have bin active in the Commission of Array, shall be sequestred for the use and service of the Common wealth. Resolved upon the Question &c. That the Kings Revenue arising out of Rents, Fines in Courts of Justice, Compositions for Wards, & the like, & al other his Majesties Revenue, shall be brought into the severall Courts and other places where they ought to be paid in, and not Issued forth or paid out, untill further order shall be taken by both Houses of Parliament. The manner of sequestration is referred to a Committee. FINIS
The Examination of David Alexander, taken Octob. 6. 1642. HEe saith, wheu the King went towards the North, at Newmarket he came to the Court, and followed the King to Yorke and stay∣ed at Yorke, whn the King first went to Kingstone upon Hull, and came backe to Yorke, and after the Kings returne Sir Iohn Hinderson told him it was a good service to God and the King to kill Sir John Hotham, and he refused to do it; and that he said he would rather venture upon an Army, and then the King went to Beverly, and the Postmasters boy brought him word from Sir Iames Hamilton he should come to Be∣verly, and should be made Corporall of the field, which he sleighted, and said he was an old man, and could no ride, and then Sir James Hamil∣ton sent to him to meet him at the Post-house, which he did, and Sir Iames told him if he came not the next day, he would lose his place, hee told him he had no money, and he gave him ten shillings, and with that he hired horse and went thither, and that he came to the Lord Lindsey, Generall, which said he was welcome▪ and bid him goe to the King▪ and told him the King had sent twice for him, and the next day, which was the day wherein the Earle of Holland, &c. had his audience, the King be∣ing in the field spake to him, and bid him goe to my L. Generall who gave order to Sir Iohn Culpepper, to give him ten pounds, which hee re∣ceived▪ and my Lord Generall told him Master Slingsby and an other Knight were about a Mine which failed, and the siege raised, and after∣ward he went to Nottingham, and there Sir Iohn Hinderson said to him, hee should doe good service if he would set the Magazine on fire, and that he undertooke to doe, and he told him it would be well, if he could get a service in the traine of Artillery, and often spoke to him about that acti∣on, and said he should he highly recompenced: and thereupon he came to London on Tuesday was five or six wekes; and he was with Sir VVil∣liam Balfore, and made meanes to goe into Ireland: and that he confest to Sir Balthazar Gerbier upon Munday last, all the passages betwixt him and Sir Iohn Hinderson, and to nobody else but he spake to Sir Iohn Mildram to get him a place in the Irish Wars, and Sir Iohn promised to speak with the Irish Committee for him: he said Sir Iohn Hinderson told him the King was acquainted with this proposition of firing the Magazine di∣verse times: and this examinant told him that hee had spoken to Sir Balthazar Gerbier to tell the King that he could not performe it, and hee denyed that ever he had laboured for any place in this Army. David Alexander.
The Examination of Sir Balthasar Gerbier, taken the 8. of October 1642. HEe sayes, he knowes one David Alexander a Scotch-man, and hath knowne him long, and has had discourse lately with him. He sayes, the said David Alexander said he had a propositi∣on made to him to kill some body, but none named to this ex∣aminant, he answered, that to kill a man was fit for a hang∣man, but any generous act befitting a souldier he would doe. The said Alexander, said that Colonell Hinderson made this proposition at the Court, he sayes that act was proposed; That another proposition was made by the same person that he should get a place in the Traine of Artillery, and getting knowledge where the Magazine was, to doe his best to fire it, and this he entertained, and was received, and had money given him, and besides Colonell Hinderson, and Master Endymion Porter spoke also concerning the same businesse to him. This Examinant sayes, he knowes not whether Alexander, Hinderson, and M. Endymion Porter spoke of the same at the same time, nor did he tell him what sum of Money hee recei∣ved, nor did hee speake of any other Promises: upon the third of this Instant, at nine of the clocke this discourse was, which he noted in his Table-booke. Then desiring to looke in his Table-Booke, the Examinant further rela∣ted; That hee having occasion to use some mans service to the Court, with the Venetian Ambassadour, according to his place, he sent to this David Alexander, to know if he would goe along with him, the said David told him he could not go; the Examinant wondred at it, knowing his poverty, and asked the reason, the reupon he said he had some service to doe, and the Examinant being his old friend, he would deal plainly with him, and tell him, and said it was of that nature, that it was as much worth as his life to discover, the Examinant wondred at
it, and made some difficulty to know it; but he answered that in the Lord Buckinghams time he had been his friend, and there∣fore to him he would tell it, and put his life into his hands: The Examinant said, why wilt thou put thy life into such dan∣ger? then he said he was dispatcht and had received money for it to apply himselfe to the Army, and to endeavour to get a place about the Artillery, to the end to take a time to fire the Magazine; which he said you know I can doe by an instrument made like a watch, which having gone for so many houres then strikes fire, he said he had applyed himselfe to Sir William Bal∣fore to be recommended by him, but was put off, onely had of∣fered to him 14 s. per diem for a Serjeant Majors place of Dra∣gooners, or some service for Ireland; but he refused it, as not fit for him, saying, that he was more proper for fire workes and Artillery, &c. He said further, that meeting Dulbier, hee told him, how now David, thou dost not come hither for the service against those from whence you come, he said no; and then resolved to apply himselfe to Sir Iohn Meldram, by whom he was to be presented to the house the third of this instant: he desired this Examinant to take this relation from him and to acquaint the King with it, to whom it would be acceptable to know what was become of him, & he could not write it himself, and therefore wisht this Examinant to write it in his Table. booke: This Examinant said he would put it into his Table-booke, and said how should I venture to tell this to the King, or know it to be true; and he said the King would soone know that, and it will be an honour to you to be so trusted, so he concluded his discouse with presenting a Scotchman to this Examinant in his journey, the Scotchman was his compani∣on, and a Solicitor here for one Gordan the Kings Agent at Hamburgh; but this Examinant took only his name, and liking not his aspect, promised to send him some other time. Balthazar Gerbier.
THe same Examinant, upon the 7 day of Octob, doth con∣firm all the particulars aforementioned: and further saith, that the reason why he told Sir Balthazar Gerbier of this businesse, was to desire him to tell the King that he could not as yet performe it; and he thinks that the King and Sir Iohn Hin∣derson, doe believe that he is in my Lord of Essex Army; and that he doth intend to performe his promise. Taken the 0 of October. David Alexander. THis Examinant told Sir Balthazar Gerbier the 3 of Octob. last, I cannot goe with you, because I have undertaken to fire the Ammunition in the Army of Parliament, and tell the King or Sir John Hinderson I have not effected it; but I am going to Sir John Mildram at 9 of the clocke this morning, to bring me to the Parliament, to get employment in the Artil∣lery belonging to the Parliament; and that I might have had 14 shillings a day to be a Major in a Regiment of Dragooners with the Parliament, and refused it; which he desired the King might know. David Alexander. October 10. 1642. THe said David Alexander further acknowledgeth, that he offered to tell Sir Balthazar Gerbier, what the great busi∣nesse was which did hinder him from going with him, and what he had said was as much as his life was worth to dis∣cover: that Sir Balthazar Gerbier did refuse to heare it; but this Examinant did very earnestly presse to heare what it was. David Alexander. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament that this Declaration, Depositions, and Votes thus amended be forthwith Printed and published John Browne Cler. Parliam FINIS. Octob. 20. London Printed for John Wright.
