E186 E157_16 99871284 156896
A LETTER of that most religi∣ous and pious Prince K. Edward the sixth to Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London, for the taking downe of Altars, and setting up the Table in the steed thereof, subscribed by nine of the said Kings Privie Councell, together with the said Kings six reasons for the same alteration; All which are set forth in the Ecclesiasticall History, containing the Acts and Monuments or Martyrs, written by M. John Fox, and may there be read in the life of that ever blessed King. London, Printed 1641.
A Letter of that most Religi∣ous and pious Prince King Edward the sixth to Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, for the taking downe of Altars, and setting up the Table, &c. RIght reverend Father in God, right trusty and welbeloved, wee greet you well; And where it is come to our knowledge, that the Altars within the most part of the Churches of this Realme, being already upon good and godly con∣siderations taken downe, there doe yet remaine Altars standing in divers other Churches, by occa∣sion wherof much variance and contention ariseth amongst sundry of our Subjects, which if good fore-sight were not had, might perchance engen∣der great hurt and inconvenience: Wee let you wit, that minding to have all occasion of conten∣tion taken away, which many times groweth by those and such like diversities; and considering that amongst other things belonging to our Roy∣all Office and care, Wee doe account the greatest to be to maintain the cōmon quiet of our Realme, Wee have thought good, by the advice of our
Counsell, to require you, and neverthelesse espe∣cially to charge and command you for the avoyd∣ing of all matters of further contention and strife, about the standing or taking away of the said Al∣tars, to give substantiall order throughout all your Diocesse, that with all diligence, all the Altars in every Church or Chappell, as well in places exemp∣ted, as not exempted, within your said Diocesse be tken downe, and in the steed thereof a Table to be set up in some convenient part of the Chancell within every such Church or Chappell, to serve for the ministration of the blessed Communion; and to the intent the same may be done without offence of such our loving Subjects, as be not yet so well perswaded in that behalfe, as we would wish, wee send unto you herewith certaine considerations gathered and collected, that make for the purpose, the which, and such others as you shall think meet to be set forth to perswade the weake to embrace our proceedings in this part, wee pray you cause to bee declared to the people by some discreet Preachers, in such places as you shall think meet, before the taking downe of the said Altars, so as both the weake consciences of others may be in∣structed and satisfied as much as may be, and this our pleasure the more quietly executed; For the better doing whereof, we require you to open the fore-said considerations in that our Cathedrall Church in your owne person, if you conveniently may, or otherwise by your Chancellor, or some other grave Preacher, both there, and in such other
Market Townes, and most notable places of your Diocesse, as you may think most requisite. Given under our Signet at our Palace at Westminster the 24 day of November, in the fourth yeare of our Raigne. Edward Somerset. Thomas Cranmer: William Wiltshire. Iohn Warwick. Iohn Bedford. William North. Edw. Clinton. Hen. Wentworth. Thom. Ely.
Reasons why the Lords Board should rather be after the forme of a Table then of an Altar. The First Reason. FIrst the Forme of a Table shall more move the simple from the superstitious opinions of the Popish Masse unto the right use of the Lords Supper; for the use of an Altar is to make Sacrifice upon it, the use of a Table is to serve for men to eat upon. Now when we come to the Lords Boord, what doe wee come for? to Sacrifice Christ a∣gain, and to Crucifie him again, or to feed upon him, that was once only crucified and offered up for us? If wee come to feed upon him, spiritually to eate his body, and spiritually to drinke his blood, which is a true use of the Lords Supper, then no man can deny but the form of a Table is more
meete for the Lords Boord, then the forme of an Altar. mhe Second reason. ITem, Whereas it is said that the Book of Com∣mon Prayer maketh mention of an Altar where∣fore it is not lawfull to abolish that which the Book alloweth, to this it is thus answered, The Book of Common Prayer calleth the thing whereup∣on the Lords supper is ministred indifferently a Table, an Altar, or the Lords Boord, without pre∣scription of any forme thereof, either of a Table or of an Altar; so that whether the Lords boord have the forme of an Altar or of a Table the Book of Common Prayer calleth it both an Altar and a Table; For as it calleth it an Altar whereupon the Lords Supper is ministred a Table and the Lords boord, so it calleth the Table where the holy Commu∣nion is distributed with lauds and thanksgiving unto the Lord, an Altar, for that there is offered the same sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and thus it appeareth that there is nothing either said or meant contrary to the Book of Common Prayer. The third Reason. THirdly, the Popish opinion of Masse was that it might not bee celebrated but upon an Altar or at the least upon a Super-Altar to supply the
fault of the Altar, which must have had his prints and Character, or else it was thought that the thing was not lawfully done; but this superstiti∣ous opinion is more holden in the minds of the simple and ignorant by the forme of an Altar then of a Table, wherefore it is more meete for the a∣bolishment of this superstitious opinion, to have the Lords Boord after the forme of a Table then of an Altar. The Fourth Reason. FOurthly, The forme of an Altar was ordai∣ned for the Sacrifices of the Law and there∣fore the Altar in Greeke is called quasi Sacrificii locus, but now both the Law and the Sa∣crifices thereof doe cease, wherefore the Forme of the Altar used in the Altar ought to cease with∣all. The Fifth Reason. FIftly, Christ did institute the Sacrament of his body and bloud at his last Supper at a Ta∣ble and not at an Altar, as it appeareth manifestly by the three Evangelists, and St. Paul calleth the comming to the holy Communion the comming unto the Lords Supper, and also it is not read that any of the Apostles or the primitive Church did ever use any Altar in ministration of the holy
Communion; wherefore seeing the form of a Ta∣ble is more agreeble to Christs institution, and with the usage of the Apostles and of the Pri∣mitive Church, then the forme of an Altar, there∣fore the forme of a Table is rather to be used then the forme of an Altar in the administration of the Holy Communion. The Sixth Reason. FInally it is said in the Preface of the Book of Common Prayer, that if any doubt doe arise in the use and practising of the same Book, to ap∣pease all such diversity, the matter shal be referr'd unto the Bishop of the Diocesse, who by his dis∣cretion shal take order for the quieting and appea∣sing of the same, so that the same order be not contrary to any thing contained in that book. After these letters and reasons received, the forenamed Nicholas Ridley, Bp. of London, conse∣quently upon the same did hold his Visitation, wherein, amongst other his Injunctions, the said Bp. exhorted those Churches in his Diocesse where the Altar then did remaine to conforme themselves unto those other Churches which had taken them downe, and had set up in stead of the multitude of their Altars, one decent Table in e∣very Church: Upon the occasion whereof there arose a great diversity about the form of the Lords Boord, some using it after the form of a Table, and
some of an Altar, wherein when the said Bishop was required to say and determine what was most meet, he declared, he could do no less of his boun∣den duty for appeasing of such diversity, & to pro∣cure one godly uniformity, but to exhort all his Dioces unto that which he thought did best agree with Scripture, with the usage of the Apostles, and with the Primitive Church, and to that which is not only not contrary unto any thing contained in the Book of Common Prayer, as is is before pro∣ved, but also might highly further the Kings most godly proceedings, in abolishing of diverse vaine and superstitious opinions of the Popish masse out of the hearts of the simple, and to bring them to the right use taught by holy Scripture of the Lords Supper, and so appointed, he the forme of a right Table to be used in his Diocesse, and in the Church of Paul brake down the wall standing then by the High Altars side. BY the preceding passages, the whole World may see, that in all times there will bee Champions found to defend all o∣pinious; you see how Tables did then cry downe Altars, and how Altars of late have thrust out Tables, and Bishops defending both according to the Current and humour of the time, or rather according to the in∣disputable command of the Metropolitan;
to whose papall pride and Lording greatness all the rest of the Prelats by oath and Cano∣nicall obedience are slavishly subservient. Which usurped and insufferable dominati∣on hath beene the chiefe cause of all the  troubles and Innovations both in Chur  Common Wealth: But it is hoped that  generating order of Bishops (under  this Kingdome groanes) will by this P¦ment be either wholy taken away, or b¦ded within such Limits, that their Lor power, pride, and cruelty, shall swell ¦more above the banks of moderation to t ruine of the Church and Common Wealth.  if any Dutifull sonne of the Church will stan up in the defence of that order, and invocat the Holy Apostles to justifie the institution and antiquity of Episcopacie; if that shall bee yielded, then let them be reduced to that Primitive condition; or (because they have so much abused bounty of Princes) for ever lose the plea and Title. FINIS.
