E2448 E149_8 99858844 110903
VOTES OF BOTH Houses of Parliament: With sundry Articles, or Acts of Par∣liament to confirme the same. Taken out of the Records of the Tower. Also, Two Orders of both Houses of PARLIAMENT: The one, To all High Sheriffes, Justices of the peace, and other Officers, within 150. Miles of the City of YORKE: The other, In particular to the high Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, and other Officers within the County of Lancaster. In generall, to all the Counties of England, and Dominion of Wales. Die Sabbathi 28. Maii 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these Votes with the Articles be forthwith printed and published. Io. Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, for Cristopher Latham. 1642
Die Veneris 20. Maii, 1642. Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons, &c. THat it appeares that the King (seduced by wic∣ked Counsell) intends to make warre against the Parliament, who (in all their consultations and actions) have proposed no other end unto themselves but the care of his Kingdoms, and the performance of all duty and loyalty to his person. Resolved, &c. That whensoever the King maketh warre upon the Parliament, it is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his people, contrary to his oath, and tending to the disso∣lution of this government. Resolved, &c. That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such warres, are Traitours, by the fundamentall Laws of this Kingdom; and have been so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament.
Out of the Roll of the Parliament held at West∣minster, 11 R. 2. ITem, by the said encroachment, the aforesaid Alexander Arch-bishop of Yorke, Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, Robert Tressilian false Justice, and Nichol. Brembre false Knight of London, have done that▪ whereas at the last Parliament, all the Lords and other Wise men and Commons there assembled, seeing the losse of the King and his kingdome eminent, as well for the perils and mischiess aforesaid, as that the King was departed from the Counsell of the King∣dome, and hearkened wholly to the Counsell of the aforesaid maleta∣ctors and traytors, as also because the French King with his Royall power was shipt upon the Sea, ready to have come into England to de∣stroy the Kingdome, and the English tongue, and that no ordinance nor government was then established for the safety of the King nor of the kingdome, they knew not other remedy thereupon, but remonstrated unto the King at full, how that he was ill governed, counselled, and car∣ried away, by the aforesaid traytors and malefactors, declaring unto him their wicked conditions, and required him most humbly as his loyall subjects for the safety of him, and of his whole kingdome, and for the avoiding of the perils aforesaid, to let go and put from him the afore∣said malefactours and traytours out of his presence and company, and that he would not do hereafter according to their wicked counsels, but that he would follow the wise, loyall, and discreet men of the kingdom, and thereupon the said traytors and malefactors, seeing this good and honourable opinion of the Parliament, and to disturbe their good pur∣pose therein, by their false counsell caused our Lord the King to com∣mand the Major of London to cause a great power of the people of Lon∣don to be suddenly levied, for to kill and put to death all the said Lords and Commons, excepting only such as were of their party, at the doing of which wicked act, the said great malefactors, and traitors should have been parties, & present to the destruction of the King and all his Realme. Article 29. Item, For to accomplish this high treason aforesaid by their councell, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of Yorke, Robert Ʋeere Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, caused
the King to send his Letters of Credence to his adversary the French King: some by one Nicholas Southwell, Groome of his Chamber, and some by other persons of meane fortune, as well Aliens as Denizent, requiring and praying the said French King, that with his power and Counsell he would be aiding and assisting to our Lord the King to de∣stroy and put to death the said Lords, and other English, which the King then held his enemies and traytors, as before, to the great disquiet and trouble of his whole kingdome. Article 30. Item, The aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of Yorke, Robert de Veere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, en∣croaching unto themselves Royall Power, caused the King to promise unto the French King, by his said Letters and Messages, for to obtaine aide and assistance from the French King, and his power, for to accom∣plish that high treason, prodition, and murder, to give and surrender un∣to the said French King the Towne and Castle of Calis, and all other Castles and Forts in the March of Picardy and Artoys, the Castles and Townes of Chirlurge, and of Brerte, to the great dishonour, trouble, and dammage of the King and of his Kingdome. Article 37. Item, the asoresaid Alexander Archbishop of Yorke, Robert de Ʋere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la poole Earle of Suffolke, Robert Trelsillian false Justice, and Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of London, malefactors and Traytors, during the time of the said protection, to the overthrowing of the said appeale, falsely Counselled, and caused the King to command by his letters, divers Knights, Esquires, his Sheriffes, and others his officers of divers Counties, to raise and assemble all the power that they could to come with the said Duke of Ireland, against the aforesaid other Lords Appellants, suddainely to make warre against them and destroy them. Article 38. Item, During the time of the said protection, the aforesaid Robert de veere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la poole. Earel of Suffolke, Alexander Archbishop of Yorke, Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of Lon∣don, caused the King by his Letters, to signifie to the said Duke of Ire∣land, how that he and others were appealed of treason by the said Tho∣mas Duke of Glocester Constable of England, Richard Earle of Arun∣dell and Surry, and Thomas Earle of Warwick. and how that the King had thereupon given day to the said parties, untill the next Parliament, and how hee had taken both parties, with their men, goods and Chattells, into his speciall protection, and besides it was contained in the said let∣ters of the King, that if the said Duke had sufficient power he should not faile to come on with all his aforesaid power, and to come to the King;
and soone after they procured the King, to write unto the said Duke of Ireland, that he should take the field, with all his power, which he could gather together, and that the King would meet him withall his power, and that the King would with him put in hazard his Royall person; and that the King was in great danger himselfe and his whole kingdome if he were not helped and succoured by thesaid Duke of Ireland, And that the Duke of Ireland should make knowne this unto all the men that were assembled unto him; and that the King would pay all the wages, and charges of the said Duke of Ireland, and of all the men assembled by him, by vertue of which letters, and the malicious and Trayterous exitations as well of the said Duke, as of his Adherents and all the other malefactors and Traytos, the said Duke of Ireland assembled a great number of men at Armes and Archers, as well the Connties of Lan∣caster, Chester, and Wales, as of other places of the Kingdome, to de∣stroy, and to put to death the aforesaid Lords, and all others which were assenting to the making of the said Ordinance, Statute and Commission, unto the destruction of the King, and his Kingdome. Article 39. Jtem the said Robert de veere Duke of Ireland, false tray∣tore to the King and kingdome, assembled a great power of men at Armes, and Archers of the Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and Wales, and of divers other places, to the intent to have trayterously destroyed so farre as in him lay, the Lords Thomas Duke of Glocester Constable of England, Henry Earle of Derby, Richard Earle of Arundell and Sur∣rey, Thomas Earle of Warwick, and Thomas Earle Marshall, and other Loyall Subjects of our Lord the King, as well to the destruction and an∣nihilation of our Lord the King and of his whole kingdome; and so he rid with great power and force of men at Armes, and Archers, from the County of Chester through the kingdome, till he came neere to a cerraine place, which place is called Rotcotbridge, neere to Cotswold, inchroaching to himselfe Royall power, caused the banner of the King to be displayed in his company, contrary to the dignity of the King and of his Crowne, at which time the said Duke of Ireland and his com∣pany, were by the grace of God, disappointed of their wicked purpose. Memorand. That the same Roll containing the Petition of the afore∣said appeale distinguished by Articles as above by quotation is marked, was delivered in the present Parliament, by the aforesaid Duke, and Earles appellants; & Memorand, that afterwards in the same Parli∣ament, the 1. 2. 11. 15. 17. Articles foresaid are declared, and adjud∣ged treason, and every one of them is declared and adjudged treason, And that that which is contained in the 22. Article of the aforesaid Ar∣ticles concerning the levying of men, to make warre and destroy the
Lords and Lieges of the King is likewised declared and adjudged trea∣son. And that the 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 37. 38. 39. Articles aforesaid are also declared and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared and ad∣judged treason, as is set downe in the Record and the processe annexed and affixed to this Roll on the back side of the said Roll by these words quelle petition levee in presence du Roy ure dit Sr. &c. This judgement was confirmed by act of Parliament. 11. R. 2. Cap. 3.1 H. 4. cap. 3. and 4. of the old printed statutes, and the said statute 1. H. 4. repeales and makes void the Parliament of 21. R. 2. and all the proceedings thereof, in which forc'd and tumultuary Parliament, the Acts of the Parliament of 11. R. 2. had beene reversed. Rot. Parl. 11. R. 2. MEmorandum quod iste idem Rotulus continens petitionem appelli supra∣dictiper articulos distinctè pro ut superius per quotationem annotatur liberatus fuit in prasenti Parliamento per praedict. Ducem & Comites appel∣lantes; Et mem. quod postea in codē Parliamento primus, secundus, undeci∣mus, quintus decimus, & decimus septimus articuli praedicti declarantur & adjudicantur Proditio; & eorum quilibet declaratur & adjudicatur prodi∣tio; & quod illud quod continetur in vicessimo secundo articulo praedictorum articulorum tangens levationem gentium ad guerrand. & destruend. domi∣nos & legeos legis similiter declaratur & adjudicatur proditie: Et quod vi∣cessimus octavus, vicessimus nonus, tricessimus, tricessimus primus, tricessi∣mus secundus, tricessimus septimus, tricessimus octavus, & tricessimus nonus articuli predicti declarantur etiam & adjudicantur Proditio, & corum qui∣libet declaratur & adjudicatur Proditio; prout annotatur in Recordo & pro∣cessu huic Rotul. consutis & annexis. In dorso Ejusdem Rotuli per haec ver∣ba. Quel le petition lui in presence du roy nostre dit Henneres & &c. Crom at. per statut. 1. H. 4. cap. 3. & 4. in the old printed statutes.
Die Veneris 27 Maii. 1642. WHereas it appears to the Lords and Commons, that the King seduced by wicked Counsell, intends to make warre upon his Parliament. It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that the High Sheriffes, and Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, within the same Counties, Cities, and Townes Corporate, situate within 150 Miles of the City of Yorke, shall forthwith take speciall care for to make stay of all Armes, and Ammunition carrying to∣wards Yorke, untill they have given notice thereof unto the Lords and Commons, and shall have received their further direction. And for the better affecting hereof, the said High Sheriffes, Justices of the peace, and other officers, are further to take speciall Care, that strict watches be kept within their severall limits, and jurisdictions, for the searching for, and seizing of, all such Armes and Ammunition, as likewise for the apprehending all persons going with the same.
Die Sabbathi 28. May, 1642. WHereas it appeares, that the King seduced by wicked-Counsell, intends to make war against the Parliament, and under the co∣lor of a guard to secure his royall Person, doth command troopes both of Horse and Foote to assemble at Yorke; All which is against the Lawes of the Kingdome, tending to the dissolution of the Par∣liament, and destruction of his people. It is therefore ordered by the Lords, and Commons in Parliament, that the Sheriffes of the County of Lancaster, and all other Sheriffe of the Kingdome of England, & Dominion of Wales, shall by the power of that County, and of their severall Counties, respecti∣vely, suppresse the raising, and comming together of any Souldiers, Horse or Foote, by any warrant, commission, or order from his Majesty, without the advise and consent of the Lords, and Commons in Parliament; And that all persons whatsoever doe forbeare to execute any such commission, or war∣rant for levying Souldiers, or gathering them together without consent of Parliament; And these who shall execute, or obey any such Commission, or warrant, are hereby declared to be disturbers of the peace of the Kingdome. And the Lord Lievtenant of the County of Lancaster, and all Lords Liev∣tenants of all other Counties in the Kingdome of England, or Dominion of Wales respectively, as likewise all deputy Lievtenants, Captaines and of∣ficers of the Trained Bands, and all Majors, Justices of peace, and other his Majesties loving Subiects, are hereby commanded, and required to be ayding, and assisting to the said Sheriffe of the County of Lancaster, and to the other Sheriffes of the other Counties of this Kingdome, and of the Dominion of Wales; And that his Majesties loving Subjects may the better understand what the Law, and their owne duty is in this behalfe, the said Sheriffe of Lancashire, and other Sheriffes of the other Counties of this Kingdome respectively, shall cause this present Order, forthwith to be publish∣ed in the severall Market Townes within their said Counties. Sabbathi 28. Maii. 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these shall be forth∣with Printed and published. IO. BROWNE, Cler. Parliamentorum: FINIS.
