E2376 669.f.3[46] 99868641 160604
royal blazon or coat of arms surrounded with emblems of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE ❧ To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament. Sheweth, THat Your Majesty, in answer to their late Petition, touching the proceedings against the Lord Kimbolton, M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, Members of the Parliament, was pleased to signifie, That as Your Majesty once conceived, that You had ground enough to accuse them, So now Your Majesty findes as good cause wholly to desert any fur∣ther prosecution of them. Notwithstanding which, they remain still under that heavy charge so imputed unto them, to the exceeding prejudice, not only of them∣selves, but also of the whole Parliament And whereas by the expresse Laws, and Statutes of this Your Realm, that is to say, by two Acts of Parliament, the one made in the 37. and the other in the 38. yeer of the Raign of Your most Noble Pro∣genitor, King Edward the third; If any person whatsoever, make suggestion to the King Himself, of any Crime committed by another, the same person ought to be sent, with the suggestion, before the Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seal, Treasurer, and the great Councell, there to finde surety to pursue his suggestion, which if he cannot prove, he is to be imprisoned till he hath satisfied the Party, accused of his dammages and slander, and made fine▪ and ransome to the King. The said Lords and Commons humbly beseech Your Majesty, That not only in point of Justice to the said Members in their particulars, but for the Vindication of the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, Your Majesty will be pleased to send the person or per∣sons, that in this case made the suggestions, or informations to Your Majesty, against the said Members of Parliament, Together with the said suggestions or informati∣ons, to Your Parliament, That so such fruits of the said good Laws may be had, as was intended by them, and the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament may be Vin∣dicated, which of right and justice ought not to be denyed. Febr. 18. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.
