E3330 669.f.7[15] 99870404 160997
ROBERT Earle of ESSEX, CAPTAINE GENERALL OF THE Army imployed for the Defence of the Protestant Religion, the Safety of his Majesties Person, and of the Parliament, the preser∣vation of the Lawes, Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdome, and protection of His Majesties Subjects from violence and oppression. To all those whom it may concerne; WHereas I am informed that diverse Officers and Soul∣diers belonging to the Army under my Command, by licence or otherwise are now remaining in and a∣bout the Cities of London and Westminster, and parts adjacent; It is my expresse will and pleasure, and I do hereby declare, that if any the said Officers or Soul∣diers whatsoever, shall not forthwith upon publication hereof made, repair to their severall Quarters in the Army before to morrow next in the Evening, being the 19. of this instant Month of May, there to at∣tend the duties of their places, and to receive further order from Me, that every such Officer and Souldier, not having after this Proclama∣tion made a particular licence from Me, shall be forthwith casheered, and also proceeded against by the Councell of Warre, according to the Rules of Martiall Discipline. And if any person whatsoever resi∣ding within the said Cities and liberties, or else where, shall conceale or with-hold any such Officers or Souldiers from their attendance; I doe hereby declare that such persons shall bee further proceeded a∣gainst by the Councell of Warre, as persons ill affected to the State, according to their severall offences. And I do hereby require all Iu∣stices of the peace, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other his Majesties of∣ficers and loving Subjects whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting in the discovery and prosecution of such as shall contemne or neglect this command, so much importing the good and wellfare of the Army, rai∣sed for the service of the King, Parliament and Kingdome. Given under my Hand and Seale at Arms this 18. day of May, Anno Domini 1643. ESSEX. It is His Excellencies pleasure that this Proclamation be forth-with Printed. Ro. Chambers Secr.
