f234a 99899375 153210
SEVERALL PROPOSALLS From his EXCELLENCY Sr Tho. Fairfax: and the general Councel of the ARMIE. Shewing their humble desires in those things which concerns them as SOVLDIERS. Together with a Letter, tendered to the Lords and Commons Commissioners of Parliament, Residing with the Army. To bee by them humbly Represented to both Houses of PARLIAMENT. By the appointment of his Excellency Sr THO∣MAS FAIRFAX, and the generall Councel of the ARMY. Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secretary. Putney the 22. of Septemb. 1647. LONDON▪ Printed by James and Joseph Moxon. for John Pounset, at the signe of the Hand and Bible, at the lower end of Budg-row, neer Dowgate. 1647.
FOR THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE the LORDS and COMMONS Com∣missioners of Parliament, residing with the Army. Right Honourable, IN our Representation or Declaration, sent from St Albans, wee did expresse in generall Terms what things wee de∣sired for the setling of the Rights, Liber∣ties Peace, and safety of the Kingdom: and since (as the distractions and interruptions wee have met withall would admit) wee have proceeded to prepare and have lately delivered to your Lordships our particular Proposalls in pursuance of those gene∣rall desires: and in order to the same ends, having in those set forth, what our desires are, in the things which concerns us; as members of the Common wealth, and in Common wth all others. Wee shall now de∣sire your Lordships to re-minde the Parliament of our humble desires in those things which concerns us as Souldiers, and of our dis-satisfactions in relation thereunto; which remained upon us, when some Regi∣ments
of the Army were voted to bee disbanded; for which purpose we have now prepared (and do herewith tender to your Lordships) our particular desires, in pursuance of our former papers, published before our comming to St Albans, in Order to the satisfaction and securitie of the Army, and other the Parlaments Forces, in point of Arrears, and other things that con∣cern us meerly as Souldiers, which we desire, may bee humbly represented to the Parliament, to be taken in∣to as speedy Consideration as may be. The matter of the first Article, concerning the present stating of ac∣counts, and giving debenters for Arrears, to be speedi∣ly put in execution, or set in a way of dispatch, and the rest of them to be agreed upon, provided for, and in∣cluded in any setling of a Peace, which wee shall har∣tily pray for. Putney Septemb. 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sr Tho∣mas Fairfax, and the general Councel of the Army. JOHN RUSHWORTH, Sceretary.
SEVERAL PROPOSALLS From His EXCELLENCIE Sr Tho. Fairfax; and the general Councel of the ARMIE. Shewing their humble Desires, in those things which concern them as Souldiers. 1. THat a Committee or Commissio∣ners be appointed by the Parlia∣ment, to come down and abide at the Heed Quarters of the Ar∣my, with fll power and authority to audite and state he Accounts thereof; and to give Debenters as well for the pay respited upon the Publique faith, as otherwise, for their service under the command of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, or any other respective Command, wherein they, or any of them, have served the Parliament; that so what shall appear to be justly due upon the afore∣said
Debenters, may be made an unquestionable debt unto them. And for the more effectual ac∣complishment hereof, we desire, that the Respe∣ctive Treasurers and Commissaries of musters of the several Armies, may be commanded to attend the said Committee or Commissioners, that thereby the Arrears of any person of this Army, incurred in other Armies or Garrisons, who by his or their continual attendance upon the service, have not had their accounts audited and stated, may now be fully accounted for, without further trouble. And forasmuch as the Accounts of many who are Members of this Army, and have formerly served the Parliament under other Commands, (though the neglect or want of musters, loss of Papers, death of Officers, taking of Garrisons, &c.) will be very difficult to be cleared, to what they will be for the service under the Com∣mand of His Excellencie Sir THOMAS FAIR∣FAX, where Musters have been certaine, and Accounts better kept, and such contingencies as aforesaid have not hpned; we humbly offer, that the said Committee or Commissioners, may have such full instructions, that where Certifi∣cates from superiour Officers cannot possibly be obtained, or other sufficient Testimonies had, the oath of such persons may be taken, and vallid as to the stating of their Accounts
And in regard there remaines a dis-satisfaction upon the Army, grounded upon the Instructions made for the auditing of our Accompts, and published to us at the Rendesvouze of the Ar∣mie at Triplow-heath, in order to our satisfaction, wherein care is taken for the abatement for Free∣quarter, when monies have been received, and quarters not accordingly satisfied, but no notice taken of payment of quarters at any time, beyond our proportions of pay received, nor any regard had of the several hardhips, wants, and extre∣mities wee have been put upon, in times of e∣minent service, viz. difficult marches, continual motions, and tediou Lghers, &c. Where, by the greatness of our Body, or closeness in po∣sture in quartering, there hath been such scarcity in provisions, that both Officers and Souldiers have been put to extreme expences in procuring necessaries to live upon, and all this at such time when no monies have been sent us; and there∣upon a proceed-made to the severall large dedu∣ction thereafter specified, which we neither then nor yet can see good grounds for: therefore we humbly ffer, that the two Houses would be pleased to re-assume the consideration of the said Instructions, and thinke upon some expedient, whereby our deduction for Free-quarter may be moderated, as to the Instructions afore-said: and that no person who hath constantly paid quarters,
may be put upon any deduction, nor any Officer be accountable for any thing save that which parti∣cularly concerns himself. And further wee desire there may be effectual course taken, and provision made for the stating of the Accompts, and securing the Arrears of other the Souldiery of the Kingdom, who have faithfully served the Parliament, and concurred with this Army in their late engagement. And whereas divers of the Horsemen of this Army upon the loss of their Horses in the Par∣liaments service, have at their owne charges fur∣nished themselves with others, fit for the said service, and haply have againe lost certain of the said Horses so bought, whereby the State have been served, and the Souldiery much damnified: Wee humbly desire the two Hou∣ses will be pleased to take it into their conside∣ration, thar some convenient satisfaction may be thought upon for such, as by sufficient Testi∣moniall shall make it appear they have been dam∣nifyed as aforesaid. 2. Secondly, That Provision may be forth∣with made, and a visible security given, to sa∣tisfie the Arrears of the Armie, in such way and manner, as may be least burthensome to the Common-wealth; in order to which we offer, that Bishops lands, Dean and Chapters lands, and
Forrest Lands may bee speedily put to saile, or o∣therwise made over for the use aforesaid, or any o∣ther way the Parliament in their wisedome shall think meet, appearing satisfactory for the security of the said Arrears. 3. Thirdly, That there may bee an Ordinance for securing all and every person in this Army, who have willingly served the Parliament, from beeing impressed out of this Kingdom, to any forraign ser∣vice: and that no Horse-man shall bee forced to serve on foot in any future case: And for the more reall effecting hereof, wee desire, that every such person aforesaid, as shall have a certificate under the Generalls or his respective Field Officer or Cap∣tains hand, that he hath served in this Army (which he may carry about him, or keepe by him, by pro∣ducing such a Ticket he may bee upon sight thereof discharged: and that if any Officer shall detaine a∣ny such person after the sight of such testimoniall, there may bee a certaine penalty inflicted upon him. 4. Fourthly, That the Ordinance concerning Apprentices freedom, that have served the Parli∣ament, may be made an act before or at the setling of a Peace. 5. Fifthly, That the Ordinance concerning
Provision for maimed Souldiers, and the Wid∣dows, and Orphants of men slaine in the Parlia∣ments service, may likewise bee made an Act. 6. Sixthly, That to the Ordinance lately past for Indemnity, there may bee an Additionall Provision, for saving harmlesse and Indemnified the Army and all the Members of it. As also all that have acted in concurrence with it, and for secu∣ring of them from all Troubles, Question, or Pre∣judice for or concerning any thing done, in, upon or in pursuance of the Petition of the Army, a∣greed upon at Walden, in March last; or any the papers since then presented and published from the Army, or any the things therein con∣tained, or for or concerning any thing spoken or done in relation to, or in Vindication of the Army, from the injuries or extremities put up∣on it, about the said Petition, or since: which Additionall Provision wee desire, may, toge∣ther with the said Ordinance for Indemnity, bee past into Acts, at the setling of a Peace: so as we or others, may not (for what we have done or insisted on, in necessary defence or Vindication of our selves, as Souldiers; from Ruine or insuf∣ferable Injuries and Oppressions, or in behalf of the Common wealth; for the setling and secu∣ring of the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and Safe∣ty
thereof) remaine subject to the malice or censures of our and the Kingdomes Enemies, who wee have opposed upon any future ad∣vantage. Putney, Septemb. 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sr Thomas Fairfax, and the gene∣ral Councel of the Army. Signed John Rushworth, Secretary.
