F406 99827853 171564
Phancies Phoenix. OR. The Peerless Paragon of the Times. Being a young Gallants description of a Lady which he hath settled his thoughts on, resolving never to change, not to love any other Beauty or Face in the World. And is perswaded if there be. A Phoenix in the world, 'tis she. To an amorous new Tune. COme all you Batchlors so brave that spend your time in Cupids Court And with your complements do rve, with many Ladies for to sport: I am contrary to your mind, I court but one, and she , She's vertuous chaste, and if there be, a Phoenix in the world 'tis she. I little thought I ever could, by any beauty e're be won, Nor ca now if that I would, remove my mind on any one: No wealth, no beauty, nor no face, no fire thoughts from her disgrace, She's vertuous, chaste, and if there be, a Phoenix in the world 'tis she. I Must confess: I am in Love although I thught I never should, But sure she was sent from above and made of Natures cheifest mould: So pure so fair, and all Divine Ile quit the world to make her mine: She's vertuous, chaste and if there be a Phoenix in the World 'tis she. Do you not sée the Stars retreat when Sol salutes the sky so clear So must all  so great shrink and with  appear; So brighte, so clear, that a must say 'tis fair Roselia laim the day, She's vertuous, chaste, and if there, &c. Her bashful Chéeks with blushing swéet, cast such a rich vemillion dye, That Rose and  ere doth méet each striving for the victory: So rare, so pure, you' scarce believe dame Nature could such clors ive She's vertuous, chaste, and if there &c Her eyes like spars of Diamonds clear such glances cast in me ry sort No wantoness n them appears yet Cupid saie here kéeps his court 'Twas from her Eyes be shot his dat y• hus hath pierc' m lve-sik heart She's vertuous, chast, and if there, &c. But stay my Muse what néed hav I to praise her beauty in such sort, When as her fame abroad doth fly more then I can of her epor: Wee she to me as kind as fair then might I live and not desair But sure I think if that there be a Phaenix in the World 'tis she For she desires to be alone and never to participate, Her lve she faith to any one but single livs withou a mate, Such thoughts I think in few remain yet doth in her the moes my pain Then sure I think if that there be, &c. Cruel she is to none I hear no more she is not unto me Nor proud she is not that is rare you'l say in women for to be She's courteous, lovely, chast, and fair, 'tis few that can with her compare For sure I think if that there be, &c. Then if she Phenix-like will live and dye alone I am content My heart to her ile fréely give unto no other ile consent But in her flames my heart shall burn and Phenix like to ashes turn, For it is her and none but she by whom I must revived be. And if she will not yeild at last but still her resolution hold, I will not think my time ill spent nor yet my love shall ne're wax cold To stay for such a one as she, I think no time there lost will be. I'd better with my fancy wed then lodge some women in my bed. I that you néeds would know of me whereas this Phenix doth abide For that I must excused be yet near the Strand she doth reside No other notice will I give to any one whilst I do live, And if she doth a Phaenix dye look in her ashes there am I. You roving Batchellors that be resolved for to spend your time, In several Maiden company when as their beauty are in prime, Beware, beware, let vertue guide the to a Maid to make thy Bride: Let not her beauty tempt your eye, least vertue too in her you spye. I must depart time calls away I cannot now express my mind, This Song is long enough you'l say unless that she did prove more kind She's vertuous, chaste, and therefore re'd to love her t I die. For sure I think if that there be, a Phoenix in the world 'tis she London, Printed for F. Coles, . Vere, and J. Wright.
