G1969 99859161 111228
A LETTER TO THE Lord Grey of Grooby. Wherein is declared a great victory obtai∣ned by the Parliaments Forces neere Hinkeley, Where they have Slain Captain Manwaring, 12 Common Souldiers. Taken Prisoners, Lieu. Grey, brother to the Lord Greys Cornet, Lieutenant Rawlings, Quartermaster Deckins, Col: Nevels Trumpeter with a silver Trum∣pet. 44 Common Souldiers, Surprised, Many Armes, 150 Horse, 80 Heads of Cattle, Divers packs of Ammunition. Whereof they have rescued 2 Ministers, & 30 Countrey men. Which the enemy had taken Prisoners. Printed for Andrew Coe, according to Order, 1644.
A LETTER TO The Lord Grey of Grooby. RIGHT HONORABLE, UPon Sunday night about ele∣ven a clock J received adver∣tisement from Captaine BO∣DLE, that the enemy past Nielfon, with three hundred and fifty horse, and ad∣vanced
towards Litterworth with a pur∣pose to sweep the whole Countrey upon Munday, I drew forth Major BINGLEY, Captaine HACKERS, and Captaine BODELS Troops to goe and fight with them; hear∣ing they were at Sutton, but missing them there; I marcht to Hinkley hearing they would quarter there that night, I came to Hinkley about seven a clock where I fonnd all passage into the Town blockt up about halfe a mile from the Towne, I tooke one of their Scouts, who affirmed them to be three hundred horse and fiftie Dragoones, and that they had been in their Quarters two houres, I entred the Town at the end towards Barwell, first causing my Dra∣goons to light by the Mils, where I left their horses with a small Guard, and caused my Dragoons to advance with the Forlorn hope of thirtie horse, commanded by Cap∣taine FITZGARRET to force the passage which after some resistance, was effected:
My selfe with the small body that I had, one hundred and twentie charged up to the Crosse, where I found the Enemy in a body, and after one quarter of an hours fight wee beat them out of the Towne, being in the field they Rallied againe, and were advancing to charge us, wher∣upon I drew up my Dragoons, and cau∣sed them to advance with my horse into the field, where after some shots made, the Enemy gave way, then I charged them againe, with my horse which they stood not to receive, but wheeld off and fled, I pursued them above halfe a mile, but being in the night and in a dirty Countrey, I thought it not safe to pur∣sue them any further, knowing they were as many more as I had. There were slaine of the Enemy one Captain MAN∣WARING, of common Souldiers about twelve, but I am confident there were many wonnded. For J heare that there
were some went into houses and died by the way. I have Prisoners Liev∣tenant GREY your Lordships Bro∣ther) Lievtenant RAWLINGS, quartermaster DECKENS, one Trumpetter with his silver trumpet, foure and forty common sonldiers, a great many armes which I gave most unto Captatne BODLE, for his Treope and Dragoons, we took above one hundred and fifty horses, eightie head of Cattle, and divers packs with some Ammuuition I released two Ministers, Prisoners, and thirtie Countrymen taken from Cosby and Laer, the Horse and Cattle being most taken from our Friends were most restored, some little satisfacti∣on
being made to the Souldiers, this was done with 120 Horse and 50 of Musquettiers of my Cosen Greys Company, his Lievtenant is a very brave man, whom your Lordship must needs think off, the Enemie by my cosen Greys confession were 300: being three troops that came out of Newarke, two of Lichfield: one of the Lord of LOUGHBOROUGHS; one from Tissington, and one from VVi∣verton, besides Dragoons, the Trum∣pet saith sixty, my Cosen acknow∣ledgeth twenty: The glory I wholy ascribe unto God of this action, J ac∣knowledge it was his hand, and not ours that defeated the Enemy. For certainly had they stood to it, when
they were got into a body in the field, we should have had the worst of it, My Lord, I hope, by my next to send your Lordship good news: From Newarke, In the mean time I am Right Honorable Your most faithfull Servant, Henry Grey. Leicester the sixth of March, 1643. Published according to Order.
