G2043 E1043_2 99862661 168955
THE SPEECH Which the SPEAKER of the House of Commons Made unto the KING In the House of LORDS, at His Passing of the BILLS therein mentioned, The 29. of August in the Year of our Lord 1660. LONDON, Printed by Edward Husband and Tho. Newcomb, Printers to the House of Commons, Anno 1660.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE The Speech which the SPEAKER of the House of Commons made un∣to the King, the 29 of August, 1660. Most Gracious Soveraign, NOt many moneths since, England was but a great Prison, where the worst of men were our Go∣vernors, and their vilest lusts the Laws by which they governed. The great and most Wise God, conveyed divine intel∣ligence into Your Patient and Pious Soul, and taught You how by suffering for us, to deliver us from our sufferings; to knock off our shackles, and set Your People at liberty, when neither Power, nor Policy could effect it. So soon as Your Majesty set Your Foot upon Your English shore, our Prison was turned into a Paradice of Pleasure, and the whole Nation fill'd with Joy, and Love, and Peace. Sir, This great Blessing is already registred in Your Peoples thankful Hearts; and they desire that the me∣mory thereof might be perpetuated; and therefore they have laid it up amongst their choicest Jewels, and annext
it to their Magna Charta▪ which they are willing to pawn unto Your Majesty, upon condition, when they forget this, to forfeit that and . Sir, Amongst Your many Illustrious Titles, which like fair and beautiful flowers, do adorn and be-deck Your Royal Crown, there's one exceeds and excels all the rest, as well in Vertue as in Beauty, and that is Your Title of Defender of the Faith. Sir, As that Title is Your Honor, so the truth of it, is our happiness. Neither the highest Provocations, nor the strongest Temptations, that ever Prince met withal, have been able to shake Your Victori∣ous Faith, nor abate Your holy Zeal; witness Your first Act, after Your return to the exercise of Your Regal Power, in Your early and timely suppressing Prophaneness, and discountenancing debaucht persons, who know not how to express their thankfulness unto God for mercies, but by a sinful drinking them away; a practise Your Soul abhors. And as it is Your highest Honor, to be the Defender of that Faith which we profess; so it is the greatest interest, prerogative, and priviledge Your Majesty can be indowed and invested withal in this world, and will be Your most lasting comfort in the world to come, That God who hath hitherto been a Sun to direct You, will be a Shield to protect You; and that Faith which You defend, will de∣fend You against all Your enemies maugre the malice of the Devil, and all his wicked instruments. Royal Sir, Your eminent Vertues, and those excellent Qualifica∣tions that God hath bestowed upon You, to make You every way worthy and fit for Government, invites us at
this time, with joyful hearts, to make our humble addresses unto Your Majesty, and to give You a chearful accompt of our proceedings this Parliament, wherein we have spent our whole time upon Publick Bills; some we must confess of very great concernment to Your Majesty, and all Your People, are not yet ripe, nor brought to perfecti∣on: But though like an after-crop, yet with the fair wea∣ther of Your Majesties wonted patience, we hope like∣wise to Inn them well at last, to Your Majesties full satis∣faction, and the great contentment of all Your Loyal and Faithful Subjects. Some Bills are passed both Houses, and already lodged here, which attend and wait for Your Majesties Royal As∣sent, and I shall humbly beg the favor onely but to touch upon some of those of most publick concernment, by the way, and in transitu, to that Bill here in my hand. Sir, There is one Bill now before You, intituled, An Act for the Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings; the scope and intendment of that Bill, is to settle Mens Estates, which is the way to quiet their mindes; and when their mindes are at rest, there will be no fear of their breaking the Peace, or forfeiting their Good-behavior any more in time to come. There is another Bill, intituled, An Act to prevent the taking of Excessive Usury. The restraining men of ava∣ritious mindes, whose Consciences are as large as their Bags, will be a great ease to Your People, and an inable∣ment to Your Merchants the better to go on with their Trades. They are the Laborious Bees that bring in Honey into Your Majesties Hive; and Usurers are the lazy, idle droues, that rob Your Hive of the Honey.
There is another Bill, Entituled, An Act for a per∣petual Anniversary Thanksgiving to be observed and kept upon the 29 of May: A say that God himself was pleas∣ed to honor and adorn with a new additional Star, never seen before nor since; a Star of rare aspect, which de∣clar'd to all the world at once, the happy news of Your Majesties Blessed Nativity: And as it was Your Maje∣sties Birth-day, so it was the day of Your Restauration to Your Kingdoms, Parliament, and People: And likewise the day of Your Peoples re-Creation out of a Chaos of confusion and misery. And therefore they humbly pray, That not only we (for there would need no Act for that so long as we live) but that our posteri∣ty, and the ages that shall succeed us, might for ever be obliged to set apart that day, as a Holy day, to dedicate their Praises and Thanksgivings up unto Almighty God for his miraculous Deliverance of this poor Nation, when it lay in dust and ashes, in a most miserable, despe∣rate, forlorn, and deplorable condition. There is another Bill, Entituled, An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indempnity and Oblivion. It may well be called a Free Pardon: for Your Majesty was pleased to offer it before we had confidence enough to ask it, and at a time when Your People had most need of it: And it may as truly be called a General Pardon, in re∣spect of the extensiveness of it. But looking over a long, black, prodigious, dismal Roll and Catalogue of Malefactors, we there meet not with men, but Monsters, guilty of Blood, Precious Blood, Precious Royal Blood, never to be remembred without tears; incomparable in all the kindes of Villany that ever was acted by the worst of Miscreants, perverters of Religion, subverters of Go∣vernment,
false to God, disloyal to the best of Kings, and perfidious to their Countrey: And therefore we found an absolute and indispensable necessity incumbent upon us, to except and set some apart for Treacle, to ex∣pel the poison of Sin and Rebellion out of others, and that they might be made sacrifices to appease Gods Wrath, and satisfie Divine Justice. And now I am come to that Bill here in my hand, which I am commanded humbly to present Your Majesty with∣all. Royal Sir, Your Commons, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now assembled in Parliament, taking into consi∣deration the great and unsupportable Burden of the Ar∣mies and Navy, that your people do now groane under; and knowing, as Mony is the sinews of War, so as the State of Affairs now stand, that 'tis likewise the best Me∣dium that can be us'd, in order to the attaining that end we have all so much desired, and so long prayd for, The set∣tlement of a Happy Peace; and therefore they have pas∣sed this Bill Entituled, An Act for a speedy Provision of Money, to pay off and disband all the Forces of this King∣dom both by Sea and Land, upon which they hope such a Sum will be advanced and brought in, as may be sufficient fully to discharge and dispatch that work. And they humbly pray Your Majesties gracious acceptance thereof, and Your Royal assent thereunto. I am further to inform and assure your Majesty, that Your people have passed another Supply and Revenue unto your Majesty, which far surmounteth all they have already done in value, and that is, their Hearts and Af∣fections; having their hearts, your Majesty may com∣mand their purses.
Most Royal Soveraign, We have nothing more to offer, or to ask at this time, but Your Majesties gracious favor, so soon as your Service, and the Publick Affairs will permit, that we might have leave to go into our Countries, where we shall make Your people sensible of their happiness, in having such a King to govern and rule over them; and as we praise Your Majesty, so likewise to pray for your Majesty, that you may Live long, and Reign prosperously. FINIS.
