G2050 E94_7 99860010 155780
TVVO SPEECHES, SPOKEN In the Honourable House of Commons. THE FIRST BY Mr. Grimston Esquire: THE SECOND, BY Sir Beniamin Rudiard. Concerning the Differences between the Kings Majesty, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT. LONDON Printed for H. Hutton. 1643.
Mr. Grimstons Speech, IN The House of Commons, concerning the distempers between the King, and both Hou∣ses of Parliament. Master Speaker, I Would fain bring one stone to our building now in hand and it is but a caveat to the Master builders, to be∣ware of those who hinder the worke, and pull down by night, what is built up by day. Master Speaker, there are that speake loudly to the King, and in agitating of all matters, seem very tender of him, but substances, and semblances, essences, and apparences, are opposite: Multa Videntur quae non sunt, these would make us believe, that our redressing of some grievances, is the pul∣ling out of some flowers from the Crown, and hereby they cast maine and intricate doubts, wherewith to retard and perplex our proceedings, and to lay an ill favoured imputa∣tion upon us, as if we were regardlesse of our Gracious So∣veraign,
and these good men, the onely Battresses of his Royalty: by this they endeavour to endeare themselves to the King, for their own advance∣ment, to have him guided by their own Coun∣cels, and to take off his affection from his best, and most Loyall Subjects, Assembled in Parlia∣ment. Master Speaker, The King and his Subjects are Relatives, and we know that in Logicke; ne lato sublato tollatur Correlatum, they that disjoynt the King and his People, doe neither better nor worse but doe their utmost, to un-King him. M. Speaker, The King is the Parentthe Husband solemnly espoused at his Coronation, the head of the Republike, as it is with the natural parent, Hus∣band and Head: So it is with the publike: the naturall parent bestoweth on his Child, protecti∣on and love, with all his fruites: the Child return∣eth him filiall reverence with all due respects, and he that laboureth to breake this intercourse, by possesseing the parent with an evill opinion of the Child, is equally an enemy to both. There is a sweet eccho of conjugall affections
between the married, and he that shall go about to interrupt it, is a hater of them both, and a subverter of their Family. In the naturall body, such is the connexion be∣tween it and the Head, that a separation is destruc∣tive to both, where as otherwise, the head in the body, being the seate of the vitalls, and the brain in the Head, of the Animall Spirits, reciprocally communicating preserve the whole: Our grati∣ous Soveraigne is the common parent, Husband, and Head, if therefore there shall be any found to be as undermining Pyoners envying to disaffect our parent to us, to divorce us from this our Hus∣band to divide us from our head. My just motion is, that upon a watchfull dis∣covery, whereon I would have every mans good intent, they may receive the extremity of severity as they deserve, and if any of them shall prove member of this House, that the Furnace may be heated ten times hotter, for betraying the trust re∣posed in them, by their County that sent them hither.
A Speech spoken in the House of Com∣mons, by Sir BENIAMIN RUDYARD. M. Speaker, IN the way we are, we have gone as far as words can ca∣rie us: We have voted our own rights, and the Kings Duty: No doubt there is a Relative Duty between a King and Subjects; Obedience from a Subject to a King, Protection from a King to His People. The present unhap∣py distance between His Majesty and the Parliament, makes the whole Kingdome stand amad, in a fearfull expectation of dismall calamities to fall upon it: It deeply and consci∣onably concerns this House to compose and settle these threatning ruining distractions. M. Speaker, I am touch'd, I am pierc'd with an apprehension of the honour of the House, and successe of this Parliament. The best way to give stop to these desperate imminent mischiefs is, to make a fair way for the Kings return hither; it will likewise give best satisfaction to the people, and will be our best justifica∣tion. M. Speaker, That we may the better consider the con∣dition we are now in, let us set our selves three yeers back: If any man then could have credibly told us, that within three yeers the Queen shall be gone out of England into the Low-Countreys, for any cause whatsoever: The King shall remove from his Parliament, from London to York, decla∣ring himself not to be sfe here: That there shall be a totall Rebellion in Ireland, Such discords and distempers both in
Church and State here, as now we find; certainly we should have trembled at the thought of it: wherefore it is fit we should be sensible now we are in it. On the other side, if any man then could have credibly told us, That within three yeers ye shall have a Parliament, it would have been good Newes; That ship-money shall be taken away by an Act of Parliament, the reasons and grounds of it so rooted out, as that neither it, nor any thing like it, can ever grow up again; That Monopolies, the High-Commission Court, the Star-Chamber, the Bishops Votes shall be taken away, the Councell Table regulated and restrained, the Forrests bounded and limited; that ye shall have a trienniall Parliament; and more then that, a perpetuall Parliament, which none shall have power to dis∣solve without yout selves, we should have thought this a dream of happinesse; yet now we are in the reall possession of it, we do not enjoy it, although His Majesty hath promi∣sed and published he will make all this good to us. We stand chiefly upon further security; whereas the very having of these things, is a convenient faire security, mutually securing one another, there is more security offered, even in this last Answer of the Kings, by removing the personall Votes of Popish Lords, by the better education of Papists children, by supplying the defects of Lawes against Recusants, besides what else may be enlarged and improved by a select Com∣mittee of both Houses, named for that puapose. Wherefore Sir, let us beware we do not contend for such a hrzardous unsafe security, as may endanger the losse of what we have already; let us not thinke we have nothing, because we have not all we desire, and though we had, yet we cannot make a Mathematicall security, all humane caution is Susceptible
of corruption and failing; Gods providence will not be bound, successe must be his, he that observes the wind and rain, shall neither sow nor reape, if he can do nothing till he can secure the weather, he will have but an ill harvest. Master Speaker, It now behoves us to call up all the wis∣dome we have about us, for wee are at the very brinke of Combustion and Confusion: If blood (once more) begin to toueh blood, wee shall presently fall into a certain misery, and must attend an uncertain successe, God knowes when, and God knowes what. Every man here is bound in con∣science to employ his uttermost endeavours to prevent the effusion of bloud; blood is a crying Sinne, it pollutes a land: Let us save our Liberties and our Estates, as wee may save our Souls too. Now I have clearely delivered mine owne conscience, I leave every man freely to his. FINIS.
