G2036 E200_14 99859576 157555
Mr. Grimstone, HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT: On VVednesday the 19th of Ianuary, Vpon the Preferring of the Essex Petition, Anno Domino, 1642. VVith a desire to set the Countrey in readinesse of Arms for defence against forreine enemies. VVherein is set forth the miserable decay of Trading in Cloth. For the removing of Popish Lords from Parliament; with the searching out of Priests and Iesuites. Also for the speedy bringing the Bishops to a Triall. LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.
Mr. Grimstone His Speech in Parliament on Wednesday the 19. of Ianuary, upon the preferring of the Essex Petition, Anno 1642. Mr. SPEAKER, I Have received a Petition from the Knights and Gentry of his Maiesties County of Essex, and a Petition from the whole Burrough of Colchester in the same County, tending both to one effect, the scope and subiect therof consists of these heads: I. First, the exceeding great decay of their Trade of Cloathing especially, and also the trading of manifacture in that County, oc∣casioned by the present distractions and di∣stempers in the State.
II. Secondly, the putting of that County and the whole Kingdome in a fitting posture of warre for the desence of the same, for preven∣tion of any plot or practice in agitation either of forraigne force, or domesticke stratagem by the pubicke and private enemies thereof. III. The removing of Popish Lords and Bi∣shops from the House of Peeres. IV. The searching out and apprehension of Priests and Iesuits, which lye secretly lurking and practising mischiefe in divers places of this Kingdome. V. Lastly, the bringing to triall of those Bi∣shops, and others of their adherents, delin∣quents in this Sate, and to their deserved pu∣nishment. Mr. Speaker, under favour of this honou∣rable House, I desire to speake a word or two of these Petitions, the presenting whereof to this House is committed to my trust & care, and of these particulars of the same, which I have now recited.
I. First, concerning the decay of Trade in that County, of Cloathing: It is too manifest, that by the same, many housholds and fami∣lies are brought to poverty and utter decay. The greatest part of that County towards Colchester, and the part thereof adiacent to the Sea, having formerly had the chiefest meanes of their livelihood by that Trade, ma∣ny Websters which have in times past (be∣fore the many taxations and oppressions laid upon that Commodity of Cloath, Sayes and Bayes, by divers ill instruments of State, pry∣ing into the Art, and benefit that came there∣by to this Kingdome, raising the Customes thereof, to that excesse and height, that no∣thing could be gained by the same) imployed many poore people, whereby their charges and families were maintained, now deal little or nothing in the same, but betake themselves to other wayes of livelihood, some turning In-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, some Far∣mers, Grasiers, and the like, whereby rents of Farmes are increased by the multitude of Tenants, that hath almost beggered the most part of that County. And rhose poore men, Artificers, as Weaers, Combers, and the like, appertaining to the Trade of Cloath∣working, are brought (many of them) to beg their bread, and the rest live upon the Parishes
charge, wherein they have had their habita∣tions. II. Secondly, concerning the removing of Bi∣shops and Popish Lords from the House of Peeres, wee have found it by wofull experi∣ence more then necessary, they having beene, both publickly and privately, the onely op∣posers and hinderers of our proceedings in the great affaires wee had in hand, concerning neerly the peace and welfare both of Church and State, I need not mention their practises to effect their endeavours, they are too too manifest and apparent to all men. III. Thirdly, for searching and apprehending or Priests and Iesuites, which have been the chiefe disturbers of our peace, this Honoura∣ble House hath already taken order for the same, to which I can say no more. IV. Fourthly, the bringing to triall of those Bi∣shops accused, and all other delinquents, are the chiefest endeavours of this House, as farre as other the great affaires of State will give leave.
V. Fiftly and lastly, the setting of this King∣dome into a good posture of Warre, is of ab∣solute necessitie for the defence and securitie thereof, especially that Countie of Essex, and other Maritane Counties of ths King∣dome perceiving the malignities of Forreigne States, are alwayes watching an opportunitie to iniure, and to worke mischiefe, if it were possible, to the utter confusion, not onely of this, but the other his Maiesties King∣domes; To which purpose wee have daily in∣telligence of their practises and plots with disaffected persons, and members of this state, favouring, and taking part with any whatsoe∣ever, either Foreigne or domestique, to bring their owne intentions and malicious indea∣vours to perfection, although it be to the ru∣ine of their King and Countrey. And thus Sir, of that which I had to say concerning these Petitions, which I humbly leave to the consideration of this House, and to give such answere thereunto, as to the wis∣dome of the same shall seeme requisite. FINIS.
