H2526 E105_11 99865560 117805
The Holy Harmony: OR, A Plea for the abolishing of Organs and other Musick out of the Protestant Churches of Great Britain, and demolishing of superstitious and idolatrous Monuments. WITH A plenary Expression OF The Parliaments Piety, Cities Charity, Countreys Constancy. ECCLES. 4.11, 12. Also if two sleep together, then shall they have heat: but to one how should there be heat? And if one overcome him, two shall stand against him: and a threefold cord is not easily broken. LONDON, Printed by R. Austin, and A. Coe. 1643.
The Holy Harmonie. SOlomon the wisest of Kings did so love the peace of the Church, that he charged the daughters of Jerusalem not to awaken the Spouse of Christ untill she pleased, Cant. 8.4. and when he built the Temple of the Lord, you shall observe greater noise at the dedication then erection, for there we heard Solomons prayer, the peo∣ples submission and acclamation, 2 Chron. 7.3. but in the building of this holy pile not the noise of a ham∣mer: it is a Holy Harmony when the King and people joyn in prayer and sacrifice, for I find it no prejudice to holy David in descending to the poo∣rest, though holy expressions of his people; the Crown and Scepter is not prejudic'd in the observation of the meanest acts of devotion: the King of Niniveh prescribes not a fast to man, and beast, but himself also. Monar∣chy were miserable if it had this exemption. I find in this pious union between the King and people, a notable zeale, wherein it had been no point of treason, for the subject to have been more devout then his Soveraigne; 'tis true, the Levites were there with their in∣struments of musick, which David made to praise the Lord, which I con∣ceive he was forced to do, to comply with the people, who were but new∣ly exept from under the Judges, in which time having no King, they did e∣very man as he listed, and therefore were not fully reduc'd to civility, so that David happily suffered these plausible things, whereby to attract the peoples recourse to the Temple, nature ever aiming at somthing that may please or profit, and a holy policy is tolerated, for God grants that nation a Bill of divorce, because of the hardnesse of their hearts: but we must know, that our hearty devotions are the only musick for the house of God, Psalms and Prayers are not the heavenlier for Copes and Vestments, not the louder for wind-Instruments. Indeed I observe at the dedication of Nebuchadnezzars image, the Cornet, Trumpet, Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery,
and all instruments of Musick, Dan. 3.7. were alarums appointed as Vshers to the adoration of those living statues to a dead image, as if the eare must be rouzed before the heart, or as if mens devotions were like Bucks, Bores or Hares, not to be rouzed without hollowings, hornes, and hounds, or as if men had slept all night in a strange lodging, and were to be awakened the next morning by the Weights of the towne, with good morrow to your Worship, certainly that zeale is halfe dead the six dayes, that must have all that stirre to awaken his nap the seventh; certainly this is no holy Har∣mony. Me thinkes I affect that holy pastime, and devout derision of Eliahs used to the Priests of Baal, when he was by the convincing, and converting of Isreal, to confound them, 1. King. 18.27. Crie aloud (sayes he) for he is a God, either he taketh or pursueth his enemies, or is in his journy, or it may be that he sleepeth, and must be awaked, but this would have been one of the de∣vils sheetings, a great crie and no wooll. Lazy and sluggish devotion is cold in operation, holy duties have their life, and vigour without such secondary assistance as is borrowed from lea∣therne bellies: what needs such horrid shouts unlesse it bee to confound the sweetnes of a hymne? tis hard for the vulgar sort to know the Psalme which is cleerely lost by the Organs, and the Quire, well may they admire the art of the Musician, but not edify themselves; yet many I suppose have gon to see the praiers, but thy could not distuiguish by the sound they were so, yet was this applauded by the unholy, for the holiest harmony. The soule should appeare to God, as God to Moses, in a soft, and a still winde, the holy and sweet sighes, or silent expressions of the soul are most acceptable, Paul knew the sweetnesse of this still Musick, these heavenly breathings, and would have preferred one of them before a thousand crouds of sackbutts, this is the holy harmony. I find the ancient Romanes had a kinde of Vergers that went before their solemne processions, to proclaime silence that so there might be no distur∣bance to their devotions, for indeed me thinks it had been absurd for a peo∣ple to speak to their God who must of necessity hold his tongue, but the new Romans being emptier of zeale, have their Organs to rouze theirs least like those in a swoune they should die in a qualme of ardency; tis the organs of our selves we should imploy in that service. Poore Hanna obtained a sonne for never a word speaking. 1 Sam, 1.13. for Hanna spoke in heart, he lipps did move only, but her voice was not heard, but marke she that con∣ceived a prayer in her heart, forthwith conceives a son in her wombe, such
accesse to the heavenly throne hath the silentest prayer, they shall be fertile that are faithfull, but as if the loudest prayers were the highest, Eli tells her shee is drunke, which shee devoutly disproves, nay my Lord, &c. even like him, more impotent, and holy they are in their censures, for they think all congregations drunke whose organs they heare not: but hee that prayes to be heard of men, men shall never heare that that mans prayer is heard, but we hope to have our desires heard, granted, and our sterile wombs opened by those sound, but not sounding expressions of our foules, which is the holy harmony. Christ when he was to raise the daughter of Iairus Mat. 9. would not worke his miracle of mercy till he had excluded the minstrells (though a bedchamber be a fitter place for such a pack then the house of God) our dum∣pish soules find small solace in such society, nor can they be raised from their slumbers in sin, nor receive the benefit of Christs consolation, whilst they suffer themselves to be transported with the raving raptures of their foolish jollitie, tis thence happily we are deprived from the blessed operations of the spirit of life, wee approaching the tents of Iacob rather to heare the noise of such instruments, then the devine voice of the charmer, who spake as never man spake. Tis worth the observation that Sauls evill spirit was driven away with Davids harpe, which we know was the stillest instrument amongst the Iewes, for I conceive that not only much babbling but loud is discom∣mended, though I know that deep sorrowes, or strong sence of sin doth frequently make choice of violent, zealous, importunate and loud expres∣sions, in which case if I mistake not, was the holy Paul, when he cried out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver mee from this body of death? this is a holy harmony. Questonlesse the still devotions are deepest: which smoothly and strong∣ly run in an unfathomed channell, hasting with a strong current into the maine and uncircumscribed Ocean of Gods mercies, then the whirling and shallow streames, which publish their grumbling peace, and are dam∣med up by boys in sport. The Pharisee procliams his Plaudite, when as the poore Publican dares hardly whisper his devotions, yet makes up a more approved Harmony. I dare avouch the Primitive times sent up speaking devotions with a lit∣tle noise or pomp, their holy melodie did not swell their cheeks, but their hearts with sighes, and eyes with teares, they sought not to give that a sound which was dumbe, for they knew they praied to him that was not
deafe; for men in publique to tie themselves to musicall ayres, is to publish himselfe a uselesse fiddle that can make no musick till he be put in tune. Such anthemes as those our Saviour used over Heirusalem, to which holy harmo∣ny had they given regard, they had not felt the Romane fire. Which divine harmony is the greatest matter that hath kindled the holy Tapers of these times, who had rather offer up the incense of sweet and heavenly prayer to almighty God, knowing that the still, or sweetely smel∣ling, though silent, savour thereof, is more acceptable to him then all the bellowing of beasts sacrificed. These coares in our devotions doth the Parliament strive by all meanss to cut out, as carefull confectioners from Apples, or Peares, or the stones from fruit, that so they may preserve with the Sugar of reformation the fruit it selfe, whith else would putrifie, or like wise Chirurgions that em∣bowell that body, they intend to embalme, tis much better to part with what we can spare, and will hurt being kept, then by keeping a snuff incense the owner to remove his candlestick, this might justly be suffered by the Church, and the Church not suffer by it. I hold it as great an error in us to affect the Pompe of the Romish Church, as for them to contemne the homely, yet decent, and holy dresse of the Primitive, Christ chose a spouse that though shee was black was comely, the wife attires not her selfe but in a modest, and civill manner, when as the whore useth garish flaunting, pain∣ting, crisping, to insnare the silly beholder: whom shee blindfold leades in∣to the Chambers of death: had not the pompe and policy of Rome prevailed beyond her, shee had had as few Proselites, as Crowns, which whore, and bawd, our Parliament is wipping, and carting for her many fornications, and adulteries committed with the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.2. this is the way to produce a Holy Harmony. Those watchmen of Israel, or strongmenn about the bed of Solomon had rather our Church should be found in the seamelesse coat of Christ, then arrayed in the royall apparell of Herod, Act. 12. for they finde Christ arising from the hive of the worme in glory, and Herod made living food for the worms, so that now though I conclude not the same on our Church and theirs, who in all their blinde (though garish devotions) looke not on God, nor ascribe the excellency thereof (if any) to him, but to the visibility, and glory of their Church, and Pope, yet I say we may without sinn expect a happy resurrection of ours from the dead errors borrowed from them in which shee yet sleepeth, and also to see her layd like Sodome, a marke of divine vengeance, to encrease our Harmony, how have they already
given proofs of these pious purposes, having defaced those offensive monu∣ments stopt, and exiled by all possible means the course of her menstru∣ousnesse, and branded her with the marks of her prostitutions. This then must needs be the basis of their endeavours, for without some spirituall end no mortall men would ever involve themselves in such toyls, or strive with Atlas to ease the groaning burden of a superiour, an office not so painfull as unthankfull. I find in that Apologue of Iotham, Iudg. 9. that the Olive would not leave his fatnesse, the Fig his sweetnesse, the Vine his cheering∣nesse, to be a King. Questionlesse in that honourable Assembly there are Olives, Figs, Vines, which have declined the fat, sweet, and cheerings of their possessions and retirements, to groan under constant incumbrances, ha∣zards threatned, censures proclaimed, and ruines (without Gods infinite protection) to be expected, and all this for a Holy Harmony. I find in that place above-cited a bramble that accepts the government, which happily may be the reason that ever since there hath been such scratching about a Crowne, for there be brambles that endeavour, if not to be in the throne of Solomon, yet to be as the Lions on either side, so that their Soveraigne might neither ascend nor descend, but the beams of Majesty must of ne∣cessity reflect upon them, whose lustre is peradventure not desired for its own splendor, but for that it affords them; like the Salamander, who loves not the fire because it is hot, but in respect of the antipathy between him and the cold: so I suppose such brambles regard not the royall gems be∣longing to the Crown, because they are as fixed stars, and cannot be dis∣joynted from the regall possessour, they dearly adore those the Prince may spate ro gild their blackberries, or if you will have it plainer, they affect not the religious acts of a Prince (which are the true imperiall gems) but cherish any vice that may feed their luxury or avarice: these be the kind Ravilliacs of a Prince, and brambles in a Throne. The pious and insuppor∣table care the Houses undergo to produce this Harmony is inexpressible; what depths of unknown troubles wade they thorow? At Sea they stand at the helm by turns, because the labour is great, and only thought to be the businesse of one watch, but in this task of theirs every man is at the helm, the whole voyage being sothered indissolubly, all mens labours are one, and ones is every mans, every Member being both the alarum that strikes, and the wheeles also by which the alarum doth strike. Argos is fained to have an hundred eyes, and him Iuno set to watch Io from Iupiters imbraces, which he did, giving his eyes rest by turns, but these cannot doe so, for one motion keepes them all waking, let who that likes unmantle this fiction by a farther application.
Now all these bees doe extreamly labour to fetch in the hony on their laded thighes from all parts of the kingdome, into the hive of the Church, and common wealth, out of which to make one cake of pure wax of which may be made a blessed, and divine light, to guide us to a holy and heavenly Harmony. In which Act as good as great, this Citty hath not spared any encouragements that would possibly be given, whose helps to this Cause is not unworthy the name of Charity, though it may properly be stiled a mag∣nificent supportment; yet where the greatest workes of God doe require (though not want) the helpes of men, they are termed charitable workes. In the cause of a distressed Mother the aid of a son may come within the lists of Charity, though it be a duty injoyned by Nature; thus then the sustaining of our mother the Church in her infirmities, not only by seeking such remedies as may recover her health, and also reward the Doctor for prescriptive receipts, and the Apothecaries bills, I meane the cheif reducers and their agents; this you do, and this Harmony you have endeavored to ad∣vance, being as zealous, and largely free, as the heavens in showres, the Sun order, the sea in flouds; where shall I begin my wonder, is it at your Hospi∣talls the stately nurseries of infirm and diseased bodies, or those of crazed mindes, or looke upon the education of your infantry to breed up the good, or house of correction to castigate the ill, upon your free Almes to each Company belonging, your encouragements to deserving female servants, your large allowances to heavenly Dispensers, your daily nourishments or shall I now name a Charity out-stripping the vaunts of Rome, such a one that the sun may stand amazed almost to behold, Posterity would be start∣led to sum up the last great, spacious unpatternd, and vast charity, to the Irish Pilgrimes, these were your brethren in Christ: so that now I am a∣mazed at a greater disbursment; association, or what I may call it, a filiall, er∣sonall, generall assistance of your languishing Mother whose glorious raggs you have striven to take off, whose holy homely ornaments you have like Solomons Temple endeavoured to garnish not onely with your gold, but bloud, which holy harmony, as Paul speaks of that he heard, no tongue can expresse, nor few of your own hearts can conceive. This great unexampled act makes you more famous then all your holy edifices, stately granaries, pompous edifices, by which you shall live in a record beyond the applause of Speed, or any mortall Chronologer or Historian. Rome quakes more now at the name of London, then once at Carthage, in whose wals noble Essex shalbe held as terrible as their Hanniball, no Hannonian faction shalbe
able to put a jarre in your Musick, nor no Scipio survive to triumph in y spoyles, whilst your dagger (the Cities arms) wounds yours and Gods op∣posers, and you enjoy that liberty which Paul made his dignity, being  from all the Maligners of your prosperity: the twelve Companies, like the twelve Tribes, attending the Ark of the Almighty shall rear up their Stan∣dards and lead you thorugh the wildernes, by the conquest of the Canantish. Confederates, till you arrive in the land of Promise where you shall finde what I treat of, a Holy Harmony. Now behold the strength of a zealous association, like that holy oyle  Aarons head, that came down to his garments; tis not the Heads of the king∣dome now assembled, that give care to this heavenly melody, nor the shoul∣ders, which is the Metropolis, but the skirts of the garments, the zealous countries, though not so wealthy in abilities, yet have the same garlands to wreath about their heads. Harfordshire, Essex, and Cambridgeshire, have furnisht up an Army able to reduce Ireland, who have sent in 20000 able, wealthy, well armed, trained men, all of the army of the Lord of Hosts to fight this (nay his bat∣tell) who mett at their randevous in Cambridge, and Bishop-Stratford, on Saturday last, where observe how ready the people of God are to obey his summons for upon Thursday the first of this Iune at the Faire at Bishop-Stratford: no sooner had some of his Excellencies trump summoned their ap∣pearance, but suddainly every man was in readnesse, forsaking their wives with as great joy as first they met them, every man putting two moneths pay in his pocket, and have marched with a noble resolution to procure to us a Harmony heere which shal be a preparation to that Harmony the Angels make at the throne of the Lamb, to whom be glory now, and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
