H3578 e112_24 R19132 99860582 112705
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE SCOTTISH, And many others the Inhabitants of the Province of Ulster, in the Kingdome of Ireland. To the Right Reverend and Right Ho∣norable the Moderator, and remnant Members of the Generall Assembly of SCOTLAND, Conveened at S. Andrews in July. 1642. printer's device or ornament (cf. McKerrow 379) LONDON, Aug. 17. Printed for John Bartlet. 1642.
To the Right Reverend & Right Honorable the Moderator and remnant Members of the general Assembly of Scotland, conveened at S. Andrews, in July, 1642. The humble Petition, &c. Humbly sheweth, THat whereas your Petitioners by the great blessings of the Lord enjoyed for a little while a fruitfull and peaceable Ministery of the Gospel, yet through our owne abuse of so rich a mercy, and through the Tyrannie of the Prelates, we have been for a long time spoiled of our Ministers (a yoak to many of us heavier then death) who being chased into Scotland, were not altogether unusefull in the day of need; and we having beene since oppressed and scattered as sheep, who have no Shepherd, now at last the wise and righteous hand of the Lord, by the sword of the Rebels, hath berest us of our friends, spoiled us of our goods, and left us but a few, and that a poore handfull of many, and hath chased from us even the rest that were called our Ministers, the greatest part whereof we
could scarce esteeme such, as being rather Officers to put the Prelates injunctions in execution, then feeders of our soules: So that now being already visited with sword and sicknesse, and under some ap∣prehension of famine, if withall we shall taste of the sorest of all plagues, to be altogether deprived of the Ministery of the Word, we shall become in so much a worse condition then any Pagans, as that once we enjoyed a better. Neither know we what hand to turn to for help, but to the Land, so far ob∣liged by the Lords late rare mercies, and so far en∣riched to furn sh help of that kind; a land whence many of us draw our bloud and breath, and where (pardon the necessary boldnesse to say our own Mi∣nisters now are, who were so violently pluckt from us, so sore against their owne and our wills; yea the Land that so tenderly in their bosomes received our, poore out casts, and that hath already sent us so rich a supply of able and prosperous iers to re∣venge our wrongs. THerefore although we know that your zeal and brotherly affection would urge you to take notice of our condition without our adver∣tisement; yet give us leave in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to entreat, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercy, that now in the nick of time, when the sword of the enemie making way for a more profitable entertaining the Gospel, having also banished the Prelates and
their followers, when our extremity of our di∣stresse, and the faire hopes of a speedy setling of Peace, hath opened so faire a doore to the Go∣spel, you would take the cause of your younger sister (that hath no breasts) to your serious consi∣deration, and pity poore Macedonians crying to you, that you would come over and help us, being the servants of the God of your Fathers, and clai∣ming interest with you in a common Covenant, that according the good hand of God upon us, you may send us Ministers for the house of our God. We doe not take upon us to prescribe the way or the number, but in the view of all, the sin∣ger of the Lord points at these: who though the persecution of the Prelates drave from us, yet our interest in them could not bee taken away, wherein we trust, in regard of several of them cal∣led home by death, your bounty will super-adde some of your owne that are able men, that may helpe to lay the foundation of Gods house accor∣ding to the patterne. But for these so unjustly reft from us, not onely our necessity, but equity pleads, that either you would presently send them all over, which were a worke to be paralleld to the gloryes of the Primitive times, or at least that you would declare them transportable, that when invitations shall be sent unto any of them, where∣in they may discerne a calling from God, there may be no difficulty in their loosing from thence, but they may come back to perfect what they begun, and may get praise and same in the land
where they were put to shame. Neither are you to question your power over us so to doe, or crave a presidence of your own practice in that kind, for our extraordinary need calling on you, furnishes you with power to make this a president for the like cases thereafter. Herein if you shall lay aside the particular concernment of some few places, which you may easily out of your rich nurseries plant againe, and make use of your publique spi∣rits, which are not spent, but increased by your so many former noble designes, you shall leave up∣on us and our posterity the stamp of an obligation that cannot be deleate, that cannot be expressed. You shall send to all the neighbouring Churches a patterne, and erect for after-ages a monument of selfe-denying, tender zeale, that shall dis∣burden that land of the many out-casts who will follow over their Ministers, and you shall make it appeare that the churlish bounty of the Prelates, which at first cast some of these over unto us, is not comparable with the cheerfull liberality of a rightly constitute generall Assembly, to whom we are perswaded the Lord will give seed for the loane which you bestow on the Lord: Yea the day may come when a generall Assembly in this Land may returne to you the first fruits of thanks for the plants of your free gift. And although you were scant of furniture of this kind your selves, or might apprehend more need then formerly, yet doubtlesse your bowels of compassion would make your deepe poverty,
even as in a great tryall of affliction, abound to the riches of your Liberality. But now seeing you a∣bound in all things, and have formerly given so  a proofe of your large bestowing on  abroad in Germany, and France, know∣  you are not weary in well-doing, we con∣ promise to our selves, in your names, that  bound in this grace also; following the  of our Lord and the Primitive Churches,  sent out Disciples in payrs; but if here∣  shall faile us, we shall not know whe∣  that we had dyed with our brethren by  ies hand, for we shall bee as if it were said unto us, Go serve other Gods; yet looking for a∣nother kind of Answer at your hands, for in this you are to us as an Angell of God, who have sent these berers our brethren, who may more par∣ticularly enforme you of our cause and desires, that at their returne they may refresh the bowels of Your most instant and earnest Supplicants. FINIS.
