J589 E467_31 99864722 162320
THE DECLARATION OF David Jenkins Late prisoner in the Tower of London; concerning the Par∣liaments Army, and the Lawes and Liberties of the People of ENGLAND. With the Copy of his Letter sent from VVallingford Ca∣stle, to his Dread Soveraign the KING; and his Advice and Directions touching the Treaty. Subscribed, DAVID JENKINS. portrait of David Jenkins Printed in the Yeer, 1648.
JUDGE JENKINS DECLARATION Concerning The Parliaments Army, and the Lawes and Liberty of the People. VVHereas the Army (under the Com∣mand of the Lord General Fairfax) have and do still indeavour the exe∣cuting and bringing to tryall the Capitall Offenders of these Times, and to execute and inflict exemplary and condign punishment upon those who have acted con∣trary to the fundamentall laws of this Kingdom, whom
they account to be the great and sole enemies to peace and truth, and the only Caterpillars which casts the unsavoury mist to eclipse the brightnesse and splendor of the true consonant VVord of God; therefore, to re∣move those who are the most prevalent, and by their poysonous Pills, and painted papers, infects the hearts of divers well affected in and about the City of Lon∣don; it was thought requisite, by the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, to remove Judge Jin∣kins the Oracle of his time, in esteem with many in Lon∣don) from Neugate to Wallingford Castle, and having a Convoy from the City to conduct him thither, on Sunday last he was met by a party of horse from the Army at Vxbridge, who desiring a conference with some of the Commanders, it was assented to, where he declared, That he had alwayes a good opinion of the Ar∣my, and (notwithstanding his opposing the power and Ordinances of Parliament, and the insufferable and long imprisonment inflicted upon his weak and frail body) were resolved to sacrifice his life for the Lawes of the Land, the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and the liberties of the people of England; saying, that he would submit to any thing that should be concluded by the King and Parliament, but would dye with the Laws, rather then act against them, before they be repealed, but then he would submit to any. So soon as he had declared his Sense and Resolution touching the Army, the fundamentall Lawes of the Land, the Government of the Church of England, the Power and Prerogative of his Prince, and the common Rights, Freedom, and Liberties of the people; A Co∣lonell then present, asked him, whether he thought the
King might do what he will; he said, yes, with the con∣sent of his Judges and Ministers: it being objected, what if they be corrupted; he answered, they must be o∣beyed, and so the Conference ended; which being done, on Sunday in the afternoon he was conducted from Vxbridge to VVallingford, by a Troop of horse belong∣ing to the Army. Omnia jura sunt in manu Regis, Ezr. 7.26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Con∣fiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. EZra concludes with blessing, that the Kings heart was for God, v. 27. and mercy to him from the Au∣thor; and so many instruments, as the King, his Councel∣lors, and Princes, v. 28. The King received a government from his Ancestors, such as the Nation were never un∣der before, and of all forms it came next to the divine pattern, for God himself rules by seven Spirits which are before his Throne, Rev. 1.4. & 4.5. called 7 Eyes, Zec. 4.10. not to inform the Almighty, but to be his Witnesses, and wise workers of all his Councels: this was derived to his people, who shewed him his name in Gods Book, with his great Office to be Gods Shephard, which caused great admiration, And Artaxerxs with his 7 Councellors following the steps of Cyrus, hono∣red the God of heaven more then any hod done before them, being Pagans: So happy is it for Kings to learn from God, and to have is Law go before theirs, and when there is such a conjunction, Judgment is seaso∣nable upon all Offenders.
His Maiesties Proposals touching Church-Government, to the Parliaments Commissioners. 1. His Majesty said, He had been bred and instructed in the way He stands for, and that by his Father, the wi∣sest King, and best man in the world; therefore could not easily yeeld, nr must it be wondred if He did not. The Ministers answer for satisfaction, the course was held: and desired he declared his scruples. His Majesty replyed, He had yeelded far, having de∣nied nothing but the sale of Bishops Lands, and desired them to speak whether his answer was not good to the Com∣missioners to that part, offering a Copy to Mr. Marshall, but he refused it as not having power, nor was it, said he, fit they judge in such things. When the King could nor get it received, he said, Is it so hot that you fear to burn your fingers. Then his Majesty declared the three scruples, which the Commissioners desired to see before the Ministers had them. The last, which was the Coronation Oath, because de∣pending upon the Law, was judged improper for them to resolve: the other two Mr. Marshall received, and desiring to withdraw, the King consented; after they return'd, Mr. Marshall, M. Vines, and M. Seaman spake: His Maiesty desired it in writing, which they were wil∣ling, if the Commissioners thought fit: they treated a∣bout the Oath at Coronation, and the Ministers were Tuesday to bring their answer, which was done. The Kings Bishops and other Clergy, and the Ministers of Parliament being present, Mr. Vines read it, His Maie∣sty desired it, promising to prepare an answer; as to the sale of Bishops Lands as Sacriledge: the Commis. told
his Mai. that thing lay so much in the Laws of the Land, that the Ministers could not judge of it; at last his Mai. appeared inclinable, but said, That if they were aliena∣ted, then they did revert to the Crown. On Thursday the King and the Com. debated about the Directory, and ta∣king away the Liturgy, but nothing concluded of. The King in this debate asked, what fault they found in the Common prayer Book, one one of the Commis. answered, He had heard it was the saying of a very learned man, that the Liturgy was taken out of the Masse Book only spoiled in the translation: Who was that, said his Maiesty? It was replied, It was your Father King James: His Ma∣jesty said, If it were good in it self, that did not make it ill: the King hath since made offer of a limited Episco∣pacy. Newport, 13. October, 1648. Other letters from the Commis. on Wednesday last, and read in both Houses say, That the King grants the mi∣litia as is desired, that is for 20 yeers to be in the Parl. and after if occasion be of using the sword, in case the Parl. see cause, the King refusing, the Parl. may make war, and to suppresse any forraign Forces who shall invad, or indeavour to invade the kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, and the town of Barwick upon Tweed or any of them. As for the Church which was before it in order, the King still refuses, and offers Episcopacy; and for the Bishops Lands, he will not consent to any other, then a Lease for 99 yeers: they are now upon the 4 Bill tou∣ching Ireland: the House voted, that the answer to the Church proposition is not satisfactory, and ordered their
Commissioners to presse it to the King again, so soon as the Bill of Ireland is over. By an Expresse from Wallingford it is said, That the aforesaid Judge Jenkins hath sent a Letter to the King, (but intercepted) humbly beseeching his Majesty, to salve up the Sores of this Kingdom, in this present per∣sonall Treaty, and to embrace the opportunity now on foot, and to play his Cards so, that he may ingratiate himself into the City and Parliament, by offering to come to Westminster to treat, desiring him to court the Lord Generall Fairfax, Lieutenant Generall Crom∣well, the Commissioners, and others of the Army, by messages from himself, for the effecting thereof; as also to send Proposals to the Army, and to promise them large gratuities to be instrumentall therein. This Letter is (said to be) directed from VVallingford Ca∣stle, Octob. 12. and Subscribed, D. JENKINS. FINIS.
