J955 e109_4 99873032 125479
GOOD NEWES FROM IRELAND: From these severall Places. NAMELY, Kimsale, Bandum, Clarakelty; with the valarous resolution of Captain Weldam. ALSO The taking and burning of the Towne of Temo League, wherein was destroyed 1000. Barrel of Corne of the Enemies. Expressed in a Letter sent from Ensigne IONES to his Brother Master Alexander Polington in Lumberstreet, London. London printed for Robort Howes and Thomas Bates, are to be sold in the Old Bailey, 1642. August the 4.
Good Newes from IRELAND. THe 28. of June we set sail from Deal, the 29. and 30. we had along the Channel most miserable weather, & were of severall Ships of our severall designes 70. saile; by contra∣ry windes, our fleet was forced into Mount Bay in Cornwall the first of July, and the 2. of the same we set saile from thence towards Ireland, but through a crewel mist, and stresse of winde, we were almost brought upon the Rocks of Sille, and was within a stones throw upon them (with a full saile) ere we perceived them, and that by one man was spied also, this was at two of the clock in the morning, when every man (but the watch appointed) was asleep, the report of two Guns which were shot by us to warn the rest of our fleet, wakened us sleepers, then did we perceive how great a danger God delivered us from; upon the fourth of the same, we made two saile of Ships, and bore up to them, and found one a Flemming, the other a Bristow-man, both laden with salt from Rochell, who told us that at Rochell was an Irish ves∣sell of some 50. Tun, laden with Amonition, who as they thought onely stayed till all the English, and the Dutch were gone from thence, and they then would venture
forth  that there were two small men of war Irishmen, that were upon buying up the French and Spanish prize, some eight peeces of Ordnance, and so take what English tey could, that might be to weak for them; and so ei∣ther that they may furnish themselves, or by that disfur∣  both which will be but little God knowes. The  of July we got into Kimsaile, though in most mi∣ weather, where we had the knowledg of my Lord rsident of Munsters death, and some things suspected, to have had foule play form his Physitian his son: The  Inquin hath had a great conquest, for with a few men he kild, 500. Rebells, tooke 6. Cullers, 4. Drumes; the Rebells five severall wayes undermined Limbrick-Call, and at last were Masters of it, now that the Town and Casstle is theirs as yet, our two longstay, lost it; for they kept it till Midsomer. I hope we shall go upon some designe suddenly, that will conduce much to out prosit, and honour; the rebells lost seven score Armes, the other day to my Lord of Insiquen, and their want of that, was more losse to them by report, then three thousand men, so few they have of Armes. I question to Gods blessings in our Conquest: they call us the Parliaments Rebels, and say they would once faine see a prest man come over. I have not else at present any thing worth your observation. Friday the 16. of Iuly, we marched from Kimsaile to Bandum with nine Colours, two of which were all Sea∣me, sever of Land-men, and all, some seven hundred; from Kimfaile to Bandum seven miles, which shewed their joy in meeting us and complelating guarding us into the Towne, whom we saluted both by displaying Co∣lours,
and also a full valley shot: wel billeted we were, we had on the Saturday following two Companies of Foot of these Bandum men, and some sixty Horse with many others, which they called and we found Pillagers, who onely mindes in all Actions their game, but conside∣red not our losse. From Bandum wee marched with these aforesaid to Clnna-kellie, and sound in the towne not above twenty men, women and children, which our troopers killed all and ranged about, and found some hundred more hid in gardens, and killed all; there might you have seen every sex discovered, and some lying on their backs, old, young, none spared: at some sights I could have pittied, but con∣sider that pity spoyles a City; I durst not cherish that charity. From Clannakelltie on the sunday forenoone we marched to relieve Raple Barley-Castle, some three miles from thence, where one Master Freake lives in much distresse for want of helpe, we found him yet wel: but I should have told you moreover that our Lievtenant Colonell Lord Fuerbrush in our march from Clannokelte to the Castle, considered the booty we had taken, which was some eighteene hundred sheepe, some two hundred Oxen and Cowes, and some fifty Horse; he thought good to send three Companies back from us, to guard them at the Towne; they went, and the Enemies had notice of it, and by three Scouts had notice of their strength, and came upon them; one of our Captaines was somewhat refractory, and would not hear of retreat∣ing to any place of succour; valour, but not discretion, was cut off Lievtenant and Ensigne, with some forty more, but did sight very valiantly to the last, and his
Ensigne with some Souldiers in the one part of the town retreated into a house, and suffered himselfe and Colours to burne, and armes also, rather then the Rebels should have them: the Captaines name was Weldon, his Ensigne one Bridges, my Lord Furbrush his Secretary also. Some six of the Bandum men were killed besides, and some foure of Captame Price his Company, which was one of the three; but of the Rebels was killed some six or seven hundred men, and many more would, if they were not so base an Enemy to run away; for after we had sent these three Companies back from us to the Towne to guard the Castle, while we went to relieve the Castle, never came to us (the Major Patys) to let us know that the Enemy was neere our three Companies; we left some aid with them in the Castle, and marched back to the Enemy, in great hope they would have stood one onset, but they basely fled, though six nay seven times our number; which I beleeve was well neere foure thou∣sand men: we also fast pursued them with our Troope that they imbraced death to shut it; for one hundred Rebels leapt into the water, hoping to scape, but our Horsemen so eagerly followed them, that they in the water killed most, and one of our Troopers was in the exploit drowned, not giving his horse way enough. That night, we marched back some miles beyond the Town (where we lost our men) and lodged in a fair field, the enemie I think being fled far enough from us. To Bandum on Munday at night, ws came and stayed all Tuesday there, and that day drove all the Cattle, which was some 2000. into the Town, and let whose will take
what he could get; for our Souliers and the Townsmen, were so unruly that they would not have patience to stay till they were parted equally. Wednesday the 20. we marched to Kilbrittan-Castle, now in possession of the English, and quartered there all night, and the next day we marched some three miles beyond it, to Temoleague-Castle, and sounded a Peale to the Lady of it; offered quarter, but refused, we presently fell upon it, and with our small field peeces, broke down the first wall, entred in the first gate, where they payed us with great stones, kild some 8. men, and when all was done, we could not take it, for our field peeces were to small to batter down the Castle about their eares, which I hope we shall ere long; for we shall march thither againe one of these dayes better provided: We burnt all the Towne, and their great Abbey, in which was some thousand barrels of corne: wee expected the Enemy would have come and set upon us there, but he did not. He is treacherous and cruell in advantage, but base in flight. If the other Army were come, I beleeve we might march through the Kingdome: on Friday we marched back to Kinsaile to our Ships, and tooke two Spies by the way, but the roagues slight death, for we could get nothing out of them; so our men mangled them to pieces. And received here the 29. of July 1642. from Isaac Jones, brother in Law to Alex. Pallington. FINIS.
