l2168 e288_12 99860901 113028
The Reasons of Lieu Col. Lilbournes sending his Letter to Mr. Prin, humbly pre∣sented to the Honorable Committee of Examinations. Making my appearance (upon Summons) before this Honorable Committee, To Answer, to the Com∣plaint of Mr. Prin, for publishing in Print a Letter which I had sent unto him. And having upon demand, acknowledged the publishing thereof, I humbly intreated that I might have the favour, to render the Reasons of my so doing: which you were pleased to grant, and to injoyn me to bring them in writing; For which I esteeme my self farther obliged unto this Honorable Committee. Unto whose grave Considerations I humbly present my said Reasons as followeth. Wherein I humbly intreat I may not appear arrogant or vain-glorious, though I enlarge my self in Relation of my own condition and actions, it being a necessitie enfor∣ced upon me by my accuser Mr. Prinne. MAy it please You then to remember, and seriously to consider, the manifold afflictions I suffered for many yeers under the tyrannicall power of the Bishops, and Star Chamber: having for defence of the common and just Free∣dome of this Nation, in opposition to the Oath Ex Officio, and
other exorbitances in things civill and religious; suffered a most cruell and reproachfull sentence, and had at least 200 stripes: and after that a most noysome and painfull close imprisonment, and ten weeks lying in Irons; being in continuall and reall danger of my life by attempts of secret poyson, open violence, and famish∣ing, to the extreme impairing of my health long after my deli∣verance. That this Parliament (the hope of the oppressed) no sooner sate, but as being most sensible of grievances of that nature, they made it their principall work (as most acceptable unto God) to deliver the Captives, and to set the oppressed free, especially those that had been oppressed for Conscience sake: Amongst whom (which I shall never forget) this Honorable Parliament were plea∣sed to take me into their first and most compassionate thoughts; and delivered me out of all my troubles. And as this their tender compassion wrought in all sorts of conscientious people a thankfull acknowledgement of their piety and goodnesse towards tender consciences, so more especially in me as I was a more large partaker of their immediate good∣nesse; insomuch that I with thousands more were instantly ready on all occasions to adventure our lives in defence of so just, and pious an Authority: which we frequently and successefully testi∣fied at Westminster in the most dangerous and doubtfull times, to the terror of their enemies. Nor did our affections or gratitude coole within us; but as the necessities of the Parliament increased, and the malice of their enemies introducing new; we forsook all that was dear unto us, and voluntarily betook our selves to Arms in their just defence. And first at Kienton Field gave proof of our Constancie and Reso∣lution: Secondly, at Brainsford, where for 5 or 6 houres such a fight was maintained with a handfull of men against the Kings Army, as gave check to their fury, and time to further provision, and made way to a faire and great opportunity for the Parlia∣ments party, as hath been seen since the warre. In which action many precious friends lost their lives; and wherein it was my lot to be taken prisoner: in which condition I suffered so many re∣proachfull scoffs from both great and small in that Army, the in∣solencies,
inhumane revilings, and unheard usages that villany could invent, and malice inflict, untill I was brought to Oxford: where after I had, through the assistance of God, withstood the temptations of 4 Lords making the largest offers of profit and ho∣nour, if I would forsake the Parliaments service, and serve the King: I was instantly thrown into Irons, threatned with death; and arraigned before Judge Heath in a most reproachfull and irk∣some manner (in all which I blesse God I stood firm and unshaken in my faith, and thankfulnesse to the HonorableAlthough I lost by my ly∣ing in prison 6 or 700 l. in my estate that I left at Lon∣don. Parliament) expecting no other then a shamefull death: And then also was not the Parliament unmindfull of me their Servant and Souldier; but made an Order in my behalf that restrained the malice of their proceeding towards me, and exchanged me I most thankfully ac∣knowledge upon odds; and in my return I received a large supply and reall encouragement from my Honored Lord Generall Essex. All which endeared me still farther to do them the best service I was able; whereupon I engaged my self under the Right Hono∣rable my Lord of Manchester in his Northern expeditions; where∣in, what service so performed in taking of Sir Fra. Wortleys Garri∣son, and Tickell Castle, as also how I succoured my wounded Souldiers, being wounded my self; and my self disbursed almost 30 l. to cure them, when we had neither Chirurgion nor money from the State: and how I have behaved my self all along in that warre I wish might be testified by my most worthy Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, who was a daily witnesse of my actionsFor which Service there is about 600 l. owing me.. And when opportunity gave leave I resolved to visit my friends at Westminster and London, expecting a joyfull and cheerfull entertainment, and good acceptation both of my selfe and all other the like conscientious persons; as being well assured that neither I nor they had ever shamed our selves either by treache∣ry, covetousnesse, plundering or mutiny, &c. But to my excee∣ding grief and astonishment, I found a very sad and frowning countenance from most of those that formerly had had us in great and good esteeme; I found all sorts of conscientious people, ex∣cepting one sort onely, altogether discountenanced and discou∣raged; and as towards others, so also towards my self: the City being fill'd with daily relations of strange and very hard usage
towards them in all quarters; as that some upon pretence of law had been violently carried before Magistrates for not hearing Common Prayer, and though known to be neither Papists nor Malignants, have been sent to prisons and common Jayls, Baile being refused many, accesse of friends denyed, also the benefit of writing, kept amongst theeves and murtherers; not plancks to lye upon, nor food allowed; wives, children, and families perish∣ing by such occasions. The like hard usage for meeting together in private houses to worship God: Some have been Indicted and adjudged to be banished, or not obeying to be hanged to death, upon Statutes made in the Prelaticall times of ignorance, super∣stition, and persecution; which was hoped would have abolish∣ed with the Bishops. That others had been as hardly dealt withall upon pretence of Authority of Parliament, as violently surprised and affright∣ed, many dragged before Officers and Magistrates, and thence hurried to prison, and used as aforesaid: others set in the stocks, excluded garrison Towns, thrust from their habitations, threat∣ned with banishment out of Counties, examined Ex Officio against themselves and dearest friends, and imprisoned for refusing to answer. That the Covenant was as earnestly prest upon tender consci∣ences, though their faithfulnesse were no whit doubtfull, as upon Neutrals and Malignants, and refusing because of some expres∣sions, put from offices of trust and publick imployments. That rude ignorant people frequently took boldnesse to break and spoil their houses, threatning to fire them, and to stone the people to death; that some had been beaten and sore bruised; one had been killed in the place where he was worshipping God: and many women so abused as they miscarried of their children; All which usages so full of hazard and mischief to good men, can be testified by witnesses. These and the like Discourses, may it please this Honorable Committee, being the hourely complaints of a faithfull religious people, ever deare and pretious to my affections, for their un∣fained zeale to God, and sinceritie to the Parliament, made very sad and deepe impressions upon my spirit: so as considering with
my selfe whence so great evils should againe arise (the Bi∣shops, High Commission, and Starre-Chamber being all sup∣pressed) the Parliament having ever shewed good respect to∣wards them, as having had their reall and cordiall assistance in the most doubtfull times: I concluded within my self, that they were the issues of sundrie invective and provoking lan∣guage divulged both from the Pulpit and Presse. Wherein I found none to exceed or to come neer unto my old fellow-suf∣ferer Mr. Prinne, from whom I least expected such bitter ex∣pressions, yea so bitter, that truly when I considered them, and rightly apprehended the dangers thereof, I was so farre from wondering, at the miserable sufferings of consciencious peo∣ple, that I rather wondred that any of us walked the streets in safetie. For though the power of God force him to confesse in the first page of his Epistle to the Parliament, in his book entituled, Truth triumphing over Falshood, that we, for the most part are really cordiall in our affections, actions to the Parliament and Church of England (for which, and for our pietie we are (as he saith) to be highly honoured) yet immediately after he en∣deavours to make us, our actions and tenents to be destructive to the very fundamentall power and being of Parliaments, and as bad or worse then the Popish Gunpowder-plot to blow up the Authority of this high Court, in all succeeding ages. Being confident (as he saith) that no age, nor History can ever para∣lell us in the least measure, the very malignant Prelates and Anti-parliamentary Cavaliers being not so bad as we. And a little after saith, that we contemne and despight Authoritie and all humane power whatsoever. And in his Epistle to the Reader, page the second, he saith, that we are destructive to all Christian and humane societies, and bring in meere confusion and flat Atheisme amongst the people. And a little after saith, that we dissolve all relations, subordinations, and humane so∣cietie it selfe, being as bad as the Popish Monks, Hermites, An∣chorites, Nunnes, and Jesuites, with infinite other most despe∣rate, monstrous, provoking, unjust, and unsufferable expressi∣ons which all his books are filled full of. In all which there ap∣peared to my understanding so unchristian a spirit, and tend∣ing
so much to the prejudice and utter destruction of a most faithfull, precious, godly people; and being consciencious of my own integritie and uprightnesse, and also of all the rest of my friends that are as Souldiers in your service, being pressed above measure in my very conscience by all the premised rea∣sons and motives, I could do no lesse then what I did, both in duty towards God, in love to my (poore, afflicted, despised, yet innocent) brethren, and to my native Countrey, then endea∣vour to take off those vile, inhumane, unsufferable scandals he laboured to cast upon us, tending so much to our utter ruine and destruction, and the damage of the Parliament and King∣dome. Also I was moved to write my Letter to Mr. Prinne, not one∣ly because of his bitter, invective, slanderous language; but be∣cause he not onely endeavours to insence the Parliament and people of England against my selfe, and all such as I am in the Army and elsewhere, but likewise eagerly presseth them to de∣stroy us, and cut us off. Epistle to the Parliament, page 5, and at the conclusion of his book entituled, Independency examined, &c. there he presseth the cutting us of y the Sword: yea, and in the conclusion of his Full Reply, he presseth the Parliament upon pain of contracting the guilt of highest perjury to execute wrath and vengeance upon us, by meanes of all which he be∣came, as I conceived, guilty of being an Incendiary betwixt the Parliament and their faithfull friends and Servants; which actions and practises of his tended to no better end but to the utmost of his abilitie, at least to make us to be sleighted and contemned (of those that formerly had honoured us, and gi∣ven us no small cause to love and honour them) that we a faithfull, conscientious, and considerable party in the Army and Kingdome might be dis-ingaged; which endeavour of his to cause them to lay down their Armes, I conceived would be an advantage to none but the common Enemy, but a great disadvantage and losse to the Parliament and Common∣wealth. The serious consideration of which, exceedingly pressed me out of that reall love I beare to my Countrey, in a few
lines to Mr. Prinne, to discover unto him his unworthy and un∣charitable dealing towards those he falsly calumniateth; and the great dis-service his bloody lines is likely to do to the whole Kingdome in generall. In dividing the affections of those that formerly were one, till such bitter dividing spirits as his kindled a blazing fire of discord and dissension amongst us. Now I appeal to every true hearted Englishmen that desires a speedie end of these warres, of what evill consequence it would be to the Parliament and Kingdome, to have so faith∣full and considerable a party as Mr. Prinne calumniateth, and reproacheth as bad if not worse then ever the Bishop of Canter∣bury did, should be causlesly cut off with the Sword, or be dis-ingaged by his meanes (especially seeing the Kingdomes ne∣cessities is such that they stand in need of the help of forrainers) of all which people whom he reproacheth as Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, I am confident he is not able to tax any one of them with unfaithfulnesse to the Parliament, nor with cowardlinesse, or any other basenesse in the Service. And for my part I professe, I know not one of that generation in England that ever drew his Sword one houre for the King or his party against the Parliament and theirs: and if Mr. Prinne know any, I desire him to declare it. Now most Noble and worthy Senators, is it not a sad thing that it should be a crime in that man who being sensible of these bloody, unchristian and dividing practises in Mr. Prinne, us'd meanes to inform him thereof, and endeavoured by a free debate with him (which I offered him in my letter) to convince and reclaim him from making further progresse in incensing Magistracy against those that are faithfull and successefull in∣struments of their preservation, to leave the publick Service as in the prelaticall time for oppression of conscience, in so much as I could not forbear. These are the Reasons which mov'd me to send my Letter to Mr. Prinne, which I humbly offer and submit to the grave Judgement of this Honorable Committee, being resolved that no provocations from any man shall slack my wonted faithful∣nesse to my distressed Countrey.
Besides the foresaid afflictions of the poore Saints, others in∣crease daily; as that of Mr. Knowles, who being lately at a meeting with a company of Christians, and being preaching the Word of God, had divers Bullets shot at him out of a Crosse-bowe, of purpose to slay him: the party is since apprehended. John Lilburne Lieut. Coll. Printed 13. June. 1645. Acts 13.8. & 16.19, 20, 21, 22. & 17.5, 6, 7. & 19.23, 24, 25. & 21.27, 28. But the Jews which beleeved not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the City on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people. And when they found them not, they drew Jason, and certain brethren unto the Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also, whom Jason hath received, and these do all contrary to the Decree of Cesar, say∣ing, that there is another King, one Jesus. Act. 28.22. But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. FINIS.
