L2383 669.f.16[31] 99870133 163187
A List of all the Victories, and successefull Atchievements of the Parlia∣ments Fleet, under the Command of Col. Popham (lately deceased) Col. Blake, and Col. Deane, Admiralls and Generalls of the Fleet, from the time they were impowred, which was 28 Feb. 1650. to this present. 1 THe Sancta Maria, a Sugar Prize 2 The Crown a fly-boat of Haver∣degrace in France, burthen 400. Tuns, 22 Guns, part laden with Corne. 3 A Galiot of Amsterdam laden with Corne at the Terceras. 4 The Saltheap burden 400 Tunnes richly laden from Genoa bound in for Lisbone. 5 The Armes of Amsterdam laden by a French man whom we tooke in her, comming out of Lisbone. 6 The Caesar of Rotterdam bound for Lisbone, and comming from Ʋilla Rosin laden with corne. 7 The Christopher of Rotterdam. 8 A Iersey Vessel of some 50 Tuns, having about 50000. of Poor Iohn in her. 9 The King David of Rotterdam, and two other small pinks. 10 A smal Carval with some decayed Pilchers in her. 11 The Fortune Frigot of Anchuysen taken be∣fore Cales, with French goods in her. 12 The Peter of Amsterdam, with 33 bailes of linnen cloath, and other goods. 13 On the beginning of March, 1650. Richard Thurstons with the John Adventure, beat off a Jersie Man of War, and defended three rich Ships richly laden. 14 A Ship laden with goods, and 3300 and odde peeces of eight taken by Captaine Pen, neare Cales. 15 A Vessel called the Golden Waggon, re-taken on the westerne coasts by Captaine Hall. 16 A French Ship with goods taken by Cap∣taine Hall. 17 A ship taken from the Scots King on the North coast of Scotland, with some Gentlemen, and divers Commissions from their King, and two Cloakes with stars, and other baggage. 18 Divers Commissions, and Letters, and Pa∣pers of discovery taken at Boston, that came in a vessel from Rotterdam. 19 On 17 March, Mr. Michael Kerry, James Sely and others, brought away the Hope-well from Scilly to Mine-head. 20 The 29 March, 1651. Captaine Brown-bushel the great sea Admirall, enemy to the Parliament of England was beheaded. 21 April 1. 1651. A ship taken near Haymouth four miles from Barwick, whither she was chased, with Provisions and Armes for the Scots King from Holland. 22 A fleet of Ships seized on going to Fortugall, from some in Holland. 23 Captaine Fenne beat a French man of War with 32 Guns, on the Coasts of Spaine, and forced her a ground. 24 A French Man of War with 20 Guns taken by Captaine Penne: 25 Two rich ships belonging to Merchants in St. Mallowes taken, with Merchandise of great value. 26 A ship taken neare Leeth in Scotland by the President Friggot, laden with Wines, Salt, To∣bacco, strong Waters, and other lading; some con∣siderable persons of the Scots Kings party were in her. 27 A Sea Pirate belonging to the Isle of Man ta∣ken, and brought in to Liverpoole. 28 A rich Prize comming from Rotterdam to∣wards Scotland, wherein were 20 Officers English and Dutch, taken the 11th. of April on the borders of Scotland, by the President Friggot. 29 A French Vessel taken with ten guns: 30 A Vessel of the Earl of Derbies taken by Cap∣taine Seemar neare Doglow by the Isle of Man, and brought to Bewmorris. 31 A French ship of ten Guns, and five Murde∣rers taken on the Northern coasts by Captain Cole∣man, and Capt. Cheaney. 32 The Scots Alarmed on Fife side, April 17. by a small fleet manned, under command of Captain Reynols from Leeth, by Orders from Generall Deane. 33 Cunie Islannds near Scilly taken by Generall Blague. 34 Brice Island taken by him also. 35 Tresco Island with the Fort taken by storme, and 25 peece of Ordnance, and 166 Prisoners, 20 flaine, and 40 drowned 36 Grimsly the Harbour at Scilly taken by Gen. Blague, with two ships therein, and 9 Guns. 37 A London ship of 70 Tuns rescued from a Jersie man of War, on the Western coasts, 38 A Vessel of Scilly comming from France: was chased and taken by Capt. Pack, commander of the Amity Friggot, with 20 tun of wine. 39 Captaine Coleman took a French man with 15 Guns, 48 Prisoners, loaden with provisions, and 40 Tun of Cask with water going for Green-land, brought in to New-castle. 40 A Vessel of 20 Tuns burden laden with Salt and Coales taken by Capt. Seaman, who commands the Fox Friggot, trading between Scotland, Ireland, and the Isle of Man. 41 Capt. Michael Peck with the Amity Frigot tooke a vessel, and some prisoners of quality sailing from Scilly to fly to France. 42 A ship with 26 guns taken near Scilly. 43 A ship with 16 guns taken near Scilly. 44 A vessel belonging to Scilly taken going to France, by Capt. Pack. 45 On the first of May, two tun of Beere, some quantity of Beefe, two caskes of Bread, and one barrel of Pease, taken in a vessel at Humber. 46 Twelve Packets, qts. 20 Kers. 18 single do∣zens, 3 baggs of horns, 50 Ferkins of Butter, 25 duds of Iron, 200l. of drest Flax, three quarters of an hundred weight of Sugar, two Hogs-heads of Sack, and three Pipes of red Wine taken in some vessels at Humber: 47 Two packs of cloth, qts, 24 Kerdeyes, and ten Dozen, and one, also 20 peeces of Lead taken in a vessel of Hull. 48 On the third of May a Prize was brought in∣to Leeth in Scotland, with 100 tunnes of Wheat be∣longing to the Scots King. 49 May 5. Capt. Anthony Young re-tooke near Barwick an Hoy of Rochester from a Scots man of War of 12 Guns, in which was Mr. Theodore Jen∣nings, messenger to the Lords Embassadour then in Holland, and Col. Washburne. 50 The Assistance Frigot brought in a Prize to Leeth, with 100 tuns of wheat, that the Scots Kings ships had taken from the Dutch, and were sending it to Aberdeen. 51 Two Frigots belonging to Scilly were in pursuit cast away, and divers of the Sea-men that got ashore came in to Gen. Blague. 52 Two Vessels taken near Long-rode. 53 A Vessel with six notable Mosse Troopers that had been in Ireland, was brought into Liver∣poole. 54 Capt. Bradshaw a notorious Pirate taken by Capt. Sherwin neare the Isle of Man, who with his men were brought prisoners to Liverpoole. 55 Capt. Beck with the Merchant Adventure, with 54 men, beat two great ships, the one with 24 Guns, the other 34 Guns near the Downes, with 500 men in them. 56 Capt. Reeves with the Elizabeth Frigot took a French Vessel near the Isle of St. Nichelas Island. 57 A Vessel taken with 60 good Horse on the Westerne coasts going to Barbadoes, sent to Plim∣moth by Gen. Blake. 58 Two ships taken in the Straights, one laden with Silk, the other with Sugar. 59 A French man of War taken with six peece of Ordnance belonging to Deep. 60. Capt. Coleman commander of the Fortune, fought with three of the Scots Kings Vessels, and tooke one of them, and brought it into New-castle. 61 An Irish Vessel called St. Patrick taken prize with 20 baggs of pockets, of 2900 l. weight, and Irish Wooll, 6000 Hides, and other commodities, taken by the Swift-sure. 62 Another Irish ship taken by the Swift-sure. 63 A French Vessel taken by the Swift-sure also with 21 men, two small guns and some Muskets aboard her, 64 Two ships taken with Horse and other sup∣plies going for Scotland brought into Yarmouth by Capt. Wadsworth the 23 May. 65 Mary Island, and the Island of Agads: and all the remainders of Scilly Islands, and Forts sur∣rendred to Gen. Blake with 50 Barrels of Powder, Match proportionable, aboundance of great shot, and all their Ordnance. 66 A ship taken by Cap. Hall of 300 Tuns and 22 guns, laden with Wheat and Ryce. 67 A ship taken by Cap. Hall of 140 Tuns, with 16 Guns, laden with silke, Grogarums, Skins, Wool, and other commodities. 68 Severall ships preserved on the coasts of Spaine. 69 A French Vessel taken on the Northern coasts by Cap. Redgate. 70 June 1. the vessell of a rich Prize retaken by Cap. Redgate, from an Irish man of War, who hard∣ly escaped, and the vessell taken was of 350 Tuns, laden with wheat, Sturgion, Pitch, Tarre, Bacon, Spanish-Wool, feathers, Canvasse, and other com∣modities. 71 Cap. Reynolds, by ships fetched away some booty from the Scots on Fife side, divers sheep and some barrels of Butter. 72 The Yarmouth Fishermen releived by Capt. King, and the Enemys man of War beaten off. 73 Cap. Vacy took a Scots vessel passing towards Ireland, and brought it to Liverpoole. 74 A Vessel retaken, and brought into Bristol. Al∣so a French vessell taken with sheep, Porke, Bisket, and mony intending to have releived Scilly. 75 A Vessel taken by Cap. Celeman, bound for France, 76 Two Prizes taken by Capt. Tackwell on the coasts of France, laden with Sugar, Brazil, Tobacco, and other merchandizes. 77 A prize taken on the beginning of July on the coasts of France, brought in by Cap. Green. 78 Three French Fisher-mens Vessells taken near Jersey. 79 A vessell taken prize by Capt Hurly, and brought into Portsmouth of 100 Tuns burden, laden with Rosin, Pitch, and other commodities, 80 A vessell taken by Cap. Hurley, brought into Portsmouth of 300 Tuns, laden with Wool, Skins, and other commodities. 81 A vessell taken by Cap. Green, laden with Ro∣sin and other wares, taken on the Western coasts. 82 A vessel taken by Cap. Green, laden with pots and other iron ware. 83 A ship of 400 Tun laden with oyle, and o∣ther Merchandizes, taken and sent into Ports∣mouth. 84 Col. Overton transported over to Fife side in Scotland, with 1400 Foot, and some Horse and Dragoons, took the North-Ferry. 85 Maj. Gen, Lambert transported over to Fife side, defeated Sir John Brown, which was the foun∣dation of all those succeeding Victories, which utterly destroyed all the Scots Kings Forces in both Nations. 86 In the beginning of August a Vessell taken on the coasts of Ireland. 87 A Vessell taken on the Northerne coasts by Cap. Coppin, brought into Yarmouth. 88 A rich ship rescued from the enemy on the Northern coasts by Cap, Coppin. 89 The Seamen of the Paradox Frigot got off from neer Flamburgh Head, after their Captain and Purser were both killed by the enemy. 90 In Septemb. 532 li. of Scots yarn &c. was taken with the Thomas Vessell at Yarmouth. 91 A Vessel taken belonging to the Isle of Man by Cap. Young. 92 An Irish vessel taken on the coasts of Ireland. 93 A French man of Warre beaten. 94 In Octob. 3 French ships beaten on the We∣stern coasts. 95 A glorious Victory obtained by Gen. Blake in surprizall of the Isle of Jersey. 96 The Fort at Sentwon Bay taken 97 St. Owens Mannor taken 98 Gronesse Castle taken 99 Castle de Leke taken 100 The Fort at Bowley taken 101 St. Albans taken 102 St. Jermans taken 103 St. Hillary being the chief Town, taken. 104 Brelades Bay taken. A Letter from aboard the Entrance, riding off Mount Orgueil Castle in Jersey, 27 Octob. 1651. THE Lord hath been pleased to deliver into our hands, the Isle of Iersey on the 22 instant between 11 & 12 of the clock in the night by ftorm. Tuesday the 22 about two in the morning the Com∣mission-Officers met aboard this ship, riding in St. Bre∣lades Bay, and having sought God for a blessing upon theirundertakings, it was upon consultation agreed, that by their Boats and strength an attempt should be made upon the Enemy in Sentwons Bay, as the most con∣venient place to land in. Accordingly Gen: Blake or∣dered the open boats and Vessels that carryed the Foot and Horse to bee manned out of our owne ships, those from England refusing to run their Vessels aground, The weather admitting no delay, the Foot were embarqued and forthwith stood for Sentwons, but before we could hale close to shore, the Tide was so far spent, that it was conceived not rationall to fall on then, whereupon the boats lay by; and the ships, viz. the Elizabeth, Phae∣nix, Battery ship, and Eagle, began to play upon the Forts with great guns, and so continued near four hours, continually pelting, insomuch that they did execution both on horse and foot, and prevented their getting in∣to bodies. The Evening proving fair, and the wind fresh from off the Sea, all the Captains of the Fleet took their boats, we manned and headed the Forlorn which was led by Cap. Dover, which gave them some incou∣ragement more than ordinary. A party of the Enemies horse charged to the very heads of our boats, and for neer an hour there was a fierce encounter on both sides, till Col. Hayne and the rest could get in to their assist∣ance, who for to give them all possible and speedy re∣lief leapt into the water up to the waste, and some high∣er: Whereupon the Enemy began to retreat, our for∣ces thereby gaining ground, till after 3 or 4 volleys of shot the enemy ran, insomuch that we became masters of their Forts, all along the Bay. What the enemies losse might be, we are not cer∣tain, but there were wounded on our side about 16. and 4 kild: The Lieutenant of the Forlorn, and one more, are since dead of their wounds. Cap. Dover was struck down with a bullet, but recovered himself again. One thing I forgot to acquaint you with, that when wee weighed from Brellades Bay, the Generall to amuse and distract the enemy, left a part of the Fleet there, which by their Guns and shooting in their boats did so alarm them, that the Pastor of a Village in that Bay with his flock and the Forces ran away to Elizbeth castle, wher their Governour Carteret is. Some prisoners report that Carteret was himself in the action, but fled as soon as any. The next morning Col. Hayne summoned the Tower and Castle of St. Albans, where were 20 Guns, much Ammunition, Provision, &c. and on a sudden it was quitted unexpectedly, those in it betaking them∣selves to the main Castle, where (it is reported) all the chief Islanders and goods are lodged; whereof we doubt not in a short time to give a very satisfactory account. Wee are now before the Castle called Mount Orgueil, and so soon as we have done, it is possible the General will make a trip to Guernsey, and summon Cornt-Ca∣stle, of which wee have the more hope, they having small hope of relief. From aboard the Entrance, riding off Mount Or∣gueil Castle in Jersey 27 Octob. 1651. FINIS. LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1651.
