l2830 e140_9 99860758 156536
Approved, Good, and happy Newes From IRELAND: Relating how the Castle of Artaine was taken from the Rebels, two of their Captaines kild, and one taken prisoners by the protestants. With the arrivall of 2000 foot, and 300 horse from England. Also a great skirmish betweene the Protestants and the Rebels at a place neere Feleston, wherein the English obtaned great renowe and victory. Whereunto is added, A true relation of the great overthrow which the English gave the Rebels before Drogheda sent in a Letter bearing date the 27 of February. to Sir Robert King Knight at Cecill house in the Strand. Printed by Order of Parliament. Ireland Protest. Rebel LONDON, Printed for Iohn Wright, 1641.
The last newes from IRELAND, 7 March, 1641. THe 10. of February our men went to Artain, against a castle so called, which had be∣fore done some mischiefe, to some of our men, the enemy being in it, But the ene∣my fled before our second comming, and left the Castle; and a garrison was left in it by us. Upon the 11th. wee had newes, that the enemy was intrenching at a place called Soughing Towne, some 6. Miles south of our City, and some 2000. Foot, and 200. Horse went out against them; The Lord Lambart commanding in chiefe; A small battell they had, but the Enemy stood not, on the Enemies side some 70 or more was killed, and but one hurt on our side, and so came home that night, and brought home one of the Rebells Captaines and two more of the enemies Cap∣taines slaine, many Letters of treason were found a∣bout him that was taken. On the 13. a man was brought to our City being taken by some of our scattering men scouting about our City, who confest without constraint, that he had killed an Englishwoman at a place called Leslipesom, 6. Miles West of our City, and washed his hands in her bloud, being set on by the popish Priests so to doe, hee was presently hanged, but dyed with much repen∣tance and a protestant, which few do.
Upon the 19. and 20. Arrived heere from you 2000 Foot and 300 horse but little or no money, which made us poore of the City fare harder then before; which was to hard. Upon the 21. Wee had knowledge that our Ships sent with vittaile to relieve Tredath had got safely in, and in spight of the enemy, who had chayned up the harbour, but our men brake the Chaine, and got in, notwithstanding. And publike thankes was with us for that happinesse, for in such a great strait was that City, as to eat Horse flesh, as letters from my friends from the City to mee testified; Also Captaine Bartlet who was the Sea Captaine, in his comming home met with some fore small Boats or Barkes of the Wexford men, going toward the enemy in the North to carry Lenten provision, but hee spoyled their designe in sinking most or all of them, About the same time we had also Letters out of Munster, that all that part of the Countrey was rose in Rebellion being carried out by the Lord Muscry, and Lord Roch, who had profes∣sed much fidellity, and many deceitfull promises had past to the president of that Province, till they saw their owne advantage, And it is reported they are not lesse then 20000 strong, best appointed of all the Rebels, for indeed this Lord Muscry is the most mo∣nied man, of all the Irish Lords, So that now not one place in Ireland, but is in Rebellion, for the Lord of Clanrickard, stands as some thinke Neuter, does no∣thing at all, or cannot do any thing, or will not, But wee heare that our President of Munster was forced to betake himselfe to the strong hold of Corke, and the Lord of Corke betooke himselfe to Yoyhall, which are
reported both to be besiged by the enemy. Upon the 23. of this moneth, newes was that at a place neere Feleston six miles from us, a great multi∣tude of the enemies had strongly fortifide themselves, and it is well fortifide by nature, having also a strong Castle in it; Some 3000 of our men went against it, horse and foote, Our Lord generall the Earle of Or∣mond himselfe went, as did Sir Charles Coot, Sir Symond Hacourt, and many more, Iohn Moore being one of the Soldiers, and upon the forelorne hope. had both his left and right hand man killed, he told me that our generall himselfe, led up the forlorne hope, with ma∣ny words of Comfort to them, able to make any man fight to see such a man as he goe in such danger: For the enemy had a great wood to shelter them beside tren∣ches, but our men after 2 houres Battell, beat them from their Trench, and from the wood, killing some 80 of them, For all that advantage but 7 of our men was killed, but that we lost one Captaine Rochford, a man of such note, that never more was any man be∣wayled; For all the good and valliant parts of a Soldi∣er was in him, in this bout Sir Symond Harcourts Regi∣ment, behaved themselves valliantly but for the Castle our men were forced to returne home without taking it, having nothing but field peeces with them, the way being to rotten to beare greater as yet; many more of the enemies had bin slaine but that the wood defended them, so that the Trees tooke off all that was sent to them in this Castle is thought to be much wealth besides all that have bin great men of the Re∣bels. But our men will not so leave it, but will againe try their forces against it shortly.
As yesterday our men came home, yet tis to be feard that a famine is like to be in our City, in that still men come to us and provision is short, and none of yours that come to us bring any vittailes, great taxes are upon us, more then can be borne, He that had Butter, and Cheese, and Cloath at between 6 and 14 Shillings a yard here sent by any out of London,, might make a good trade of it; Cheshire cheese is sould here for six pence a pound already; Some of your Londoners are come hither (acquaintance of mine) that will send for such things, for great profit may be made by them, and quicke returne. A letter sent from Droheda, to Sir Robert King, dated Febr. 27. Noble Sir, IN my last Letter, I signified to you the difficul∣ties which were like to befall us by the relee∣ving of Droheda, but God by his infinite mercy hath freed us (I may say miraculously) from that hazzard: for when our men there were driven to that extremity to eat horse-flesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallied out of the Towne with only fourty Musketiers, and fourty Horse, and beat off foure hun∣dred of the enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore Cowes and Oxen, and two hun∣dred Sheep; burned foure Townes, and brought
home two of their Colours: Besides, I must relate unto you Gods aboundant goodnesse unto us, in that the night before the reliefe and succours which we sent by Sea from Dublin to them, should have entred into the Harbour of Droheda, which was strongly fen∣ced over with a Chaine and severall boates, there happened a storm which broke their chainer, and gave our men so great a passage, as with little diffi∣culty they came safely to the Towne. The Rebels were gathered at Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men, where they were setled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carried out part of our Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable losse of our side, only Cap∣taine Iames Rochfort, a most gallant and couragious Gentleman. This was an act of great bravery, where∣in Sir Charles Coote did, (as he doth alwaies) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger as any man living could; and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and good affections, and de∣serves great encouragement from that side. Our soul∣diours are in great want of money, which causes a ge∣nerall want of all other necessaries, yet notwithstan∣ding God hath infused such courage into them (for undoubtedly it is his worke) that they thinke there is no danger so great, but they may attempt it. Colonell Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lieutenants Regiment of fifteen hundred foot, and Sir Richard Greevill with neere foure hundred Horse, which puts much heart into us, and makes us looke
big upon our neighbours, yet we grieve we cannot be able to releeve our friends in other parts, but I hope when our full succours shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but adde comfort to our poore distressed friends abroad. The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond beliefe, yet their hearts begin to faint and I believe they repent their furious madnesse. If my brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would hae written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or on his way thither: By the next he shall heare from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you. I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things which concerne me, and I am, Sir, Feb. 27. 1641. Your most affectionate servant, Ed. Loftus, Martii 7mo. 'Tis this day Ordered forthwith, that this Letter be published in print. H. Elsing. Cler. P. D. Com. FINIS.
