m1032 e401_12 99862278 114431
THE DECLARATION OF Generall MASSEY, AND Colonell Generall POYNTZ. Shewing the true Grounds and Reasons that induced them to depart from the City, and for a while from the Kingdome. With their Resolutions what they intend for their owne safety, and the preser∣vation of Religion and Covenant, and the King and Kingdome. blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed for J. L. in the yeare, 1647.
The Declaration of Generall MAS∣SEY, and Colonell Generall POYNTZ, Shewing the true grounds and Rea∣sons that induced them to depart from the City, and for a while from the Kingdome. BEeing one of us elected lately by the Common-Councell of the famous City of London, to bee their Commander in chiefe, for the defence of the King and Par∣liament, the Kingdome and the City; And being resolved both of us, to the uttermost of our power to defend the same, with and above all, the Covenant which we had so often and so so∣lemnly undertaken for the preservation of Religion, and find∣ing that by the combination of another party, (which closely lay as well by policy as by force to undermine us) that we were both left destitute of all promised helps, and being not able thereby to performe the worke conducing so much to the Co∣venant we had taken, that Religion in the first place, might be
preserved inviolable and intire, but that amongst many other, we were exposed our selves to the greatest infamy and dan∣ger, that could almost fall on any men, but especially those, who by the mercy of God have so faithfully and successefully deported themselves for the preservation of the Kingdome, both thought it requisite; as well for the generall satisfaction of the Kingdome, as the particular obligation of our own honors, to give the world notice of the integrity and Candour of our intentions in this our following Declaration. We tak no pleasure in the first place (as many do who are against us) to insinuate into the affections of the people, by repeating what great things God hath done by us in the North and West parts of the Kingdome, especially the latter. When all the power and Armes of the united West, having no lesse then the King himselfe and two Princes for their Com∣manders did sit down before the City of Glocester, which not long before, a small party out of Wales, under the command of the Lord of Raglan (since made Earle of Glamorgan) did make full account to master. There is no delight taken to repeat with what faithfulnes and courage that City was then and afterwards preserved by the one of us, and the whole Kingdome (as affaires then stood) in relation unto it  to declare that the most able and the most  ouldiers of the King being there sorely hurt, or slaine out-right. I made a way not only to facilitate the Victories to come, but to put the chiefe staffe of command into those hands also, who since have born it. For though that not long after the Earle of Essex did break both the head and the heart of the Kings Army at Newbury, he could not have the honour to see the great worke accom∣plished in himselfe. It was the vertue indeed and the vigi∣lance of Lucullus to overcome the puissant Mithridates of A∣sia, a Monarch of more then three Kingdomes, and to breake at first that mighty and almost invincible body of his Horse,
but it was the fortune afterwards Pompey to ride in triumph for it at Rome. Whilst we declare the Vertues of one great Commander, we take not from the merits of another, and we are confident there is no brest of honour can accuse us of detraction in giving the dead their due. We shall for our own parts forbeare to mention the services atchieved for the State both in Gloucestershire, and the County of Wilts, at New∣arke, and in Cheshire, &c. And what especially was perfor∣med in Summersetshire, when first the great body of Generall Grings horse was beaten. Doubtlesse there will be hereafter a review of all, and pennes that now lye dormant, will bee rouzed up to tell the mistaken their errours: But let others voyce our prayse, it shall bee enough for us to declare our in∣tegrity. The first beginning of the Distast was, when one of us did use his best endeavors to appease the mutiny and mutiners at Yorke. There are no good works but are attended with en∣vy, and Ambition is so heady that it will know nothing more eminent then it selfe. Services begn by command of the State grew first into suspition, and afterwards into offence. It was a crime to do any thing but what must be cryed up by those who would have all things to dance according to the motions of their own spheare. All things were made subject unto change, and under tendernesse of Conscience even (that which is most to bee lamented) became most spirituall, our Religion also. And the other of us when by order of Parlia∣ment, being a Member of it, I was imployed into the Army to make experience what forces could be drawn from thence for the service in Ireland, in which (I thanke them) I had an eminent place of dignity conferred on mee, where I left no∣thing unattempted for the dispatching of that service, well knowing how much it concerned the honour of England, and the necessity of Ireland. Being there dayly in the heads of the Regiments, I observed in many of them some threescore, and
in others more or lesse of the Souldiers, who heretofore had served under my Command, who were willing all to adven∣ture their lives with me in that service, and to that purpose they were drawn up, but so dow-bak't were the examples of some others in the Army, and their proceedings so left handed, that what was resolved on over-night, found no effect on the morning following. But these things are so evidently known, and so apparent to the whole Kingdome, that wee shall not need to insist upon any further discourse thereof. It shall suffice that since our departure, we will not presume to deliver any thing of our own sense upon that which hath been altered, acted, or consented unto or shall bee by the in∣stant interposition or the importunity of the Army, but onely to give a true accompt unto the Kingdome upon what grounds and reasons we have been induced to forsake the Ci∣ty. For finding all things so uncertain, and nothing answer∣ing to what was promised or expected, wee held it safer wis∣dome to withdraw to our own friends, whom wee have al∣wayes found fast and entire to their first principles, then to continue with those who like wayes are beaten with every wind, and do take or receive Counsels as their feares do prompt them, but not without this confession, that we acknowledge the Generall himselfe to be an excellent personage, and free from those violent distempers and hears of passion in which o∣ther men do delight and perish. And we do protest that as farre as in us lyes, (wheresoever God shall call us) wee will improve our utmost abilities for the true setling of Peace in this Kingdome, for the restoring of the Covenant to Religion, and for the restoring of his Ma∣jesty to his just Rights and Authority, and for the meintain∣ing of the priviledges of the Parliament, and preserving of the people in their lawfull Liberties, and proprieties, and for the relieving our distressed brethren the Protestants in Ire∣land. And we professe in the conclusion, that we have been-necessitated
to this Declaration, to give satisfaction to the World, that the honour, safety, and happinesse of this King∣dome shall bee evermore the delight and earnest of our devotion and endeavours, for we shall alwayes labour to keep our selves in that posture both with Heaven and Earth, as to bee ready to wade through a Sea of blood, and to increase it with our own, that the Gospell of truth may flourish, and that the Peace of the King, the Parliament, and the Kingdome, may grow high and happy. Edw. Massey, Syd. Pointz.
