M2160 E1126_1 99862558 114721
POEMS OF Mr. John Milton, BOTH ENGLISH and LATIN, Compos'd at several times. Printed by his true Copies. The SONGS were set in Musick by Mr. HENRY LAWES Gentleman of the KINGS Chappel, and one of His MAIESTIES Private Musick. —Baccare frontem Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro, Virgil, Eclog. 7. Printed and publish'd according to ORDER. LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at the signe of the Princes Arms in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1645.
Melpomene. Erato. IOANNIS MILTONI ANGLI EFFIGIES ANNO AETATIS viGess: Pri: Urania. Clio. . W. M. sculp
THE STATIONER TO THE READER. IT is not any pri∣vate respect of gain, Gentle Reader, for the slightest Pamphlet is now adayes more vendible then the Works of learnedest men; but it is the love I have to our own Language that hath made me diligent to collect, and set forth
such Peeces both in Prose and Vers, as may renew the wonted honour and esteem of our English tongue: and it's the worth of these both English and Latin Poems, not the flourish of any prefixed encomions that can invite thee to buy them, though these are not without the highest Commendati∣ons and Applause of the learnedst Academicks, both domestick and forrein: And amongst those of our own Countrey, the unpa∣rallel'd attestation of that renown∣ed Provost of Eaton, Sir Henry Wootton: I know not thy palat how it relishes such dainties, nor how harmonious thy
soul is; perhaps more trivial Airs may please thee better. But howsoever thy opinion is spent upon these, that incouragement I have already received from the most in∣genious men in their clear and courteous entertainment of Mr. Wallers late choice Peeces, hath once more made me adven∣ture into the World, presenting it with these ever-green, and not to be blasted Laurels. The Authors more peculiar excellency in these studies, was too well known to con∣ceal his Papers, or to keep me from attempting to sollicit them from him. Let the event guide it self which way it will, I shall de∣serve
of the age, by bringing into the Light as true a Birth, as the Muses have brought forth since our famous Spencer wrote; whose Poems in these English ones are as rarely imitated, as sweetly excell'd. Reader if thou art Eagle-eied to censure their worth, I am not fearful to expose them to thy exactest perusal. Thine to command HUMPH. MOSELEY.
On the morning of CHRISTS Nativity. Compos'd 1629. I. THis is the Month, and this the happy morn Wherin the Son of Heav'ns eternal King, Of wedded Maid, and Virgin Mother born, Our great redemption from above did bring; For so the holy sages once did sing, That he our deadly forfeit should release, And with his Father work us a perpetual peace, II. That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable, And that sar-beaming blaze of Majesty, Wherwith he wont at Heav'ns high Councel-Table, To sit the midst of Trinal Unity, He laid aside; and here with us to be, Forsook the Courts of everlasting Day, And chose with us a darksom House of mortal Clay,
III. Say Heav'nly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein Afford a present to the Infant God? Hast thou no vers, no hymn, or solemn strein, To welcom him to this his new abode, Now while the Heav'n by the Suns team untrod, Hath took no print of the approching light, And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright? IV. See how from far upon the Eastern rode The Star-led Wisards haste with odours sweet: O run, prevent them with thy humble ode, And lay it lowly at his blessed feet; Have thou the honour first, thy Lord to greet, And joyn thy voice unto the Angel Quire, From out his secret Altar toucht with hallow'd fire. The Hymn. I. IT was the Winter wilde, While the Heav'n-born-childe, All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies▪ Nature in aw to him
Had doff't her gawdy trim, With her great Master so to sympathize▪ It was no season then for her To wanton with the Sun her lusty Paramour. II. Onely with speeches fair She woo's the gentle Air To hide her guilty front with innocent Snow▪ And on her naked shame, Pollute with sinfull blame, The Saintly Vail of Maiden white to throw, Confounded, that her Makers eyes Should look so neer upon her foul deformities. III. But he her fears to cease, Sent down the meek-eyd Peace, She crown'd with Olive green, came softly sliding Down through the turning sphear His ready Harbinger, With Turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing, And waving wide her mirtle wand, She strikes a universall Peace through Sea and Land. IV. No War, or Battails sound Was heard the World around:
The idle spear and shield were high up hung▪ The hooked Chariot stood Unstain'd with hostile blood, The Trumpet spake not to the armed throng, And Kings sate still with awfull eye, As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by. V. But peacefull was the night Wherin the Prince of light His raign of peace upon the earth began: The Windes with wonder whist, Smoothly the waters kist, Whispering new joyes to the milde Ocean, Who now hath quite forgot to rave, While Birds of Calm sit brooding on the charmed wave▪ VI. The Stars with deep amaze Stand fixt in stedfast gaze, Bending one way their pretious influence, And will not take their flight, For all the morning light, Or Lucifer that often warn'd them thence; But in their glimmering Orbs did glow, Untill their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.
VII. And though the shady gloom Had given day her room, The Sun himself with-held his wonted speed, And hid his head for shame, As his inferiour flame, The new-enlightn'd world no more should need; He saw a greater Sun appear Then his bright Throne, or burning Axletree could bear. VIII. The Shepherds on the Lawn, Or ere the point of dawn, Sate simply chatting in a rustick row; Full little thought they than, That the mighty Pan Was kindly com to live with them below; Perhaps their loves, or els their sheep, Was all that did their silly thoughts so busie keep. IX. When such musick sweet Their hearts and ears did greet, As never was by mortall finger strook, Divinely-warbled voice Answering the stringed noise, all their souls in blisfull rapture took▪
The Air such pleasure loth to lose, With thousand echo's still prolongs each heav'nly close▪ X. Nature that heard such sound Beneath the hollow round Of Cynthia's seat, the Airy region thrilling, Now was almost won To think her part was don, And that her raign had here its last fulfilling; She knew such harmony alone Could hold all Heav'n and Earth in happier union. XI. At last surrounds their sight A Globe of circular light, That with long beams the shame-fact night array'd, The helmed Cherubim And sworded Seraphim, Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displaid. Harping in loud and solemn quire, With unexpressive notes to Heav'ns new-born Heir. XII. Such Musick (as 'tis said) Before was never made, But when of old the sons of morning sung, While the Creator Great
His constellations set, And the well-ballanc't world on hinges hung, And cast the dark foundations deep, And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keep. XIII. Ring out ye Crystall sphears, Once bless our human ears, (If ye have power to touch our senses so) And let your silver chime Move in melodious time; And let the Base of Heav'ns deep Organ blow, And with your ninefold harmony Make up full consort to th' Angelike symphony. XIV. For if such holy Song Enwrap our fancy long, Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold, And speckl'd vanity Will sicken soon and die, And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould, And Hell it self will pass away, And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day. XV. Yea Truth, and Justice then Will down return to men,
Th'enameld Arras of the Rainbow wearing, And Mercy set between, Thron'd in Celestiall sheen, With radiant feet the tissued clouds down stearing, And Heav'n as at som festivall, Will open wide the Gates of her high Palace Hall. XVI. But wisest Fate sayes no, This must not yet be so, The Babe lies yet in smiling Infancy That on the bitter cross Must redeem our loss; So both himself and us to glorifie: Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep, The wakefull trump of doom must thunder through the deep, XVII. With such a horrid clang As on mount Sinai rang While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake: The aged Earth agast With terrour of that blast, Shall from the surface to the center shake; When at the worlds last session, The dreadfull Judge in middle Air shall spread his throne.
XVIII. And then at last our bliss Full and perfect is, But now begins; for from this happy day Th'old Dragon under ground In straiter limits bound, Not half so far casts his usurped sway, And wrath to see his Kingdom fail, Swindges the scaly Horrour of his foulded tail. XIX. The Oracles are dumm, No voice or hideous humm Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving. Apollo from his shrine Can no more divine, With hollow shreik the steep of Dlphos leaving. No nightly trance, or breathed spell, Inspire's the pale-ey'd Priest from the prophetic cell. XX. The lonely mountains o're, And the resounding shore, A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament; From haunted spring, and dale Edg'd with poplar pale. The parting Genius is with sighing sent,
With flowre-inwov'n tresses torn The Nimphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn. XXI. In consecrated Earth, And on the holy Hearth, The Lars, and Lemures moan with midnight plaint, In Urns, and Altars round, A drear, and dying sound Affrights the Flamins at their service quaint▪ And the chill Marble seems to sweat, While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat. XXII. Peor, and Baalim, Forsake their Temples dim, With that twise batter'd god of Palestine, And mooned Ashtaroth, Heav'ns Queen and Mother both, Now sits not girt with Tapers holy shine, The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn, In vain the Tyrian Maids their wounded Thamuz mourn. XXIII. And sullen Moloch fled, Hath left in shadows dred, His burning Idol all of blackest hue, In vain with Cymbals ring,
They call the grisly king, In dismall dance about the furnace blue, The brutish gods of Nile as fast, Isis and Orus, and the Dog Anubis hast. XXIV. Nor is Osiris seen In Memphian Grove, or Green, Trampling the unshowr'd Grasse with lowings loud: Nor can he be at rest Within his sacred chest, Naught but profoundest Hell can be his shroud, In vain with Timbrel'd Anthems dark The sable-stoled Sorcerers bear his worshipt Ark. XXV. He feels from Juda's Land The dredded Infants hand, The rayes of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn; Nor all the gods beside, Longer dare abide, Not Typhon huge ending in snaky twine: Our Babe to shew his Godhead true, Can in his swadling bands controul the damned rew. XXVI. So when the Sun in bed, Curtain'd with cloudy red,
Pillows his chin upon an Orient wave. The flocking shadows pale, Troop to th'infernall jail, Each fetter'd Ghost slips to his severall grave, And the yellow-skirted Fayes, Fly after the Night-steeds, leaving their Moon-lov'd maze. XXVII. But see the Virgin blest, Hath laid her Babe to rest. Time is our tedious Song should here have ending, Heav'ns youngest teemed Star, Hath fixt her polisht Car. Her sleeping Lord with Handmaid Lamp attending. And all about the Courtly Stable, Bright-harnest Angels sit in order serviceable. A Paraphrase on Psalm 114. This and the following Psalm were don by the Author at fifteen yeers old. WHen the blest seed of Terah's faithfull Son, After long toil their liberty had won, And past from Pharian fields to Canaan Land, Led by the strength of the Almighties hand,
hovah's wonders were in Israel shown, is praise and glory was in Israel known. at saw the troubl'd Sea, and shivering fled, nd sought to hide his froth-becurled head ow in the earth, Jordans clear streams recoil, As a faint host that hath receiv'd the foil. The high, huge-bellied Mountains skip like Rams Amongst their Ews, the little Hills like Lambs. Why fled the Ocean? And why skipt the Mountains? Why turned Jordan toward his Crystall Fountains? hake earth, and at the presence be agast Of him that ever was, and ay shall last, That glassy flouds from rugged rocks can crush, And make soft rills from fiery flint-stones gush▪ Psalm 136. LEt us with a gladsom mind▪ Praise the Lord, for he is kind, For his mercies ay endure, Ever faithfull, ever sure. et us blaze his Name abroad, or of gods he is the God▪ For &c.
O let us his praises tell, That doth the wrathfull tyrants quell. For, &c. That with his miracles doth make Amazed Heav'n and Earth to shake. For, &c. That by his wisdom did create The painted Heav'ns so full of state▪ For his, &c. That did the solid Earth ordain To rise above the watry plain. For his, &c. That by his all-commanding might, Did fill the new-made world with light. For his, &c. And caus'd the Golden-tressed Sun, All the day long his cours to run. For his, &c. The horned Moon to shine by night, Amongst her spangled sisters bright▪ For his, &c. He with his thunder▪clasping hand, mote the first▪born of Egypt Land▪ For his, &c.
And in despight of Pharao fell, He brought from thence his Israel. For, &c. The ruddy waves he cleft in twain, Of the Erythraean main. For, &c. The floods stood still like Walls of Glass▪ While the Hebrew Bands did pass. For, &c. But full soon they did devour The Tawny King with all his power▪ For, &c. His chosen people he did bless In the wastfull Wildernes. For, &c. In bloody battail he brought down Kings of prowess and renown. For, &c. He foild bold Seon and his host, That rul'd the Amorrean coast. For, &c. And large-lim'd Og he did subdue, With all his over hardy crew▪ For, &c.
And to his servant Israel, He gave their Land therin to dwell. For, &c. He hath with a piteous eye Beheld us in our misery. For, &c. And freed us from the slavery Of the invading enimy. For, &c. All living creatures he doth feed. And with full hand supplies their need▪ For, &c. Let us therfore warble forth His mighty Majesty and worth. For, &c. That his mansion hath on high Above the reach of mortall ey. For his mercies ay endure, Ever faithfull, ever sure. The Passion. I. ERe-while of Musick, and Ethereal mirth, Wherwith the stage of Ayr and Earth did ring▪
And joyous news of heav'nly Infants birth, My muse with Angels did divide to sing; But headlong joy is ever on the wing, In Wintry solstice like the shortn'd light Soon swallow'd up in dark and long out-living nigh. II. For now to sorrow must I tune my song, And set my Harpe to notes of saddest wo, Which on our dearest Lord did sease er'e long, Dangers, and snares, and wrongs, and worse then so▪ Which he for us did freely undergo. Most perfect Heroe, try'd in heaviest plight Of labours huge and hard, too hard for human wight▪ III. He sov'ran Priest stooping his regall head That dropt with odorous oil down his fair eyes, Poor fleshly Tabernacle entered, His starry front low-rooft beneath the skies; O what a Mask was there, what a disguise! Yet more; the stroke of death he must abide, Then lies him meekly down fast by his Brethrens side. IV. These latter scenes confine my roving vers, To this Horizon is my Phoebus bound,
His Godlike acts, and his temptations fierce, And former sufferings other where are found; Loud o're the rest Cremona's Trump doth sound▪ Me softer airs befit, and softer strings Of Lute, or Viol still, more apt for mournful things. V. Befriend me night best Patroness of grief, Over the Pole thy thickest mantle throw, And work my flatter'd fancy to belief, That Heav'n and Earth are colour'd with my wo; My sorrows are too dark for day to know: The leaves should all be black wheron I write, And letters where my tears have washt a wannish white. VI. See see the Chariot, and those rushing wheels, That whirl d the Prophet up at Chebar flood, My spirit som transporting Cherub feels, To bear me where the Towers of Salem stood, Once glorious Towers, now sunk in guiltles blood; There doth my soul in holy vision sit In pensive trance, and anguish, and ecstatick fit. VII. Mine eye hath found that sad Sepulchral rock That was the Casket of Heav'ns richest store,
And here though grief my feeble hands up-lock, Yet on the softned Quarry would I score My plaining vers as lively as before; For sure so well instructed are my tears, That they would fitly fall in order's Characters. VIII. Or should I thence hurried on viewles wing▪ Take up a weeping on the Mountains wilde, The gentle neighbourhood of grove and spring Would soon unboosom all thir Echoes milde, And I (for grief is easily beguild) Might think th'infection of my sorrows loud, Had got a race of mourners on som pregnant cloud. This Subject the Author finding to be above the yeers he had, when he wrote it, and nothing satisfi'd with what was begun, left it unfinisht. On Time. FLy envious Time, till thou run out thy race, Call on the lazy leaden-stepping hours, Whose speed is but the heavy Plummets pace; And glut thy self with what thy womb devours▪
Which is no more then what is false and vain, And meerly mortal dross; So little is our loss, So little is thy gain. For when as each thing bad thou hast entomb'd, And last of all, thy greedy self consum'd, Then long Eternity shall greet our bliss With an individual kiss; And Joy shall overtake us as a flood, When every thing that is sincerely good And perfectly divine, With Truth, and Peace, and Love shall ever shine About the supreme Throne Of him, t'whose happy-making sight alone, When once our heav'nly-guided soul shall clime, Then all this Earthy grosnes quit, Attir'd with Stars, we shall for ever sit, Triumphing over Death, and Chance, and thee O Time▪ Upon the Circumcision. YE flaming Powers, and winged Warriours bright, That erst with Musick, and triumphant song
First heard by happy watchful Shepherds ear, So sweetly sung your Joy the Clouds along Through the soft silence of the list'ning night; Now mourn, and if sad share with us to bear Your fiery essence can distill no tear, Burn in your fighs, and borrow Seas wept from our deep sorrow, He who with all Heav'ns heraldry whileare Enter'd the world, now bleeds to give us ease; Alas, how soon our sin Sore doth begin His Infancy to sease! O more exceeding love or law more just? Just law indeed, but more exceeding love! For we by rightfull doom remediles Were lost in death, till he that dwelt above High thron'd in secret bliss, for us frail dust Emptied his glory, ev'n to nakednes; And that great Cov'nant which we still transgress Intirely satisfi'd, And the full wrath beside Of vengeful Justice bore for our excess, And seals obedience first with wounding smart This day, but O ere long
Huge pangs and strong Will pierce more neer his heart. At a solemn Musick. BLest pair of Sirens, pledges of Heav'ns joy, Sphear-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Vers, Wed your divine sounds, and mixt power employ Dead things with inbreath'd sense able to pierce, And to our high-rais'd phantasie present, That undisturbed Song of pure content, Ay sung before the saphire-colour'd throne To him that sits theron With Saintly shout, and solemn Jubily, Where the bright Seraphim in burning row Their loud up-lifted Angel trumpets blow, And the Cherubick host in thousand quires Touch their immortal Harps of golden wires, With those just Spirits that wear victorious Palms, Hymns devout and holy Psalms Singing everlastingly; That we on Earth with undiscording voice May rightly answer that melodious noise;
As once we did, till disproportion'd sin Jarr'd against natures chime, and with harsh din Broke the fair musick that all creatures made To their great Lord, whose love their motion sway'd In perfect Diapason, whilst they stood In first obedience, and their state of good. O may we soon again renew that Song, And keep in tune with Heav'n▪ till God ere long To his celestial consort us unite, To live with him, and sing in endles morn of light. An Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester. THis rich Marble doth enterr The honour'd Wife of Winchester, A Vicounts daughter, an Earls heir, Besides what her vertues fair Added to her noble birth, More then she could own from Earth. Summers three times eight save one She had told, alas too soon, After so short time of breath, To house with darknes, and with death.
Yet had the number of her days Bin as compleat as was her praise, Nature and fate had had no strife In giving limit to her life. Her high birth, and her graces sweet, Quickly found a lover meet; The virgin quite for her request The God that sits at marriage feast; He at their invoking came But with a scarce-wel lighted flame; And in his Garland as he stood, Ye might discern a Cipress bud. Once had the early Matrons run To greet her of a lovely son, And now with second hope she goes, And calls Lucina to her throws; But whether by mischance or blame Atropos for Lucina came; And with remorfles cruelty, Spoil'd at once both fruit and tree: The haples Babe before his birth Had burial, yet not laid in earth, And the languisht Mothers Womb Was not long a living Tomb.
So have I seen som tender slip Sav'd with care from Winters nip, The pride of her carnation train, Pluck't up by som unheedy swain, Who onely thought to crop the flowr New shot up from vernall showr; But the fair blossom hangs the head Side-ways as on a dying bed, And those Pearls of dew she wears, Prove to be presaging tears Which the sad morn had let fall On her hast'ning funerall. Gentle Lady may thy grave Peace and quiet ever have; After this thy travail sore Sweet rest sease thee evermore, That to give the world encrease, Shortned hast thy own lives lease, Here besides the sorrowing That thy noble House doth bring, Here be tears of perfect moan Weept for thee in Helicon, And som Flowers, and som Bays, For thy Hears to strew the ways,
Sent thee from the banks of Came, Devoted to thy vertuous name; Whilst thou bright Saint high sit'st in glory▪ Next her much like to thee in story, That fair Syrian Shepherdess, Who after yeers of barrenners, The highly favour'd Joseph bore To him that serv'd for her before, And at her next birth much like thee, Through pangs fled to felicity, Far within the boosom bright Of blazing Majesty and Light, There with thee, new welcom Saint▪ Like fortunes may her soul acquaint, With thee there clad in radiant sheen, No Marchioness, but now a Queen. SONG On May morning. NOw the bright morning Star, Dayes harbinger, Comes dancing from the ast, and leads with her The Flowry May, who from her green lap throws The yellow Cowslip, and the pale Primrose.
Hail bounteous May that dost inspire Mirth and youth, and warm desire, Woods and Groves, are of thy dressing, Hill and Dale, doth boast thy blessing. Thus we salute thee with our early Song, And welcom thee, and wish thee long. On Shakespear. 1630. WHat needs my Shakespear for his honour'd Bones, The labour of an age in piled Stones, Or that his hallow'd reliques should be hid Under a Star-ypointing Pyramid? Dear son of memory, great heir of Fame, What need'st thou such weak witnes of thy name? Thou in our wonder and astonishment Hast built thy self a live-long Monument. For whilst toth'shame of slow-endeavouring art, Thy easie numbers flow, and that each heart Hath from the leaves of thy unvalu'd Book, Those Delphick lines with deep impression took, Then thou our fancy of it self bereaving, Dost make us Marble with too much conceaving; And so Sepulcher'd in such pomp dost lie, That Kings for such a Tomb would wish to die.
On the University Carrier who sickn'd in the time of his vacancy, being forbid to go to London, by reason of the Plague. HEre lies old Hobson, Death hath broke his girt, A here alas, hath laid him in the dirt, Or els the ways being foul, twenty to one, He's here stuck in a slough, and overthrown. ▪Twas such a shifter, that if truth were known, Death was half glad when he had got him down; For he had any time this ten yeers full, Dodg'd with him, betwixt Cambridge and the Bull. And surely, Death could never have prevail'd, Had not his weekly cours of carriage fail'd; But lately finding him so long at home, And thinking now his journeys end was come, And that he had tane up his latest Inne, In the kind office of a Chamberlin Shew'd him his room where he must lodge that night, Pull'd off his Boots, and took away the light: If any ask for him, it shall be sed, Hobson has supt, and's newly gon to bed▪
Another on the same. HEre lieth one who did most truly prove, That he could never die while he could move, So hung his destiny never to rot While he might still jogg on, and keep his trot, Made of sphear-metal, never to decay Untill his revolution was at stay. Time numbers motion, yet (without a crime 'Gainst old truth) motion number'd out his time; And like an Engin mov'd with wheel and waight, His principles being ceast, he ended strait, Ret that gives all men life, gave him his death, And too much breathing put him out of breath▪ Nor were it contradiction to affirm Too long vacation hastned on his term. Meerly to drive the time away he sickn'd, Fainted, and died, nor would with Ale be quickn'd; Nay, quoth he, on his swooning bed outstretch'd, If I may not carry, sure Ile ne're be fetch'd, But vow though the cross Doctors all stood hearers▪ For one Carrier put down to make six bearers. Ease was his chief disease, and to judge right, He did for heavines that his Cart went light,
His leasure told him that his time was com▪ And lack of load, made his life burdensom, That even to his last breath (ther be that say't) As he were prest to death, he cry'd more waight▪ But had his doings lasted as they were, He had bin an immortall Carrier. Obedient to the Moon he spent his date In cours reciprocal, and had his fate Linkt to the mutual flowing of the Seas, Yet (strange to think) his wain was his increase His Letters are deliver'd all and gon, Onely remains this superscription. L'Allegro. HEnce loathed Melancholy Of Cerberus, and blackest midnight born, In Stygian Cave forlorn 'Mongst horrid shapes, and shreiks, and sights unholy, Find out som uncouth cell, Wher brooding darknes spreads his jealous wings, And the night-Raven sings; There under Ebon shades, and low-brow'd Rocks, As ragged as thy Locks, In dark Cimmerian defert ever dwell.
But com thou Goddes fair and free, In Heav'n ycleap'd Euphrosyne, And by men, heart-easing Mirth, Whom lovely Venus at a birth With two sister Graces more To Ivy-crowned Bacchus bore; Or whether (as som Sager sing) The frolick Wind that breathes the Spring, Zephir with Aurora playing, As he met her once a Maying, There on Beds of Violets blew▪ And fresh-blown Roses washt in dew, Fill'd her with thee a daughter fair. So bucksom, blith, and debonair. Haste thee nymph, and bring with thee Jest and youthful Jollity, Quips and Cranks, and wanton Wiles, Nods, and Becks, and Wreathed Smiles, Such as hang on Hebe's cheek, And love to live in dimple sleek; Sport that wrincled Care derides, And Laughter holding both his sides▪ Com, and trip it as ye go On the light fantastick toe▪
And in thy right hand lead with thee, The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty; And if I give thee honour due▪ Mirth, admit me of thy crue To live with her, and live with thee, In unreproved pleasures free; To hear the Lark begin his flight, And singing startle the dull night, From his watch-towre in the skies, Till the dappled dawn doth rise; Then to com in spight of sorrow, And at my window bid good morrow, Through the Sweet-Briar, or the Vine, Or the twisted Eglantine. While the Cock with lively din, Scatters the rear of darknes thin, And to the stack, or the Barn dore, Stoutly struts his Dames before, Oft list'ning how the Hounds and horn, Chearly rouse the slumbring morn, From the side of som Hoar Hill, Through the high wood echoing shrill. Som time walking not unseen By Hedge-row Elms, on Hillocks green,
Right against the Eastern gate, Wher the great Sun begins his state, Rob'd in flames, and Amber light, The clouds in thousand Liveries dight▪ While the Plowman neer at hand, Whistles ore the Furrow'd Land, And the Milkmaid singeth blithe, And the Mower whets his sithe, And every Shepherd tells his tale Under the Hawthorn in the dale. Streit mine eye hath caught new pleasures Whilst the Lantskip round it measures, Russet Lawns, and Fallows Gray, Where the nibling flocks do stray, Mountains on whose barren brest The labouring clouds do often rest: Meadows trim with Daisie pide, Shallow Brooks, and Rivers wide. Towers, and Battlements it sees Boosom'd high in tufted Trees, Wher perhaps som beauty lies, The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes. Hard by, a Cottage chimney smokes, From betwixt two aged Okes,
Where Corydon and Thyrsis met, Are at their savory dinner set Of Hearbs, and other Country Messes, Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses; And then in haste her Bowre she leaves, With Thestylis to bind the Sheaves; Or if the earlier season lead To the tann'd Haycock in the Mead, Som times with secure delight The up-land Hamlets will invite, When the merry Bells ring round▪ And the jocond rebecks sound To many a youth, and many a maid, Dancing in the Chequer'd shade; And young and old com forth to play On a Sunshine Holyday, Till the live-long day-light fail, Then to the Spicy Nut-brown Ale, With stories told of many a feat, How Faery Mab the junkets eat, She was pincht, and pull'd she sed, And he by Friars Lanthorn led Tells how the drudging Goblin swet, To ern his Cream-bowle duly set,
When in one night, ere glimps of morn, His shadowy Flale hath thresh'd the Corn That ten day labourers could not end, Then lies him down the Lubbar Fend. And stretch'd out all the Chimney's length, Basks at the fire his hairy strength; And Crop-full out of dores he flings, Ere the first Cock his Mattin rings. Thus don the Tales, to bed they creep, By whispering Windes soon lull'd asleep. Towred Cities please us then, And the busie humm of men, Where throngs of Knights and Barons bold, In weeds of Peace high triumphs hold, With store of Ladies, whose bright eies Rain influence, and judge the prise Of Wit, or Arms, while both contend To win her Grace, whom all commend. There let Hymen oft appear In Saffron robe, with Taper clear, And pomp, and feast, and revelry, With mask, and antique Pageantry, Such sights as youthfull Poets dream On Summer eeves by haunted stream.
Then to the well-trod stage anon, If Jonsons learned Sock be on, Or sweetest Shakespear fancies childe, Warble his native Wood-notes wilde, And ever against eating Cares, Lap me in soft Lydian Aires, Married to immortal verse Such as the meeting soul may pierce In notes, with many a winding bout Of lincked sweetnes long drawn out, With wanton heed, and giddy cunning▪ The melting voice through mazes running; Untwisting all the chains that ty The hidden soul of harmony. That Orpheus self may heave his head From golden slumber on a bed Of heapt Elysian flowres, and hear Such streins as would have won the ear Of Pluto, to have quite set free His half regain'd Eurydice. These delights, if thou canst give, Mirth with thee, I mean to live.
Il Penseroso. HEnce vain deluding joyes, The brood of folly without father bred, How little you bested, Or fill the fixed mind with all your toyes; Dwell in som idle brain, And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess, As thick and numberless As the gay motes that people the Sun Beams, Or likest hovering dreams The fickle Pensioners of Morpheus train. But hail thou Goddes, sage and holy, Hail divinest Melancholy, Whose Saintly visage is too bright To hit the Sense of human sight; And therfore to our weaker view, Ore laid with black staid Wisdoms hue▪ Black, but such as in esteem, Prince Memnons sister might beseem, Or that Starr'd Ethiope Queen that strove To set her beauties praise above The Sea Nymphs, and their powers offended. Yet thou art higher far descended,
Thee bright-hair'd Vesta long of yore, To solitary Saturn bore; His daughter she (in Saturns raign, Such mixture was not held a stain) Oft in glimmering Bowres, and glades He met her, and in secret shades Of woody Ida's inmost grove, While yet there was no fear of Jove▪ Com pensive Nun, devout and pure, Sober, stedfast, and demure, All in a robe of darkest grain, Flowing with majestick train, And sable stole of Cipres Lawn, Over thy decent shoulders drawn. Com, but keep thy wonted state, With eev'n step, and musing gate, And looks commercing with the skies, Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes: There held in holy passion still, Forget thy self to Marble, till With a sad Leaden downward cast, Thou fix them on the earth as fast. And joyn with thee calm Peace, and Quiet, Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet,
And hears the Muses in a ring, Ay round about Joves Altar sing. And adde to these retired leasure, That in trim Gardens takes his pleasure; But first, and chiefest, with thee bring, Him that yon soars on golden wing, Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne, The Cherub Contemplation, And the mute Silence hist along, 'Less Philomel will daign a Song, Id her sweetest, saddest plight, Smoothing the rugged brow of night, While Cynthia checks her Dragon yoke, Gently o're th'accustom'd Oke; Sweet Bird that shunn'st the noise of folly, Most musicall, most melancholy▪ Thee Chauntress oft the Woods among, I woo to hear thy eeven-Song; And missing thee, I walk unseen On the dry smooth-shaven Green▪ To behold the wandring Moon▪ Riding neer her highest noon, Like one that had bin led astray Through the Heav'ns wide pathles way;
And oft, as if her head she bow'd, Stooping through a fleecy cloud. Oft on a Plat of rising ground, I hear the far-off Curfeu sound, Over som wide-water'd shoar, Swinging slow with sullen roar; Or if the Ayr will not permit, Som still removed place will fit, Where glowing Embers through the room Teach light to counterfeit a gloom, Far from all resort of mirth, Save the Cricket on the hearth, Or the Belmans drousie charm, To bless the dores from nightly harm: Or let my Lamp at midnight hour, Be seen in som high lonely Towr, Where I may oft out-watch the Bear, With thrice great Hermes, or unsphear The spirit of Plato to unfold What Worlds, or what vast Regions hold The immortal mind that hath forsook Her mansion in this fleshly nook: And of those Daemons that are found In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
Whose power hath a true consent With Planet, or with Element. Som time let Gorgeous Tragedy In Scepter'd Pall com sweeping by. Presenting Thebs, or Pelops line, Or the tale of Troy divine. Or what (though rare) of later age, Ennobled hath the Buskind stage. But, O sad Virgin, that thy power Might raise Musaeus from his bower, Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing Such notes as warbled to the string. Drew Iron tears down Pluto's cheek, And made Hell grant what Love did seek. Or call up him that left half told The story of Cambuscan bold, Of Camball, and of Algarsife, And who had Canace to wife, That own'd the vertuous Ring and Glass. And of the wondrous Hors of Brass, On which the Tartar King did ride; And if ought els, great Bards beside▪ In sage and solemn tunes have sung▪ Of Turneys and of Trophies hung▪
Of Forests, and inchantments drear, Where more is meant then meets the ear. Thus night oft see me in thy pale career, Till civil-suited Morn appeer, Not trickt and frounc't as she was wont, With the Attick Boy to hunt, But Cherchef't in a comly Cloud, While rocking Winds are Piping loud, Or usher'd with a shower still, When the gust hath blown his fill, Ending on the russling Leaves, With minute drops from off the Eaves▪ And when the Sun begins to fling His flaring beams, me Goddes bring To arched walks of twilight groves, And shadows brown that Sylvan loves Of Pine, or monumental Oake, Where the rude Ax with heaved stroke, Was never heard the Nymphs to daunt, Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt. There in close covert by som Brook, Where no profaner eye may look, Hide me from Day's garish eie, While the Bee with Honied thie,
That at her flowry work doth sing▪ And the Waters murmuring With such consort as they keep, Entice the dewy-feather'd Sleep; And let som strange mysterious dream, Wave at his Wings in Airy stream, Of lively portrature display'd, Softly on my eye-lids laid. And as I wake, sweet musick breath Above, about, or underneath, Sent by som spirit to mortals good, Or th'unseen Genius of the Wood. But let my due feet never fail, To walk the studious Cloysters pale, And love the high embowed Roof, With antick Pillars massy proof, And storied Windows richly dight, Casting a dimm religious light. There let the pealing Organ blow, To the full voic'd Quire below, In Service high, and Anthems cleer, As may with sweetnes, through mine ear, Dissolve me into extasies, And bring all Heav'n before mine eyes▪
And may at last my weary age Find out the peacefull hermitage, The Hairy Gown and Mossy Cell, Where I may sit and rightly spell, Of every Star that Heav'n doth shew, And every Herb that sips the dew; Till old experience do attain To somthing like Prophetic strain. These pleasures Melancholy give, And I with thee will choose to live. SONNETS. I. O Nightingale, that on yon bloomy Spray Warbl'st at eeve, when all the Woods are still, Thou with fresh hope the Lovers heart dost fill, While the jolly hours lead on propitious May, Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day, First heard before the shallow Cuccoo's bill Portend success in love; O if Jove's will Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay, Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate Foretell my hopeles doom in som Grove ny: As thou from yeer to yeer hast sung too late
For my relief; yet hadst no reason why, Whether the Muse, or Love call thee his mate, Both them I serve, and of their train am I. II. Donna leggiadra il cui bel nome honor L'herbosa val di Rheno, e il obil varc▪ Ben è colui d'ogni valore scarco Qual tuo spirto gentil non innamora, Che dolcemente mostra si di fuora De suoi atti soavi giamai parco, E i don', che son d'amor saette ed arc, L onde l'alta tua virtù s'infiora. Quando tu vaga parli, o lieta canti Che mover possa duro alpestre legno, Guardi ciascun a gli occhi, ed a gli orecchi L'entrata, chi di te si truova indegno; Gratia sola di sù gli vaglia, inanti Che'l disio amoroso al cuor s'invecchi. III. Qual in colle aspro, al imbrunir di sera L'avezza giovinetta pastorella Va bagnando l'herbetta strana e bella Che mal si spande a disusata spera
Fuor di sua natia alma primavera, Cosi Amor meco ins la lingua snella Desta il fior novo di strania favella, Mentre io di te, vezzosamente altera, Canto, dal mio buon popol non inteso E'l bel Tamigi cangio col bel Arno. Amor lo volse, ed io a l'altrui peso Seppi ch'Amor cosa mai volse indarno. Deh! foss'il mio cuor lento e'l duro sen A chi pianta dal ciel si buon terreno. Canzone. RIdonsi donne e giovani amorosi M'accostandosi attorno, e perche scrivi, Perche tu scrivi in lingua ignota e straa Verseggiando d'amor, e come t'osi? Dinne, se la tua speme sia mai vana, E depensieri lo miglior t'arrivi; Cosi mi van burlando, altri rivi Altri lidi t'aspettan, & altre onde Nelle cui verdi sponde Spuntati ad hor, ad hor a la tua chioma L'immortal guiderdon d'eterne frondi Perche alle spalle tue soverchia soma? anzon dirotti, e tu per me rispond
Dicemia Donna, e'l su dir, è il mio cuore Questa è lingua di cui si vanta Amore. IV. Diodati, e te'l dirò con maraviglia, Quel ritroso io ch'amor spreggiar soléa E de suoi lacci spesso mi ridéa Gia caddi, ov'huom dabben talhor s'impiglia▪ Ne treccie d'oro, ne guancia vermiglia M'abbaglian si, ma sotto nova idea Pellegrin a bellezza che'l cuor bea, Portamenti alti honesti, e nelle ciglia Quel sereno fulgor d'amabil nero, Parole adorne di lingua piu d'una, E'l cantar che di mezzo l'hemispero Traviar ben può la faticosa Luna, E degli occhi suoi auventa si gran fuoo Che l'incerar gli orecchi mi fia poco. V. Per certo i bei vostr'occhi Donna mi Esser non puo che non ian lo mio sole Si mi percuoton forte, come ei suol Per l'arene di Libia chi s'invia▪
Mentre un caldo vapor (ne senti pria) Da quel lato si spinge ove mi duole, Che forse amanti nelle lor parole Chiaman sospir; io non so che si sia: Parte rinchiusa, e turbida fi cela Scosso mi il petto, e poi n'uscendo poco Quivi d'attorno o s'agghiaccia, o s'ingiela; Ma quanto a gli occhi giunge a trovar loco Tutte le notti a me suol far piovose Finche mia Alba rivien colma di rose. VI. Giovane piano, e semplicetto amante Poi che fuggir me stesso in dubbio sono, Madonna a voi del mio cuor l'humil dono Farò divoto; io certo a prove tante L'hebbi fedele, intrepido, costate, De pensieri leggiadro, accorto, e buono; Quando rugge il gran mondo, e scocca il tuono, S'arma di se, e d' intero diamante, Tanto del forse, e d' invidia sicuro, Di timori, e speranze al popol use Quanto d'ingegno, e d'alto valor vago, E di cetra sonora, e delle muse: Sol troverete in tal parte men duro Ove Amor mise l'insanabil ago.
VII. How soon hath Time the suttle theef of youth, Stoln on his wing my three and twentith yeer! My hasting dayes flie on with full career, But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th. Perhaps my femblance might deceive the truth, That I to manhood am arriv'd so near, And inward ripenes doth much less appear, That som more timely-happy spirits indu'th▪ Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow, It shall be still in strictest measure eev'n, To that same lot, however mean, or high, Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heav'n; All is, if I have grace to use it so, As ever in my great task Masters eye. VIII. Captain or Colonel, or Knight in Arms, Whose chance on these defenceless dores may sease, If ever deed of honour did thee please, Guard them, and him within protect from harms▪ He can requite thee, for he knows the charms That call Fame on such gentle acts as these, And he can spred thy Name o're Lands and Seas, What ever clime the Suns bright circle warms.
Lift not thy spear against the Muses Bowre, The great Emathian Conqueror bid spare The house of Pindarus, when Temple and Towre Went to the ground: And the repeated air Of sad Electra's Poet had the power To save th'Athenian Walls from ruine bare. IX. Lady that in the prime of earliest youth, Wisely hast shun'd the broad way and the green, And with those few art eminently seen, That labour up the Hill of heav'nly Truth, The better part with Mary, and the Ruth, Chosen thou hast, and they that overween, And at thy growing vertues fret their spleen, No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. Thy care is fixt, and zealously attends To fill thy odorous Lamp with deeds of light, And Hope that reaps not shame. Therefore be sure Thou, when the Bridegroom with his seastfull friends Passes to bliss at the mid hour of night, Hast gain'd thy entrance, Virgin wise and pure.
X. Daughter to that good Earl, once President Of Englands Counsel, and her Treasury, Who liv'd in both, unstain'd with gold or fee, And left them both, more in himself content, Till the sad breaking of that Parlament Broke him, as that dishonest victory At Chaerona, fatal to liberty Kil'd with report that Old man eloquent, Though later born, then to have known the dayes Wherin your Father flourisht, yet by you Madam, me thinks I see him living yet; So well your words his noble vertues praise, That all both judge you to relate them true, And to possess them, Honour'd Margaret▪ Arcades. Part of an entertainment presented to the Countess Dowager of Darby at Harefild, by som Noble persons of her Family, who appear on the Scene in pastoral habit, moving toward the seat of State, with this Song. 1. SONG. LOok Nymphs, and Shepherds look, What sudden blaze of majesty
Is that which we from hence descry Too divine to be mistook: This this is she To whom our vows and wishes bend, Heer our solemn search hath end. Fame that her high worth to raise, Seem'd erst so lavish and profuse, We may justly now accuse Of detraction from her praise, Less then half we find exprest, Envy bid conceal the rest. Mak what radiant state she spreds, In circle round her shining throne, Shooting her beams like silver threds, This this is she alone, Sitting like a Goddes bright, In the center of her light. Might she the wise Latona be, Or the towred Cybele, Mother of a hunderd gods; Juno dare's not give her odds; Who had thought this clime had held A deity so unparalel'd▪
As they com forward, the Genius of the Wood appears, and turning toward them, speaks. GEn. Stay gentle Swains, for though in this disguise, I see bright honour sparkle through your eyes, Of famous Arady ye are, and sprung Of that renowned flood, so often sung, Divine Alpheus, who by secret sluse, Stole under Seas to meet his Arethuse; And ye the breathing Roses of the Wood, Fair silver-buskind Nymphs as great and good, I know this quest of yours, and free intent Was all in honour and devotion ment To the great Mistres of yon princely shrine, Whom with low reverence I adore as mine, And with all helpful service will comply To further this nights glad solemnity; And lead ye where ye may more neer behold What shallow-searching Fame hath left untold▪ Which I full oft amidst these shades alone Have sate to wonder at, and gaze upon: For know by lot from Jove I am the powr Of this fair Wood, and live in Oak'n bowr▪
To nurse the Saplings tall, and curl the grove With Ringlets quaint, and wanton windings wove. And all my Plants I save from nightly ill, Of noisom winds, and blasting vapours chill. And from the Boughs brush off the evil dew, And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blew, Or what the cross dire-looking Planet smites, Or hurtfull Worm with canker d venom bites. When Eev'ning gray doth rise, I fetch my round Over the mount, and all this hallow'd ground▪ And early ere the odorous breath of morn Awakes the slumbring leaves, or tasseld horn Shakes the high thicket, haste I all about, Number my ranks, and visit every sprout With puissant words, and murmurs made to bless, But els in deep of night when drowsines Hath lockt up mortal sense, then listen I To the celestial Sirens harmony, That sit upon the nine enfolded Sphears, And sing to those that hold the vital shears, And turn the Adamantine spindle round, On which the fate of gods and men is wound. Such sweet compulsion doth in musick ly, To lull the daughters of Necessity,
And keep unsteddy Nature to her law, And the low world in measur'd motion draw After the heavenly tune, which none can hear Of human mould with grosse unpurged ear; And yet such musick worthiest were to blaze The peerles height of her immortal praise, Whose lustre leads us, and for her most fit, If my inferior hand or voice could hit Inimitable sounds, yet as we go, What ere the skill of lesser gods can show▪ I will assay, her worth to celebrate, And so attend ye toward her glittering state; Where ye may all that are of noble stemm Approach, and kiss her sacred vestures hemm▪ 2. SONG. O'Re the smooth enameld green Where no print of step hath been, Follow me as I sing, And touch the warbled string. Under the shady roof Of branching Elm Star-proof. Follow me,
I will bring you where she fits, Clad in splendor as befits Her deity. Such a rural Queen All Arcadia hath not seen. 3. SONG. NYmphs and Shepherds dance no more By sandy Ladons Lillied banks. On old Lycaeus or Cyllene hoar, Trip no more in twilight ranks, Though Erymanth your loss deplore, A better soyl shall give ye thanks. From the stony Maenalus, Bring your Flocks, and live with us, Here ye shall have greater grace, To serve the Lady of this place. Though Syrinx your Paus Mistres were, Yet Syrinx well might wait on her. Such a rural Queen All Arcadia hath not seen.
Lycidas. In this Monody the Author bewails a learned Friend, unfortunatly drown'd in his Passage from Chester on the Irish Seas, 1637. And by occasion foretels the ruine of our corrupted Clergy then in their height. YEt once more, O ye Laurels, and once more Ye Myrtles brown, with Ivy never-sear, I com to pluck your Berries harsh and crude, And with forc'd fingers rude, Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year▪ Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear, Compels me to disturb your season due: For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer▪ Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew Himself to sing, and build the losty rhyme. He must not flote upon his watry bear Unwept, and welter to the parching wind, Without the meed of som melodious tear. Begin then, Sisters of the sacred well, That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring, Begin, and somwhat loudly sweep the string.
Hence with denial vain, and coy excuse, So may som gentle Muse With lucky words favour my destin'd Urn, And as he passes turn, And bid fair peace be to my sable shrowd. For we were nurst upon the self-same hill, Fed the same flock; by fountain, shade, and rill. Together both, ere the high Lawns appear'd Under the opening eye-lids of the morn, We drove a field, and both together heard What time the Gray-fly winds her sultry horn, Batt'ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night, Oft till the Star that rose, at Ev'ning, bright Toward Heav'ns descent had slop'd his westering wheel. Mean while the Rural ditties were not mute, Temper'd to th'Oaten Flute, Rough Styrs danc'd, and Fauns with clov'n heel, From the glad sound would not be absent long, And old Damoetas lov'd to ear our song. But O the heavy change, now thou art gon, Now thou art gon, and never must return▪ Thee Shepherd, thee the Woods, and desert Caves▪ With wilde Thyme and the gadding Vine oregrown, And all their echoes mourn.
The Willows, and the Hazle Copses green, Shall now no more be seen, Fanning their joyous Leaves to thy soft layes. As killing as the Canker to the Rose, Or Taint-worm to the weanling Herds that graze. Or Frost to Flowers, that their gay wardrop wear, When first the White thorn blows; Such, Lycidas, thy loss to Shepherds ear. Where were ye Nymphs when the remorseless deep Clos'd o're the head of your lov'd Lycidas? For neither were ye playing on the steep, Where your old Bards, the famous Druids ▪ly, Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high, Nor yet where Deva spreads her wisard stream: Ay me, I fondly dream! Had ye bin there—for what could that have don? What could the Muse her self that Orpheus bore, The Muse her self, for her inchanting son Whom Universal nature did lament, When by the rout that made the hideous roar, His goary visage down the stream was sent, Down the swift Hebrus to the Letbian shore. Alas! What boots it with uncessant care To tend the homely slighted Shepherds trade,
And strictly meditate the thankles Muse, Were it not better don as others use, To sport with Amaryllis in the shade, Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair? Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise (That last infirmity of Noble mind) To scorn delights, and live laborious dayes; But the fair Guerdon when we hope to find, And think to burst out into sudden blaze, Comes the blind Fury with th'abhorred shears, And slits the thin spun life. But not the praise, Phoebus repli'd, and touch'd my trembling ears; Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil, Nor in the glistering foil Set off to th'world, nor in broad rumour lies, But lives and spreds aloft by those pure eyes, And perfetwitnes of all judging Jove; As he pronounces lastly on each deed, Of so much fame in Heav'n expect thy meed. O Fountain Arcthuse, and thou honour'd floud, Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown'd with vocall reeds. That strain I heard was of a higher mood: But now my Oate proceeds, And listens to the Herald of the Sea
That came in Neptune's plea, He ask'd the Waves, and ask'd the Fellon winds, What hard mishap hath doom'd this gentle swain? And question'd every gust of rugged wings That blows from off each beaked Promontory, They knew not of his story, And sage Hippotades their answer brings, That not a blast was from his dungeon stray'd, The Ayr was calm, and on the level brine, Sleek Panope with all her sisters play'd. It was that fatall and perfidious Bark Built in th'eclipse, and rigg'd with curses dark, That sunk so low that sacred head of thine. Next Camus, reverend Sire, went footing slow, His Mantle hairy, and his Bonnet sedge, Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge Like to that sanguine flower inscrib'd with woe. Ah! Who hath reft (quoth he) my dearest pledge? Last came, and last did go, The Pilot of the Galilean lake, Two massy Keyes he bore of metals twain, (The Golden opes, the Iron shuts amain) He shook his Miter'd locks, and stern bespake, How well could I have spar'd for thee young swain.
Anow of such as for their bellies sake, Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold? Of other care they little reck'ning make, Then how to scramble at the shearers feast, And shove away the worthy bidden guest. Blind mouthes! that scarce themselves know how to hold A Sheep-hook, or have learn'd ought els the least That to the faithfull Herdmans art belongs! What recks it them? What need they? They are sped; And when they list, their lean and flashy songs Grate on their scrannel Pipes of wretched straw, The hungry Sheep look up, and are not fed, But swoln with wind, and the rank mist they draw, Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread: Besides what the grim Woolf with privy paw Daily devours apace, and nothing sed, But that two-handed engine at the door, Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more. Return Alpheus, the dread voice is past, That shrunk thy streams; Return Siilian Muse, And call the Vales, and bid them hither cast Their Bels, and Flourets of a thousand hues. Ye valleys low where the milde whispers use, Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
On whose fresh lap the swart Star sparely looks, Throw hither all your quaint enameld eyes, That on the green terf suck the honie showres, And purple all the ground with vernal flowres. Bring the rathe Primrose that forsaken dies. The tufted Crow-toe, and pale Gessamine, The white Pink, and the Pansie freakt with jeat, The glowing Violet. The Musk-rose, and the well attir'd Woodbine, With Cowslips wan that hang the pensive hed, And every flower that sad embroidery wears: Bid Amaranthus all his beauty shed, And Daffadillies fill their cups with tears, To strew the Laureat Herse where Lycid lies. For so to interpose a little ease, Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise. Ay me! Whilst thee the shores, and sounding Seas Wash far away, where ere thy bones are hurld, Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides, Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world; Or whether thou to our moist vows deny'd, Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old, Where the great vision of the guarded Mount
Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold; Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth. And, O ye Dolphins, waft the haples youth. Weep no more, woful Shepherds weep no more▪ For Lycidas your sorrow is not dead, Sunk though he be beneath the watry floar, So sinks the day-star in the Ocean bed, And yet anon repairs his drooping head, And tricks his beams, and with new spangled Ore, Flames in the forehead of the morning sky: So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high, Through the dear might of him that walk'd the waves Where other groves, and other streams along, With Nectar pure his oozy Lock's he laves, And hears the unexpressive nuptiall Song, In the blest Kingdoms meek of joy and love. There entertain him all the Saints above▪ In solemn troops, and sweet Societies That sing, and singing in their glory move, And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes▪ Now Lycidas the Shepherds weep no more▪ Hence forth thou art the Genius of the shore▪ In thy large recompense, and shalt be good To all that wander in that perilous flood.
Thus sang the uncouth Swain to th'Okes and rills▪ While the still morn went out with Sandals gray, He touch'd the tender stops of various Quills, With eager thought warbling his Dorick lay: And now the Sun had stretch'd out all the hills, And now was dropt into the Western bay; At last he rose, and twitch'd his Mantle blew: To morrow to fresh Woods, and Pastures new▪
A MASK Of the same AUTHOR PRESENTED At LƲDLOW-Castle, 1634. Before The Earl of BRIDGEWATER Then President of WALES. Anno Dom. 1645.
now to offer it up in all rightfull devo∣tion to those fair Hopes, and rare En∣dowments of your much-promising Youth, which give a full assurance, to all that know you, of a future excel∣lence. Live sweet Lord to be the honour of your Name, and receive this as your own, from the hands of him, who hath by many favours been long oblig'd to your most honour'd Parents, and as in this representation your at∣tendant Thyrsis, so now in all reall expression Your faithfull, and most humble ServantH. LAWES.
The Còpy of a Letter Writt'n By Sir HENRY WOOTTON, To the Author, upon the following Poem. From the Colledge, this 13. of April, 1638. SIR, IT was a special favour, when you lately bestowed upon me here, the first taste of your acquaintance, though no longer then to make me know that I wanted more time to value it, and to enjoy it rightly; and in truth, if I could then have imagined your farther stay in these parts, which I understood afterwards by Mr. H., I would have been bold in our vulgar phrase to mend my draught (for you left me with an extreme thirst) and to have begged your conver∣sation again, joyntly with your said learned Friend, at a poor meal or two, that we might have banded together som good Authors of the antient time: Among which, I observed you to have been familiar. Since your going, you have charg'd me with new Obligations, both for a very kinde Letter from you dated the sixth of this Month, and for a dainty peece of entertainment which came therwith. Wherin I should much commend the Tragical part, if the Lyrical did not ravish me with a certain Dorique delicacy in your Songs and Odes, wherunto I must
plainly confess to have seen yet nothing parallel in our Language: Ipsa mollities. But I must not omit to tell you, that I now onely owe you thanks for intimating unto me (how modestly soever) the true Artificer. For the work it self, I had view'd som good while before, with singular delight, ha∣ving receiv'd it from our common Friend Mr. R. in the very close of the late R's Poems, Printed at Oxford, wherunto it was added (as I now sup∣pose) that the Accessory might help out the Princi∣pal, according to the Art of Stationers, and to leave the Reader Con la bocca dolce. Now Sir, concerning your travels, wherin I may chalenge a little more priviledge of Discours with you; I suppose you will not blanch Paris in your way; therfore I have been bold to trouble you with a few lines to Mr. M. B. whom you shall easily find attending the young Lord S. as his Gover∣nour, and you may surely receive from him good directions for the shaping of your farther journey into Italy, where he did reside by my choice som time for the King, after mine own recess from Venice. I should think that your best Line will be thorow the whole length of France to Marseilles, and thence by Sea to Genoa, whence the passage into Tuscany is as Diurnal as a Gravesend Barge: I hasten as you do to Florence, or Siena, the rather to tell you a short story from the interest you have given me in your safety. At Siena I was tabled in the House of one Al∣berto Scipioni an old Roman Courtier in dangerous
times, having bin Steward to the Duca di Pagliano, who with all his Family were strangled, save this onely man that escap'd by foresight of the Tempest: With him I had often much chat of those affairs; Into which he took pleasure to look back from his Native Harbour; and at my departure toward Rome (which had been the center of his experience) I had wonn confidence enough to beg his advice, how I might carry my self securely there, without offence of others, or of mine own conscience. Signor Arrigo mio (sayes he) I pensieri stretti, & il viso sciolto will go safely over the whole World: Of which Delphian Oracle (for so I have found it) your judgement doth need no commentary; and therfore (Sir) I will commit you with it to the best of all securities, Gods dear love, remaining Your Friend as much at command as any of longer dateHenry Wootton. Postscript. SIR, I have expresly sent this my Foot-boy to pre∣vent your departure without som acknowledgement from me of the receipt of your obliging Letter, having my self through som busines, I know not how, neglected the ordinary conveyance. In any part where I shall un∣derstand you fixed, I shall be glad, and diligent to en∣tertain you with Home-Novelties; even for som fo∣mentation of our friendship, too soon interrupted in the Cradle.
The Persons. The attendant Spirit afterwards in in the habit of Thyrsis. Comus with his crew. The Lady. 1. Brother. 2. Brother. Sabrina the Nymph. The cheif persons which presented, were The Lord Bracly, Mr. Thomas Egerton his Brother, The Lady Alice Egerton.
A MASK PRESENTED At LUDLOW-Castle, 1634. &c. The first Scene discovers a wilde Wood. The attendant Spirit descends or enters. BEfore the starry threshold of Joves Court My mansion is, where those immortal shapes Of bright aëreal Spirits live insphear'd In Regions milde of calm and serene Ayr, Above the smoak and stirr of this dim spot, Which men call Earth, and with low-thoughted care
Confin'd, and pester'd in this pin-fold here▪ Strive to keep up a frail, and Feaverish being Unmindfull of the crown that Vertue gives After this mortal change, to her true Servants Amongst the enthron'd gods on Sainted seats. Yet som there be that by due steps aspire To lay their just hands on that Golden Key That ope's the Palace of Eternity: To snch my errand is, and but for such, I would not soil these pure Ambrosial weeds, With the rank vapours of this Sin-worn mould. But to my task. Neptune besides the sway Of every salt Flood, and each ebbing Stream, Took in by lot 'twixt high, and neather Jove, Imperial rule of all the Sea-girt Iles That like to rich, and various gemms inlay The unadorned boosom of the Deep, Which he to grace his tributary gods By course commits to severall goverment, And gives them leave to wear their Saphire crowns▪ And weild their little tridents, but this Ile The greatest, and the best of all the main He quarters to his blu hair'd deities, And all this tract that front the falling Sun
A noble Peer of mickle trust, and power Has in his charge, with temper'd awe to guide An old, and haughty Nation proud in Arms: Where his fair off-spring nurs't in Princely lore, Are coming to attend their Fathers state, And new-entrusted Scepter, but their way Lies through the perplex't paths of this drear Wood▪ The nodding horror of whose shady brows Threats the forlorn and wandring Passinger. And here their tender age might suffer perill, But that by quick command from Soveran Jove I'was dispatcht for their defence, and guard; And listen why, for I will tell ye now What never yet was heard in Tale or Song From old, or modern Bard in Hall, or Bowr. Baccbus that first from out the purple Grape, Crush't the sweet poyson of mis-used Wine After the Tuscan Mariners transform'd Coasting the Tyrrhene shore, as the winds listed, On Circes Iland fell (who knows not Circe The daughter of the Sun? Whose charmed Cup Whoever tasted, lost his upright shape, And downward fell into a groveling Swine) This Nymph that gaz'd upon his clustring locks,
With Ivy berries wreath'd, and his blithe youth, Had by him, ere he parted thence, a Son Much like his Father, but his Mother more, Whom therfore she brought up and Comus nam'd, Who ripe, and frolick of his full grown age, Roaving the Celtick, and Iberian fields, At last betakes him to this ominous Wood, And in thick shelter of black shades imbowr'd, Excells hi Mother at her mighty Art, ffring to every weary Travailer, His orient liquor in a Crystal Glasse, To quench the drouth of Phoebus, which as they taste (For most do ase through fond intemperate thirst) Soon as the Potion works, their human count'rance, Th'express resemblance of the gods, is chang'd Into som brutish form of Woolf, or Bear, Or Ounce, or Tiger, Hog, or bearded Goat, All other parts remaining as they were, And they, so perfect is their misery, Not once perceive their foul disfigurement, But boast themselves more comely then before And all their friends, and native home forget To roule with pleasure in a sensual stie. Therfore when any favour'd of high Jove,
Chances to passe through this adventrous glade, Swift as the Sparkle of a glancing Star, I shoot from Heav'n to give him safe convoy, As now I do: But first I must put off These my skierobes spun out of Iris Wooff, And take the Weeds and likenes of a Swain, That to the service of this house belongs, Who with his sost Pipe, and smooth-dittied Song, Well knows to still the wilde winds when they roar, And hush the waving Woods, nor of lesse faith, And in this office of his Mountain watch, Likeliest, and neerest to the present ayd Of this occasion. But I hear the tread Of hatefull steps, I must be viewles now. Comus enters with a Charming Rod in one hand, his Glass in the other, with him a rout of Mon∣sters headed like sundry sorts of wilde Beasts, but otherwise like Men and Women, their Ap∣parel glistring, they com in making a riotous and unruly noise, with Torches in their hands. Comus. The Star that bids the Shepherd fold, Now the top of Heav'n doth hold, And the gilded Car of Day, His glowing Axle doth allay
In the steep Atlantick stream, And the slope Sun his upward beam Shoots against the dusky Pole▪ Pacing toward the other gole Of his Chamber in the East. Mean while welcom Joy, and Feast, Midnight shout, and revelry, Tipsie dance, and Jollity. Braid your Locks with rosie Twine Dropping odours, dropping Wine. Rigor now is gon to bed, And Advice with scrupulous head, Strict Age, and sowre Severity, With their grave Saws in slumber ly. We that are of purer fire▪ I mitate the Starry Quire, Who in their nightly watchfull Sphears, Lead in swift round the Months and Years. The Sounds, and Seas with all their finny drove Now to the Moon in wavering Morrice move, And on the Tawny Sands and Shelves, Trip the pert Fairies and the dapper Elves; By dimpled Brook, and Fountain brim, The Wood-Nymohs deckt with Daisies trim,
Their merry wakes and pastimes keep▪ What hath night to do with sleep? Night hath better sweets to prove, Venus now wakes, and wak'ns Love. Com let us our rights begin, Tis onely day-light that makes Sin Which these dun shades will ne're report. Hail Goddesse of Nocturnal sport Dark vaild Cotytto, t'whom the secret flame Of mid-night Torches burns; mysterious Dame That ne're art call'd, but when the Dragon woom Of Stygian darknes spets her thickest gloom, And makes one blot of all the ayr, Stay thy cloudy Ebon chair, Wherin thou rid'st with Hecat', and befriend Us thy vow'd Priests, till utmost end Of all thy due be done, and none left out▪ Ere the blabbing Eastern scout, The nice Morn on th' Indian steep From her cabin'd loop hole peep, And to the tel-tale Sun discry Our conceal'd Solemnity. Com, knit hands, and beat the ground, In a light fantastick round.
The Measure. Break off, break off, I feel the different pace, Of som chast footing neer about this ground, Run to your shrouds, within these Brakes and Trees, Our number may affright: Som Virgin sure (For so can distinguish by mine Art) Benighted in these Woods. Now to my charms, And to my wily trains, I shall e're long Be well stock't with as fair a herd as graz'd About my Mother Circe. Thus I hurl My dazling Spells into the spungy ayr, Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion, And give it false presentments, lest the place And my quaint habits breed astonishment, And put the Damsel to suspicious flight, Which must not be, for that's against my course; I under fair pretence of friendly ends, And well plac't words of glozing courtesie Baited with reasons not unplausible Wind me into the easie-hearted man, And hugg him into snares. When once her eye Hath met the vertue of this Magick dust, I shall appear som harmles Villager Whom thrift keeps up about his Country gear▪
But here she comes, I fairly step aside And hearken, if I may, her busines here. The Lady enters. This way the noise was, if mine ear be true, My best guide now, me thought it was the sound Of Riot, and ill manag'd Merriment, Such as the jocond Flute, or gamesom Pipe Stirs up among the loose unleter'd Hinds, When for their teeming Flocks, and granges full In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan, And thank the gods amiss. I should be loath To meet the rudenesse, and swill'd insolence Of such late Wassailers; yet O where els Shall I inform my unacquainted feet In the blind maze of this tangl'd Wood? My Brothers when they saw me wearied out With this long way, resolving here to lodge Under the spreading favour of these Pines, Stept as they se'd to the next Thicket side To bring me Berries, or such cooling fruit As the kind hospitable Woods provide. They left me then, when the gray-hooded Eev'n Like a sad Votarist in Palmers weed
Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus wain. But where they are, and why they came not back, Is now the labour of my thoughts, 'tis likeliest They had ingag'd their wandring steps too far, And envious darknes, e're they could return, Had stole them from me, els O theevish Night Why shouldst thou, but for som fellonious end, In thy dark lantern thus close up the Stars, That nature hung in Heav'n, and fill'd their Lamps With everlasting oil, to give due light To the misled and lonely Travailer? This is the place, as well as I may guess, Whence eev'n now the tumult of loud Mirth Was rife, and perfet in my list'ning ear, Yet nought but single darknes do I find▪ What might this be? A thousand fantasies Begin to throng into my memory Of calling shapes, and beckning shadows dire, And airy tongues, that syllable mens names On Sands, and Shoars, and desert Wildernesses. These thoughts may startle well, but not astound The vertuous mind, that ever walks attended By a strong siding champion Conscience.— O welcom pure ey'd Faith, white-handed Hope,
Thou hovering Angel girt with golden wings, And thou unblemish't form of Chastity, I see ye visibly, and now beleeve That he, the Supreme good, t'whom all things ill Are but as slavish officers of vengeance, Would send a glistring Guardian if need were To keep my life and honour unassail'd. Was I deceiv'd, or did a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night? I did not err, there does a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night, And casts a gleam over this tufted Grove. I cannot hallow to my Brothers, but Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest Ile venter, for my new enliv'nd spirits Prompt me; and they perhaps are not far off. SONG. Sweet Echo, sweetest Nympb that liv'st unseen Within thy airy shell By slow Meander's margent green, And in the violet imbroider'd vale Where the love-lorn Nightingale Nightly to thee her sad Song mourneth well.
Cst thou not tell me of a gentle Pair That likest thy Narcissus are? O if thou have Hid them in som flowry Cave, Tell me but where Sweet Queen of Parly, Daughter of the Sphear▪ So maist thou be translated to the skies, And give resounding grace to all Heav'ns Harmonies. Com. Can any mortai mixture of Earths mould Breath such Divine inchanting ravishment? Sure somthing holy lodges in that brest, And with these raptures moves the vocal air To testifie his hidd'n residence; How sweetly did they float upon the wings Of silence, through the empty-vaulted night At every fall smoothing the Raven doune Of darknes till it smil'd: I have oft heard My Mother Circe with the Sirens three, Amidst the flowry-kirtl'd Naiades Culling their Potent hearbs, and balefull drugs, Who as they sung, would take the prison'd soul, And lap it in Elysium, Scylla wept, And chid her barking waves into attention,
And fell Charybdis murmur'd soft applause: Yet they in pleasing slumber lull'd the sense, And in sweet madnes rob'd it of it self, But such a sacred▪ and home-felt delight, Such sober certainty of waking bliss I never heard till now. Ile speak to her And she shall be my Queen. Hail forren wonder Whom certain these rough shades did never breed Unlesse the Goddes that in rurall shrine Dwell st here with Pan, or Silvan, by blest Song Forbidding every bleak unkindly Fog To touch the prosperous growth of this tall Wood▪ La Nay gentle Shepherd ill is lost that praise That is addrest to unattending Ears, Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift How to regain my sever'd company Compell'd me to awake the courteous Echo To give me answer from her mossie Couch. Co. What chance good Lady hath bereft you thus? La. Dim darknes, and this leavy Labyrinth. Co. Could that divide you from neer-ushering guides? La. They left me weary on a grassie terf. Co. By falshood, or discourtesie▪ or why? La. To seek i'th vally som cool friendly Spring.
Co. And left your fair side all unguarded Lady? La. They were but twain, and purpos'd quick return. Co. Perhaps fore-stalling night prevented them. La. How easie my misfortune is to hit! Co. Imports their loss, beside the present need? La. No less then if I should my brothers loose. Co. Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom? La. As smooth as Hebe's their unrazor'd lips. Co. Two such I saw, what time the labour'd Oxe In his loose traces from the furrow came, And the swink't hedger at his Supper sate; I saw them under a green mantling vine That crawls along the side of yon small hill, Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots, Their port was more then human, as they stood▪ I took it for a faery vision Of som gay creatures of the element That in the colours of the Rainbow live And play i'th plighted clouds. I was aw-strook, And as I past, I worshipt; if those you seek It were a journey like the path to Heav'n, To help you find them. La. Gentle villager What readiest way would bring me to that place? Co. Due west it rises from this shrubby point.
La. To find out that, good Shepherd, I suppose, In such a scant allowance of Star-light, Would overtask the best Land-Pilots art, Without the sure guess of well-practiz'd feet. Co. I know each lane, and every alley green Dingle, or bushy dell of this wilde Wood, And every bosky bourn from side to side My daily walks and ancient neighbourhood▪ And if your stray attendance be yet lodg'd, Or shroud within these limits, I shall know Ere morrow wake, or the low roosted lark From her thach't pallat rowse, if otherwise▪ I can conduct you Lady to a low But loyal cottage, where you may be safe Till further quest'. La. Shepherd I take thy word, And trust thy honest offer'd courtesie, Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds With smoaky rafters, then in tapstry Halls And Courts of Princes, where it first was nam'd, And yet is most pretended: In a place Less warranted then this, or less secure I cannot be, that I should fear to change it, Eie me blest Providence, and square my triall To my proportion'd strength. Shepherd lead on.
The two Brothers. Eld. Bro. Unmuffle ye faintstars, and thou fair Moon That wontst to love the travailers benizon, Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud, And disinherit Chaos, that raigns here In double night of darknes, and of shades; Or if your influence be quite damm'd up With black usurping mists, som gentle taper Though a rush Candle from the wicker hole Of som clay habitation visit us With thy long levell'd rule of streaming light, And thou shalt be our star of Arcady, Or Tyrian Cynosure▪ 2 Bro. Or if our eyes Be barr'd that happines, might we but hear The folded flocks pen'd in their watled cotes, Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops, Or whistle from the Lodge, or village cock Count the night watches to his feathery Dames, T'would be som solace yet, som little chearing In this close dungeon of innumerous bowes. But O that haples virgin our lost sister Where may she wander now, whether betake her From the chill dew, amongst rude burrs and thistles?
Perhaps som cold bank is her boulster now Or'gainst the rugged bark of som broad Elm Leans her unpillow'd head fraught with sad fears. What if in wild amazement, and affright, Or while we speak within the direfull grasp Of Savage hunger, or of Savage heat▪ Eld. Bro. Peace brother, be not over-exquisite To cast the fashion of uncertain evils; For grant they be so, while they rest unknown, What need a man forestall his date of grief, And run to meet what he would most avoid? Or if they be but false alarms of Fear, How bitter is such self-delusion? I do not think my sister so to seek, Or so unprincipl'd in vertues book, And the sweet peace that goodnes boosoms ever, As that the single want of light and noise (Not being in danger, as I trust she is not) Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts, And put them into mis-becoming plight. Vertue could see to do what vertue would By her own radiant light, though Sun and Moon Were in the flat Sea sunk. And Wisdoms self Oft seeks to sweet retired Solitude,
Where with her best nurse Contemplation She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings That in the various bussle of resort Were all to ruffl'd, and somtimes impair'd. He that has light within his own cleer brest May sit i'th center, and enjoy bright day, But he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts Benighted walks under the mid-day Sun; Himself is his own dungeon. 2. Bro. Tis most true That musing meditation most affects The Pensive secrecy of desert cell, Far from the cheerfull haunt of men, and herds, And sits as safe as in a Senat house, For who would rob a Hermit of his Weeds, His few Books, or his Beads, or Maple Dish, Or do his gray hairs any violence? But beauty like the fair Hesperian Tree Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard Of dragon watch with uninchanted eye, To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit From the rash hand of bold Incontinence. You may as well spred out the unsun'd heaps Of Misers treasure by an out-laws den,
And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope Danger will wink on Opportunity, And let a single helpless maiden pass Uninjur'd in this wilde surrounding wast. Of night, or lonelines it recks me not, I fear the dred events that dog them both, Lest som ill greeting touch attempt the person Of our unowned sister. Eld. Bro. I do not, brother, Inferr, as if I thought my sisters state Secure without all doubt, or controversie: Yet where an equall poise of hope and fear Does arbitrate th'event, my nature is That I encline to hope, rather then fear, And gladly banish squint suspicion. My sister is not so defenceless left As you imagine, she has a hidden strength Which you remember not. 2. Bro. What hidden strength, Unless the strength of Heav'n, if you mean that? Eld. Bro. I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength Which if Heav'n gave it, may be term'd her own: 'Tis chastity, my brother, chastity: She that has that, is clad in compleat steel,
And like a quiver'd Nymph with Arrows keen May trace huge Forests, and unharbour'd Heaths, Infamous Hills, and sandy perilous wildes, Where through the sacred rayes of Chastity, No savage fierce, Bandite, or mountaneer Will dare to soyl her Virgin purity, Yea there, where very desolation dwels By grots, and caverns shag'd with horrid shades, She may pass on with unblench't majesty, Be it not don in pride, or in presumption. Som say no evil thing that walks by night In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen, Blew meager Hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost, That breaks his magick chains at curfeu time▪ No goblin, or swart Faëry of the mine, Hath hurtfull power o're true virginity. Do ye beleeve me yet, or shall I call Antiquity from the old Schools of Greece To testifie the arms of Chastity? Hence had the huntress Dian her dred bow Fair silver-shafted Queen for ever chaste, Wherwith she tam'd the brinded lioness And spotted mountain pard, but set at nought The frivolous bolt of Cupid, gods and men
Fear'd her stern frown, and she was queen oth'Woods. What was that snaky-headed Gorgon sheild That wise Minerva wore, unconquer d Virgin, Wherwith she freez'd her foes to congeal'd stone? But rigid looks of Chast austerity, And noble grace that dash't brute violence With sudden adoration, and blank aw. So dear to Heav'n is Saintly chastity, That when a soul is found sincerely so, A thousand liveried Angels lacky her, Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt, And in cleer dream, and solemn vision Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear, Till oft convers with heav'nly habitants Begin to cast a beam on th'outward shape, The unpolluted temple of the mind, And turns it by degrees to the souls essence, Till all be made immortal: but when lust By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk, But most by leud and lavish act of sin, Lets in defilement to the inward parts, The soul grows clotted by contagion, Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite loose The divine property of her first being.
Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp Oft seen in Charnell vaults, and Sepulchers Lingering, and sitting by a new made grave, As loath to leave the body that it lov'd, And link't it self by carnal sensualty To a degenerate and degraded state. 2. Bro. How charming is divine Philosophy▪ Not harsh, and crabbed as dull fools suppose, But musical as is Apollo's lute, And a perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets, Where no crude surfet raigns. Eld. Bro. List, list, I hear Som far off hallow break the silent Air. 2. Bro. Me thought so too; what should it be? Eld. Bro. For certain Either som one like us night-founder'd here, Or els som neighbour Wood-man, or at worst, Som roaving Robber calling to his fellows. 2 Bro. Heav'n keep my sister, agen agen and neer, Best draw, and stand upon our guard. Eld. Bro. Ile hallow, If he be friendly he comes well, if not, Defence is a good cause, and Heav'n be for us.
The attendant Spirit habited like a Shepherd. That hallow I should know, what are you? speak; Com not too neer, you fall on iron stakes else. Spir. What voice is that, my young Lord? speak agen 2. Bro. O brother, 'tis my father Shepherd sure. El. Bro. Thyrsis? Whose artful strains have oft delaid The huddling brook to hear his madrigal, And sweeten'd every muskrose of the dale, How cam'st thou here good Swain? hath any ram Slip't from the fold, or young Kid lost his dam, Or straggling weather the pen't flock forsook▪ How couldst thou find this dark sequester'd nook? Spir. O my lov'd masters heir, and his next joy, I came not here on such a trivial toy As a stray'd Ewe, or to pursue the stealth Of pilfering Woolf, not all the fleecy wealth That doth enrich these Downs, is worth a thought To this my errand, and the care it brought. But O my Virgin Lady, where is she? How chance she is not in your company? Eld. Bro. To tell thee sadly Shepherd, without blame, Or our neglect, we lost her as we came▪ Spir. Ay me unhappy then my fears are true.
El. Bro. What fears good Thyrsis? Prethee briefly shew. Spir. Ile tell ye, 'tis not vain, or fabulous, (Though so esteem'd by shallow ignorance) What the sage Poets taught by th'heav'nly Muse, Storied of old in high immortal vers Of dire Chimera's and inchanted Iles, And ifted Rocks whose entrance leads to hell, For such there be, but unbelief is blind. Within the navil of this hideous Wood, Immur'd in cypress shades a Sorcerer dwels Of Bacchus, and of Circe born, great Comus, Deep skill'd in all his mothers witcheries, And here to every thirsty wanderer, By sly enticement gives his banefull cup, With many murmurs mixt, whose pleasing poison The visage quite transforms of him that drinks, And the inglorious likenes of a beast Fixes instead, unmoulding reasons mintage Character'd in the face; this have I learn't Tending my flocks hard by i'th hilly crofts, That brow this bottom glade, whence night by night He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl Like stabl'd wolves, or tigers at their prey, Doing abhorred rites to Hecate
In their obscured haunts of inmost bowres. Yet have they many baits, and guilefull spells To inveigle and invite th'unwary sense Of them that pass unweeting by the way▪ This evening late by then the chewing flocks Had ta'n their supper on the savoury Herb Of Knot-grass dewbesprent, and were in fold▪ I sate me down to watch upon a bank With Ivy canopied, and interwove With flaunting Hony-suckle, and began Wrapt in a pleasing fit of melancholy To meditate my rural minstrelsie, Till fancy had her fill, but ere a close The wonted roar was up amidst the Woods, And fill'd the Air with barbarous dissonance▪ At which I ceas't, and listen'd them a while, Till an unusuall stop of sudden silence Gave respit to the drowsie frighted steeds That draw the litter of close-curtain'd sleep. At last a soft and solemn breathing sound Rose like a steam of rich distill d Perfumes, And stole upon the Air, that even Silence Was took e're she was ware, and wish't she might Deny her nature, and be never more
Still to be so displac't. I was all eare, And took in strains that might create a soul Under the ribs of Death, but O ere long Too well I did perceive it was the voice Of my most honour'd Lady, your dear sister. Amaz'd I stood, harrow'd with grief and fear, And O poor hapless Nightingale thought I, How sweet thou sing'st, how neer the deadly snare! Then down the Lawns I ran with headlong hast Through paths, and turnings oft'n trod by day, Till guided by mine ear I found the place Where that damn'd wisard hid in sly disguise (For so by certain signes I knew) had met Already, ere my best speed could praevent, The aidless innocent Lady his wish't prey, Who gently ask't if he had seen such two, Supposing him som neighb our villager; Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guess't Ye were the two she mean't, with that I sprung Into swift flight, till I had found you here, But furder know I not. 2. Bro. O night and shades, How are ye joyn'd with hell in triple knot Against th'unarmed weakness of one Virgin Alone, and helpless! Is this the confidence
You gave me Brother? Eld. Bro. Yes, and keep it still, Lean on it safely, not a period Shall be unsaid for me: against the threats Of malice or of sorcery, or that power Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm, Vertue may be assail'd, but never hurt, Surpriz'd by unjust force, but not enthrall'd, Yea even that which mischief meant most harm, Shall in the happy trial prove most glory. But evil on it self shall back recoyl, And mix no more with goodness, when at last Gather'd like scum, and setl'd to it self It shall be in eternal restless change Self-fed, and self-consum'd, if this fail, The pillar'd firmament is rott'nness, And earths base built on stubble. But com let's on▪ Against th'opposing will and arm of Heav'n May never this just sword be lifted up, But for that damn'd magician, let him be girt With all the greisly legions that troop Under the sooty flag of Acheron, Harpyies and Hydra's, or all the monstrous forms 'Twixt Africa, and Iude, Ile find him out, And force him to restore his purchase back,
Or drag him by the curls, to a foul death, Curs d as his life. Spir. Alas good ventrous youth, I love thy courage yet, and bold Emprise, But here thy sword can do thee little stead, Farr other aries, and other weapons must Be those that  of hellish charms, He with his bare wand can untared thy joynts, And crumble all thy sinews. Eld. Bro. Why prethee Shepherd How durst thou then thy self approach so neer As to make this relation? Spir. Care and utmost shifts How to secure the Lady from surprisal, Brought to my mind a certain Shepherd Lad Of small regard to see to, yet well skill'd In every vertuous plant and healing herb That spreds her verdant leaf to th'morning ray, He lov'd me well, and oft would beg me sing, Which when I did, he on the tender grass Would sit, and hearken even to extasie, And in requitall ope his leather'n scrip, And shew me simples of a thousand names Telling their strange and vigorous faculties;
Amongst the rest a small unsightly root, But of divine effect, he cull'd me out; The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it, But in another Countrey, as he said, Bore a bright golden flowre, but not in this soyl: Unknown, and like esteem'd, and the dull swayn Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon, And yet more med'cinal is it then that Moly That Hermes once to wise Ʋlysses gave; He call'd it Hemony, and gave it me, And bad me keep it as of sovran use 'Gainst all inchantments, mildew blast, or damp Or gastly furies apparition; I purs't it up, but little reck'ning made, Till now that this extremity compell'd, But now I find it true; for by this means I knew the foul inchanter though disguis'd, Enter'd the very lime-twigs of his spells, And yet came off: if you have this about you (As I will give you when we go) you may Boldly assault the necromancers hall; Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood, And brandish't blade rush on him, break his glass, And shed the lushious liquor on the ground,
But sease his wand, though he and his curst crew Feirce signe of battail make, and menace high, Or like the sons of Vulcan vomit smoak, Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink. Eld. Bro. Thyrsis lead on apace, Ile follow thee, And som good angel bear a sheild before us. The Scene changes to a stately Palace, set out with all manner of deliciousness: soft Musick, Tables spred with all dainties. Comus appears with his rabble, and the Lady set in an inchanted Chair, to whom he offers his Glass, which she puts by, and goes about to rise. Comus. Nay Lady sit; if I but wave this wand, Your nervs are all chain'd up in Alablaster, And you a statue; or as Daphne was Root-bound, that fled Apollo, La. Fool do not boast, Thou canst not touch the freedom of my minde Withall thy charms, although this corporal rinde▪ Thou haste immanacl'd, while Heav'n sees good. Co. Why are you vext Lady? why do you frown? Here dwel no frowns, nor anger, from these gates Sorrow flies farr: See here be all the pleasures That fancy can beget on youthfull thoughts,
When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns Brisk as the April buds in Primrose-season, And first behold this cordial Julep here That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds With spirits of balm, and fragrant Syrops mixt▪ Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone, In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena Is of such power to stir up joy as this, To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst▪ Why should you be so cruel to your self, And to those dainty limms which nature lent For gentle usage, and soft delicacy? But you invert the cov'nants of her trust, And harshly deal like an ill borrower With that which you receiv'd on other terms, Scorning the unexempt condition By which all mortal frailty must subsist, Refreshment after toil, ease after pain, That have been tir'd all day without repast, And timely rest have wanted, but fair Virgin This will restore all soon. La. 'Twill not false traitor, 'Twill not restore the truth and honesty That thou hast banish't from thy tongue with lies,
Was this the cottage, and the safe abode Thou told'st me of? What grim aspects are these, These oughly-headed Monsters? Mercy guard me! Hence with thy brew'd inchantments, foul deceiver, Hast thou betrai'd my credulous innocence With visor'd falshood, and base forgery, And wouldst thou seek again to trap me here With lickerish baits fit to ensnare a brute? Were it a draft for Juno when she banquets, I would not taste thy treasonous offer; none But such as are good men can give good things, And that which is not good, is not delicious To a wel govern'd and wise appetite. Co. O foolishnes of men! that lend their ears To those budge doctors of the Stoick Furr, And fetch their precepts from the Cynick Tub, Praising the lean and sallow Abstinence. Wherefore did Nature powre her bounties forth, With such a full and unwithdrawing hand, Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks, Thronging the Seas with spawn innumerable, But all to please, and sate the curious taste? And set to work millions of spinning Worms, That in their green shops weave the smooth-hair'd silk
To deck her Sons, and that no corner might Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loyns She hutch't th'all-worshipt ore, and precious gems To store her children with; if all the world Should in a pet of temperance feed on Pulse, Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but Freize, Th'all-giver would be unthank't, would be unprais'd, Not half his riches known, and yet despis'd, And we should serve him as a grudging master, As a penurious niggard of his wealth, And live like Natures bastards, not her sons, Who would be quite surcharg'd with her own weight, And strangl'd with her waste fertility; Th'earth cumber'd, and the wing'd air dark't with plumes, The herds would over-multitude their Lords, The Sea o'refraught would swell, & th'unsought diamonds Would so emblaze the forhead of the Deep, And so bestudd with Stars, that they below Would grow inur'd to light, and com at last To gaze upon the Sun with shameless brows. List Lady be not coy, and be not cosen'd With that same vaunted name Virginity, Beauty is natures coyn, must not be hoorded. But must be currant, and the good thereof
Consists in mutual and partak'n bliss, Unsavoury in th'injoyment of it self If you let slip time, like a neglected rose It withers on the stalk with languish't head. Beauty is natures brag, and must be shown In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities Where most may wonder at the workmanship; It is for homely features to keep home, They had their name thence; course complexions And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply The sampler, and to teize the huswifes wooll. What need a vermeil-tinctur'd lip for that Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the Morn? There was another meaning in these gifts, Think what, and be adviz'd, you are but young yet. La. I had not thought to have unlockt my lips In this unhallow'd air, but that this Jugler Would think to charm my judgement, as mine eyes Obtruding false rules pranckt in reasons garb. I hate when vice can bolt her arguments, And vertue has no tongue to check her pride: Impostor do not charge most innocent nature, As if she would her children should be riotous With her abundance, she good cateress
Means her provision onely to the good That live according to her sober laws, And holy dictate of spare Temperance: If every just man that now pines with want Had but a moderate and beseeming share▪ Of that which lewdly-pamper'd Luxury Now heaps upon som few with vast excess, Natures full blessings would be well dispenc't In unsuperfluous eeven proportion, And she no whit encomber'd with her store, And then the giver would be better thank't, His praise due paid, for swinish gluttony Ne're looks to Heav'n amidst his gorgeous feast, But with besotted base ingratitude Cramms, and blasphemes his feeder. Shall I go on? Or have I said anough? To him that dares Arm his profane tongue with contemptuous words Against the Sun-clad power of Chastity, Fain would I somthing say, yet to what end? Thou hast nor Eare, nor Soul to apprehend The sublime notion, and high mystery That must be utter'd to unfold the sage And serious doctrine of Virginity, And thou art worthy that thou shouldst not know
More happines then this thy present lot. Enjoy your deer Wit, and gay Rhetorick That hath so well been taught her dazling fence, Thou art not fit to hear thy self convinc't; Yet should I try, the uncontrouled worth Of this pure cause would kindle my rap't spirits To such a flame of sacred vehemence, That dumb things would be mov'd to sympathize, And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake, Till all thy magick structures rear'd so high, Were shatter'd into heap o're thy false head. Co. She fa not, I feel that I do fear Her words  t off by som superior power; And though not mortal, yet a cold shuddring dew Dips me all o're, as when the wrath of Jove Speaks thunder, and the chain of Erebus To som of Saturns crew. I must dissemble, And try her yet more strongly. Com, no more, This is meer moral babble, and direct Against the canon laws of our foundation; I must not suffer this, yet 'tis but the lees And stling of a melancholy blood; But this will cure all streight, one sip of this Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight eyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste.—
The Brothers rush in with Swords drawn, wrest his Glass out of his hand, and break it against the ground; his rout make signe of resistance, but are all driven in; The attendant Spirit comes in. Spir. What, have you let the false enchanter scape? O ye mistook, ye should have satcht his wand And bound him fast; without his rod revers't, And backward mutters of dissevering power, We cannot free the Lady that sits here In stony fetters fixt, and motionless; Yet stay, be not disturb'd, now I bethink me, Som other means I have which may be us'd, Which once of Melibaeus old I learnt The soothest Shepherd that ere pip't on plains. There is a gentle Nymph not fair from hence, That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream, Sabrina is her name, a Virgin pure, Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine, That had the Scepter from his father Brute. She guiltless damsell flying the mad pursuit Of her enraged stepdam Guendolen, Commended her fair innocence to the flood That stay'd her flight with his cross flowing course,
The water Nymphs that in the bottom plaid, Held up their pearled wrists and took her in, Bearing her straight to aged Nereus Hall, Who piteous of her woes, rear'd her lank head, And gave her to his daughters to imbathe In nectar'd lavers strew'd with Asphodil, And through the porch and inlet of each fense Dropt in Ambrosial Oils till she reviv'd, And underwent a quick immortal change Made Goddess of the River; still she retains Her maid'n gentlenes, and oft at Eeve Visits the herds along the twilight meadows, Helping all urchin blasts, and ill luck signes That the shrewd medling Elfe delights to make, Which she with pretious viold liquors heals. For which the Shepherds at their festivals Carrol her goodnes lowd in rustick layes, And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream Of pancies, pinks, and gaudy Daffadils. And, as the old Swain said, she can unlock The clasping charm, and thaw the numming spell, If she be right invok't in warbled Song, For maid'nhood she loves, and will be swift To aid a Virgin, such as was her self
In hard besetting need, this will I try And adde the power of som adjuring verse. SONG. Sabrina fair Listen where thou art fitting Under the glassie, cool, translucent wave▪ In twisted braids of Lillies knitting The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair▪ Listen for dear honours sake, Goddess of the silver lake, Listen and save. Listen and appear to us In name of great Oceanus, By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace, And Tethys grave majestick pace, By hoary Nereus wrincled look, And the Carpathian wisards hook, By scaly Tritons winding shell, And old sooth-saying Glaucus spell, By Leucothea's lovely hands, And her son that rules the strands, By Thetis tinsel-slipper'd feet, And the Songs of Sirens sweet,
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb, And fair Ligea's golden comb, Wherwith she sits on diamond rocks Sleeking her soft alluring locks, By all the Nymphs that nightly dance Upon thy streams with wily glance, Rise, rise, and heave thy rosie head From thy coral pav' bed, And bridle in thy headlong wave, Till thou our summons answer'd have. Listen and save. Sabrina rises, attended by water-Nymphes, and sings. By the rushy-fringed bank, Where grows the Willow and the Osier dank▪ My sliding Chariot stayes, Thick set with Agat, and thazurn sheen Of Turkis blew, and Emrauld green That in the channell strayes, Whilst from off the waters fleet Thus I set my printless feet O're the Cowslips Velvet head, That bends not as I tread, Gentle swain at thy request I am here.
Spir. Goddess dear We implore thy powerful hand To undoe the charmed band Of true Virgin here distrest, Through the force, and through the wile Of unblest inchanter vile. Sab. Shepherd 'tis my office best To help insnared chastity; Brightest Lady look on me, Thus I sprinkle on thy brest Drops that from my fountain pure, I have kept of pretious cure, Thrice upon thy fingers tip, Thrice upon thy rubied lip, Next this marble venom'd seat Smear'd with gumms of glutenous heat I touch with chaste palms moist and cold, Now the spell hath lost his hold; And I must haste ere morning hour To wait in Amphitrite's bowr. Sabrina descends, and the Lady rises out of her seat. Spir. Virgin, daughter of Locrine Sprung of old Anchises line,
May thy brimmed waves for this Their full tribute never miss From a thousand petty rills, That tumble down the snowy hills: Summer drouth, or singed air Never scorch thy tresses fair, Nor wet Octobers torrent flood Thy molten crystal fill with mudd, May thy billows rowl ashoar The beryl, and the golden ore, May thy lofty head be crown'd With many a tower and terrass round, And here and there thy banks upon With Groves of myrrhe, and cinnamon. Com Lady while Heaven lends us grace, Let us fly this cursed place, Lest the Sorcerer us intice With som other new device. Not a waste, or needless sound Till we com to holier ground, I shall be your faithfull guide Through this gloomy covert wide, And not many furlongs thence Is your Fathers residence,
Where this night are met in state Many a friend to gratulate His wish't presence, and beside All the Swains that there abide, With Jiggs, and rural dance resort, We shall catch them at their sport, And our sudden coming there Will double all their mirth and chere; Com let us haste, the Stars grow high, But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky. The Scene changes presenting Ludlow Town and the Presidents Castle, then com in Countrey-Dancers, after them the attendant Spirit, with the two Brothers and the Lady. SONG. Spir. Back Shepherds, back, anough your play, Till next Sun-shine holiday, Here be without duck or nod Other trippings to hetrod Of lighter toes, and such Court guise As Mercury did first devise With the mincing Dryades On the Lawns, and on the Leas.
This second Song presents them to their father and mother. Noble Lord, and Lady bright, I have brought ye new delight, Here behold so goodly grown Three fair branches of your own, Heav'n hath timely tri'd their youth, Their saith, their patience, and their truth. And sent them here through hard assays With a crown of deathless Praise, To triumph in victorious dance O're sensual Folly, and Intemperance. The dances ended, the Spirit Epilognizer. Spir. To the Ocean now I fly, And those happy climes that ly Where day never shuts his eye, Up in the broad fields of the sky: There I suck the liquid ayr All amidst the Gardens fair Of Hesperus, and his daughters three That sing about the golden tree: Along the crisped shades and bowres Revels the spruce and jocond Spring,
The Graces, and the rosie-boosom'd Howres▪ Thither all their bounties bring, That there eternal Summer dwels, And West winds, with musky wing About the cedar'n alleys fling Nard, and Cassia's balmy smels. Iris there with humid bow, Waters the odorous banks that blow Flowers of more mingled hew Then her purfd scarf can shew, And drenches with Elysian dew (List mortals, if your ears be true) Beds of Hyacinth, and roses Where young Adonis oft reposes, Waxing well of his deep wound In slumber soft, and on the ground Sadly sits th'Assyrian Queen; But farr above in spangled sheen Celestial Cupid her fam'd Son advanc't, Holds his dear Psyche sweet intranc't After her wandring labours long, Till free consent the gods among Make her his eternal Bride, And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be born, Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn. But now my task is smoothly don, I can fly, or I can run Quickly to the green earths end, Where the bow'd welkin slow doth bend, And from thence can soar as soon To the corners of the Moon. Mortals that would follow me, Love vertue, she alone is free, She can teach ye how to clime Higher then the Spheary chime▪ Or if Vertue feeble were, Heav'n it self would stoop to her. The End.
Joannis Miltoni LONDINENSIS POEMATA▪ Quorum pleraque intra Annum aetatis Vigesimum Conscripsit. Nunc primum Edita. LONDINI, Typis R. R. Prostant ad Insignia Principis, in Coemeterio D. Pauli, ar ud Humphredum Moseley. 1645.
HAEc quae sequuntur de Autho∣re testimonia, tametsi ipse intelligebat non tam de se quàm supra se esse dicta, eò quòd preclaro ingenio viri, nec non amici ita fere solent laudare, ut omnia suis potius virtutibus, quàm veritati congruentia nimis cupidè affingant, no∣luit tamen horum egregiam in se volun∣tatem non esse notam; Cum alii praeser∣tim ut id faceret magnopere suaderent. Dum enim nimiae laudis invidiam totis ab se viribus amolitur, sibique quod plus aequo est non attributum esse mavult, ju∣dicium interim hominum cordatorum at∣que illustrium quin summo sibi honori ducat, negare non potest.
Joannes Baptista Mansus, Marchio Villensis Neapolitanus ad Joannem Miltonium Anglum. UT mens, forma, decor, facies, mos, si pietas sie, Non Anglus, verùm hercle Angelus ipse fores. Ad Joannem Miltonem Anglum tri∣plici poeseos laureâ coronandum Graecâ nimi∣rum, Latinâ, atque Hetruscâ, Epi∣gramma Joannis Salsilli Romani. CEde Meles, cedat depressa Mincius urna; Sebetus Tassum desinat usque loqui; At Thamesis victor cunctis ferat altior undas Nam per te Milto par tribus unus erit. Ad Joannem Miltonum. GRaecia Maeonidem, jactet sibi Roma Maronem, Anglia Miltonum jactat utrique parem. Selvaggi.
Al Signor Gio. Miltoni Nobile Inglese. ODE. ERgimi ali' Etra ò Clio Perche di stelle intreccierò corona Non più del Biondo Dio La Fronde eterna in Pindo, e in Elicona, Diensi a merto maggior, maggiori i fregi, A'celeste virtù celesti pregi. Non puo del tempo edace Rimaner preda, eterno alto valore Non può l'oblio rapace Furar dalle memorie eccelso onore, Su l'arco di mia cetra un dardo forte Virtù m'adatti, e ferirò la morte. Del Ocean profondo Cinta dagli ampi gorghi Anglia risiede Separata dal mondo, Però che il suo valor l'umano ecede Questa feconda sà produrre Eroi, Ch' hanno a ragion del sovruman tra noi.
Alla virtù sbandita Danno ne i petti lor fido ricetto, Quella gli è sol gradita, Perche in lei san trovar gioia, e diletto; Ridillo tu Giovanni e mostra in tanto Con tua vera virtù, vero il mio Canto. Lungi dal Patrio lido Spinse Zeusi l'industre ardente brama; Ch' udio d' Helena il grido Con aurea tromba rimbombar la fama, E per poterla effigiare al paro Dalle più belle Idee trasse il priù raro. Cosi l' Ape Ingegnosa Trae con industria il suo liquor pregiato Dal giglio e dalla rosa, E quanti vaghi fiori ornano il prato; Formano un dolce suon diverse Chorde, Fan varie voci melodia concorde. Di bella gloria amante Milion dal Ciel natio per varie parti
Le peregrine piante Volgesti a ricercar scienze, ed arti; Del Gallo regnator vedesti i Regni, E dell' Italia ancor gl'Eroi piu degni. Fabro quasi divino Sol virtù rintracciando il tuo pensiero Vide in ogni confino Chi di nobil valor calcail sentiero; L' ottimo dal miglior dopo scegliea Per fabbricar a'ogni virtu l' Idea. Quanti nacquero in Flora O in lei del parlar Tosco appreser l'arte, La cui memoria onora Il mondo fatta eterna in dotte carte, Volesti ricercar per tuo tesoro, E parlasti con lor nell' opre loro. Nell' altera Babelle Per te il parlar confuse Giove in vano, Che per varie favelle Di se stessa trofeo cadde su'l piano:
Ch' Ode oltr' all Anglia il suo piu degno Idioma Spagna, Francia, Toscana, e Grecia e Roma▪ I piu profondi arcani Ch' occulta la natura e in eielo e in terra Ch'á Ingegni sovrumani Troppo avar a tal'hor gli chiude, e serra, Chiaramente conosci, e giungi al fine Della moral virtud▪ al gran confine. Non batta il Tempo l' ale, Fermisi immoto, e in un fermin si gl' anni, Che di virtù immortale Sorron di troppo ingiuriosi a i danni▪ Ch s'opre dgne di Poema o storia Furon gia, l'hai presenti alla memoria, Dammi tua dolce Cetra Se vuoi ch'io dica del tuo dolce canto, Ch' inalzandoti all' Etra Di farti huomo celeste otticne il vanto, Il Tamigi il dir à che gl' è concesso Per te suo cigno pareggiar Permesso.
I o che in riva del Arno Tento spiegar tuo merto alto, e preclaro So che fatico indarno, E ad ammir ar, non a lodar lo imparo; Freno dunque la lingua, e ascolto il core Che ti prende a lodar con lo stupore. Del sig. Antonio Francini gentilhuomo Fiorentino.
JOANNI MILTONI LONDINIENSI. Juveni Patria, virtutibus eximio, VIro qui multa peregrinatione, studio cuncta orbis terra∣rarum loca perspexit, ut novus Ʋlysses omnia ubique ab omnibus apprehenderet. Polyglotto, in cujus ore linguae jam deperditae sic re∣viviscunt, ut idiomata omnia sint in ejus laudibus in∣facunda; Et jure ea percallet ut admirationes & plausus popu∣lorum ab propria sapientia excitatos, intelligat. Illi, cujus animi dotes corporisque, sensus ad admirationem commovent, & per ipsam motum cuique auferunt; cujus opera ad plausus hortantur, sed vastitate vocem laudatoribus adi∣munt. Cui in Memoria totus Orbis: In intellectu Sapientia. in vo∣luntate ardor gloriae. in ore Eloquentia: Harmoni cos celestium Sphaerarum sonitus Astronomia Duce audieuti, Characteres mirabilium naturae per quos Dei magnitudo describitur magistra Philosophia legenti; Antiquitatum latebras, vetustatis excidia, eruditionis ambages comite assidua autorum Lectione. Exquirenti, restauranti, percurrenti. At cur nitor in arduum? Illi in cujus virtutibus evulgandis ora Famae non sufficiant, nec hominum stupor in laud and is satis est, Reverentiae & amoris ergo hoc ejus meritis debitum admirationis tributum offert Carolus Datus Patricius Florentinus. Tanto homini servus, tantae virtutis amator.
ELEGIARUM Liber primus. Elegia prima ad Carolum Diodatum. TAndem, chare, tuae mihi pervenere tabellae, Pertulit & voces nuntia charta tuas, Pertulit occiduâ Devae Cestrensis ab orâ Vergivium prono qu petit amne salum. Multùm crede juvat terras aluisse remotas Pectus amans nostri, tamque fidele caput, Quòdque mihi lepidum tellus longinqua sodalem Debet, at unde brevi reddere jussa velit. Me tenet urbs refluâ quam Thamesis alluit undâ▪ Meque nec invitum patria dulcis habet. Jam nec arundiferum mihi cura revisere Camum, Nec dudum vetiti melaris angit amor. Nuda nec arva placent, umbrasque negantia molle Quàm male Phoebicolis convenit ille locus! Nec duri libet usque minas perferre magistri Caeteraque ingenio non subeunda meo,
Si sit hoc exilium patrios adiisse penates, Et vacuum curis otia grata sequi, Non ego vel pofugi nomen, sortemve recuso, Laetus & exilii conditione fruor. O utinam vates nunquam graviora tulisset Ille Tomitano flebilis exul agro; Non tunc Jonio quicquam cessisset Homero Neve foret victo Ius tibi prima Maro. Tempora nam licet hic placidis dare libera Musis, Et totum rapiunt me mea vita libri. Excipit hinc fessum sinuosi pompa theatri, Et vocat ad plausus garrula scena suos. Seu catus auditur senior, seu prodigus haeres, Seu procus, aut posit casside miles adest, Sive decennali foecundus lite patronus Detonat inculto barbara verba foro, Saepe vafer gnato succurrit servus amanti, Et nasum rigidi fallit ubique Patris; Saepe novos illic virgo mirata calores Quid sit amor nescit, dum quoque nescit, amat▪ Sive cruentatum furiosa Tragoedia sceptrum Quassat, & effusis crinibus ora rotat, Et dolet, & specto, juvat & spectasse dolendo, Interdum & lacrymis dulcis amaror inest:
Seu puer infelix indelibata reliquit Gaudia, & abrupto flendus amore eadit, Seu ferus e tenebris iterat Styga criminis ultor Conscia funereo pectora torre movens, Seu maeret Pelopeia domus, seu nobilis Ili, Aut luit incestos aula Creontis avos. Sed neque sub tecto semper nec in urbe latemus, Irrita nec nobis tempora veris eunt. Nos quoque lucus habet vicinâ consitus ulmo Atque suburbani nobilis umbra loci. Saepius hic blandas spirantia sydera flammas Virgineos videas praeteriisse choros. Ah quoties dignae stupui miracula formae Quae posset senium vel reparare Iovis; Ah quoties vidi superantia lumina gemmas, Atque faces quotquot volvit uterque polus; Collaque bis vivi Pelopis quae brachia vincant, Quae que fluit puro nectare tincta via, Et decus eximium frontis▪ tremulosque capillos, Aurea quae fallax retia tendit Amor. Pellacesque genas, ad quas hyacinthina sordet Purpura, & ipse tui floris, Adoni, rubor. Cedite laudatae toties Heroides olim, Et quaecunque vagum cepit amica Jovem,
Cedite Achaemeniae turritâ fronte puellae, Et quot Susa colunt, Memnoniamque Ninon. Vos etiam Danaae fasces submittite Nymphae, Et vos Iliacae, Romuleaeque nurus. Nec Pompeianas Tarpëia Musa columnas Jactet, & Ausoniis plena theatra stolis. Gloria Virginibus debetur prima Britannis, Extera sat tibi sit foemina posse sequi. Tuque urbs Dardaniis Londinum structa colonis Turrigerum late conspicienda caput, Tu nimium felix intra tua moenia claudis Quicquid formosi pendulus orbis habet. Non tibi tot caelo scintillant astra sereno Endymioneae turba ministra deae, Quot tibi conspicuae formáque auróque puellae Per medias radiant turba videnda vias. Creditur huc geminis venisse invecta columbis Alma pharetrigero milite cincta Venus, Huic Cnidon, & riguas Simoentis flumine valles, Huic Paphon, & roseam posthabitura Cypron. Ast ego, dum pueri sinit indulgentia caeci, Moenia quàm subitò linquere fausta paro▪ Et vitare procul malefidae infamia Circes Atria, divini Molyos usus ope.
Stat quoque juncosas Cami remeare paludes, Atque iterum raucae murmur adire Scholae. Interea fidi parvum cape munus amici, Paucaque in alternos verba coacta modos. Elegia secunda, Anno aetatis 17. In obitum Praeconis Academici Cantabrigiensis. TE, qui conspicuus baculo fulgente solebas Palladium toties ore ciere gregem, Ultima praeconum praeconem te quoque saeva Mors rapit, officio nec favet ipsa suo. Candidiora licet fuerint tibi tempora plumis Sub quibus accipimus delituisse Jovem, O dignus tamen Haemonio juvenescere succo, Dignus in Aesonios vivere posse dies, Dignus quem Stygiis medicâ revocaret ab undis Arte Coronides, saepe rogante dea. Tu si jussus eras acies accire togatas, Et celer a Phoebo nuntius ire tuo Talis in Iliacâ stabat Cyllenius aula Alipes, aethereâ missus ab arce Patris.
Talis & Eurybates ante ora furentis Achillei Rettulit Atridae jussa severa ducis. Magna sepulchrorum regina, satelles Averni Saeva nimis Musis, Palladi saeva nimis, Quin illos rapias qui pondus inutile terrae, Turba quidem est telis ista petenda tuis. Vestibus hunc igitur pullis Academia luge, Et madeant lachrymis nigra feretra tuis. Fundat & ipsa modos querebunda Elegeia tristes, Personet & totis naenia moesta scholis. Elegia tertia, Anno aetatis 17. In obitum Praesulis Wintoniensis. Moestus eram, & tacitus nullo comitante sedebam, Haerebantque animo tristia plura meo, Protinus en subiit funestae cladis imago Fecit in Angliaco quam Libitina solo; Dum procerum ingressa est splendentes marmore turres Dira sepulchrali mors metuenda face; Pulsavitque auro gravidos & jaspide muros, Nec metuit satrapum sternere falce greges. Tunc memini clarique ducis, fratrisque verendi Intempestivis ossa cremata rogis▪
Et memini Heroum quos vidit ad aethera raptos, Flevit & amissos Belgia tota duces. At te praecipuè luxi dignissime praesul, Wintoniaeque olim gloria magna tuae; Delicui fletu, & tristi sic ore querebar, Mors fera Tartareo diva secunda Jovi, Nonne satis quod sylva tuas pesenriat iras, Et quod in herbosos js tibi detur agros, Quodque afflata tuo marcescant lilia tabo, Et crocus, & pulchrae Cypridi sacra rosa, Nec sinis ut semper fluvio contermina quercus Miretur lapsus praetereuntis aquae? Et tibi succumbit liquido quae plurima caelo Evehitur pennis quamlibet augur avis, Et quae mille nigris errant animalia sylvis, Et quod alunt mutum Proteos antra pecus, Invida, tanta tibi cum sit concessa potestas; Quid juvat humanâ tingere caede manus? Nobileque in pectus certas acuisse sagittas, Semideamque animam sede fugâsse suà? Talia dum lacrymans alto sub pectore volvo, Roscidus occiduis Hesperus exit aquis, Et Tartessiaco submerserat aequore currum Phoebus ab eöo littore mensus iter.
Nec mora, membra cavo posui refovenda cubili, Condiderant oculos noxque soporque meos. Cum mihi visus eram lato spatiarier agro, Heu nequit ingenium visa referre meum. Illic puniceâ radiabant omnia luce, Ut matutino cum juga sole rubent. Ac veluti cum pandit opes Thaumantia proles, Vestitu nituit multicolore solum. Non dea tam variis ornavit floribus hortos Alcinoi, Zephyro Chloris amata levi. Flumina vernantes lambunt argentea campos, Ditior Hesperio flavet arena Tago. Serpit odoriferas per opes levis aura Favoni, Aura sub innumeris humida nata rosis. Talis in extremis terrae Gangetidis oris Luciferi regis fingitur esse domus. Ipse racemiferis dum densas vitibus umbras Et pellucentes miror ubique locos, Ecce mihi subito praesul Wintonius astat, Sydereum nitido sulsit in ore jubar; Vestis ad auratos defluxit candida talos, Infula divinum cinxerat alba caput. Dumque senex tali incedit venerandus amictu, Intremuit laeto florea terra sono.
Agmina gemmatis plaudunt caelestia pennis, Pura triumphali personat aethra tubâ. Quisque novum amplexu comitem cantuque saluta, Hosque aliquis placido misit ab ore sonos; Nate veni, & patrii felix cape gaudia regni, Semper ab hinc duro, nate, labore vaca. Dixit, & aligerae tetigerunt nablia turmae, At mihi cum tenebris aurea pulsa quies. Flebam turbatos Cephaleiâ pellice somnos; Talia contingant somnia saepe mihi. Elegia quarta. Anno aetatis 18. Ad Thomam Junium praeceptore suum apud mercatores Anglicos Hamburgae agentes Pastoris munere fungentem. CUrre per immensum subitò mea littera pontum▪ I, pete Teutonicos laeve per aequor agros, Segnes rumpe moras, & nil, precor, obstet eunti, Et festinantis nil remoreturiter. Ipse ego Sicanio fraenantem carcere ventos Aeolon, & virides sollicitabo Deos; Caeruleamque suis comitatam Dorida Nymphis, Ut tibi dent placidam per sua regna vam.
At tu, si poteris, celeres tibi sume jugales, Vecta quibus Colchis fugit ab ore viri. Aut queis Triptolemus Scythicas devenit in oras Gratus Eleusinâ missus ab urbe puer. Atque ubi Germanas flavere videbis arenas Ditis ad Hamburgae moenia flecte gradum, Dicitur occiso quae ducere nomen ab Hamâ, Cimbrica quem fertur clava dedisse neci. Vivit ibi antiquae clarus pieta tis honore Praesul Christicolas pascere doctus oves; Ille quidem est animae plusquam pars altera nostrae, Dimidio vitae vivere cogor ego. Hei mihi quot pelagi, quot montes interjecti Me faciunt aliâ parte carere mei! Charior ille mihi quam tu doctissime Graium Cliniadi, pronepos qui Telamonis erat. Quámque Stagirites generoso magnus alumno, Quem peperit Libyco Chaonis alma Jovi. Qualis Amyntorides, qualis Philyrëius Heros Myrmidonum regi, talis & ille mihi. Primus ego Aonios illo praeeunte recessus Lustrabam, & bifidi sacra vireta jugi, Pieriosque hausi latices, Clioque favente, Castalio sparsi laeta ter ora mero.
Flammeus at signum ter viderat arietis Aethon, Jnduxitque auro lanea terga novo, Bisque novo terram sparsisti Chlori senilem Gramine, bisque tuas abstulit Auster opes: Necdum ejus licuit mihi lumina pascere vultu, Aut linguae dulces aure bibisse sonos. Vade igitur, cursuque Eurum praeverte sonorum, Qum sit opus monitis res docet, ipsa vides. Invenies dulci cum conjuge forte sedentem, Mulcentem gremio pignora chara suo, Forsitan aut veterum praelarga volumina patrum Versantem, aut veri biblia sacra Dei. Caelestive animas saturantem rore tenellas, Grande salutiferae religionis opus. Utque solet, multam, sit dicere cura salutem, Dicere quam decuit, si modo adesset, herum. Haec quoque paulum oculos in humum defixa modestos, Verba verecundo sis memor ore loqui: Haec tibi, si teneris vacat inter praelia Musis Mittitab Angliaco littore fida manus. Accipe sinceram, quamvis sit sera, salutem Fiat & hoc ipso gratior illa tibi. Sera quidem, sed vera fuit, quam casta recepit▪ Icaris a lento Penelopeia viro.
Ast ego quid volui manifestum tollere crimen, Ipse quod ex omni parte levare nequit. Arguitur tardus meritò, noxamque fatetur, Et pudet officium deseruisse suum. Tu modò da veniam fasso, veniamque roganti, Crimina diminui, quae patuere, solent. Non ferus in pavidos rictus diducit hiantes, Vulnifico pronos nec rapit ungue leo. Saepe farissiferi crudelia pectora Thracis Supplicis ad moestas delicuere preces. Extensaeque manus avertunt fulminis ictus, Placat & iratos hostia parva Deos. Jamque diu scripsisse tibi fuit impetus illi, Neve mora ultra ducere passus Amor. Nam vaga Fama refert, heu nuntia vera malorum! In tibi finitimis bella tumere locis, Teque tuàmque urbem truculento milite cingi, Et jam Saxonicos arma parasse duces. Te circum latè campos populatur Enyo, Et sata carne virum jam cruor arva rigat. Germanisque suum concessit Thracia Martem, Illuc Odrysios Mars pater egit equos. Perpetuóque comans jam deslorescit oliva, Fugit & aerisonam Diva perosa tubam,
Fugit io terris, & jam non ultima virgo Creditur ad superas justa volasse domos. Te tamen intereà belli circumsonat horror, Vivis & ignoto solus inópsque solo; Et, tibi quam patrii non exhibuere penates Sede peregrinâ quaeris egenus opem. Patria dura parens, & saxis saevior albis Spumea quae pulsat littoris unda tui, Siccine te decet innocuos exponere faetus, Siccine in externam ferrea cogis humum, Et sinis ut terris quaerant alimenta remotis Quos tibi prospiciens miserat ipse Deus, Et qui laeta ferunt de caelo nuntia, quique Quae via post cineres ducat ad astra, docent? Digna quidem Stygii quae viva clausa tenebris, Aeternâque animae digna perire fame! Haud aliter vaes terrae Thesbitidis olim Pressit inassueto devia tesqua pede, Desertasque Arabum salebras, dum regis Achabi Effugit atque tuas, Sidoni dira, manus. Talis & horrisono laceratus membra flagello, Paulus ab Aemathiâ pellitur urbe Cilix. Piscosaeque ipsum Gergessae civis Jesu Finibus ingratus jussit abire suis.
At tu sume animos, nec spes cadat anxia curis Nec tua concutiat decolor ossa metus. Sis eteni  quamvis fulgentibus obsitus armis, Intententque tibi millia tela necem, At nullis vel inrme latus violabitur armis, Deque tuo cuspis nullo cruore bibet. Namque eris ipse Dei radiante sub aegide tutus, Ille tibi custos, & pugil ille tibi; Ille Sionae qui tot sub oenibus arcis Assyrios fit nocte silente viros, Inque fugam vertit quos in Samaritidas oras Misit ab antiquis prisca Damascus agris, Terruit & densas vido cum rege cohortes, Aere dum vacuo buccina clara sonat, Cornea pulvereum dum verberat ungula campum, Currus arenosam dum quatit actus humum, Auditurque hinnitus equorum ad bella ruentúm, Et strepitus ferri, murmuraque alta virûm. Et tu (quod superest miseris) sperare memento, Et tua magnanimo pectore vince mala. Nec dubites quandoque frui melioribus annis, Atque iterum patrios posse videre lares.
Elegia quinta, Anno aetatis 20. In adventum veris. IN se perpetuo Tempus revolubile gyro Jam revocat Zephyros vere tepene novos. Induiturque brevem Tellus reparata juventam, Jamque soluta gelu dulce virescit humus. Fallor? an & nobis redeunt in carmina vires, Ingeniumque mihi munere veris adest? Munere veris adest, iterumque vigescit ab illo (Quis putet) atque aliquod jam sibi poscit opus, Castalis ante oculos, bifidumque cacumen oberrat. Et mihi Pyrenen somnia nocte ferunt. Concitaque arcano fervent mihi pectora motu, Et furor, & sonitus me sacer intùs agit. Delius ipse venit, video Penëide lauro Implicitos crines, Delius ipse venit. Jam mihi mens liquidi raptatur in ardua coeli, Perque vagas nubes corpore liber eo. Perque umbras, perque antra feror penetralia vatum, Et mihi fana patent interiora Deûm. Intuiturque animus toto quid agatur Olympo, Nec fugiunt oculos Tartara caeca meos.
Quid tam grande sonat distento spiritus ore? Quid parit haec rabies, quid sacer iste furor? Ver mihi, quod dedit ingenium, cantabtur illo; Profuerint isto reddita dona modo. Jam Philomela tuos foliis adoperta novellis Instituis modulos, dum silet omne nemus. Urbe ego, tu sylvâ simul incipiamus utrique▪ Et simul adventum veris uterque canat. Veris io rediere vices, celebremus honores Veris, & hoc subeat Musa quotannis opus. Jam sol Aet iopas fugiens Titnoniaque arva, Flectit ad Arctöas aurea lora plagas. Est breve noctis iter, brevis est mora noctis opacae Horrida cum tenebris exulat illa suis. Jamque Lycaonius plaustrum caeleste Boötes Non longâ sequitur fessus ut ante viâ, Nunc etiam solitas circum Jovis atria toto Excubias agitant sydera rara polo. Nam dolus & caedes, & vis cum nocte recessit, Neve Giganteum Dii timuere scelus. Forte aliquis scopuli recubans in vertice pastor, Roscida cum primo sole rubescit humus, Hac, ait▪ hac certè caruisti nocte puellâ Phoebe tuâ, celeres quae retineret equos.
Laeta suas repetit sylvas, pharetramque resumit Cynthia, Luciferas ut videtalta rotas, Et tenues ponens radios gaudere videtur Officium fieri tam breve fratris ope. Desere, Phoebus ait, thalamos Aurora seniles, Quid juvat effoeto procubuisse toro? Te manet Aeolides viridi venator in herba, Surge, tuos ignes altus Hymettus habet. Flava verecundo dea crimen in ore fatetur, Et matutinos ocyus urget equos. Exuit invisam Tellus rediviva senectam, Et cupit amplexus Phoebe subire tuos; Et cupit, & digna est, quid enim formosius ill, Pandit ut omniferos luxuriosa sinus, Atque Arabum spirat messes, & ab ore venusto Mitia cum Paphiis fundit amoma rosis. Ecce coronatur sacro frons ardua luco, Cingit ut Idaeam pinea turris Opim; Et vario madidos intexit flore capillos, Floribus & visa est posse placere suis. Floribus effusos ut erat redimita capillos Taenario placuit diva Sicana Deo. Apice Phoebe tibi faciles hortantur amores, Mellitasque movent flamina verna preces.
Cinnameâ Zephyrus leve plaudit odorifer alâ, Blanditiasque tibi ferre videntur aves. Nec sine dote tuos temeraria quaerit amores Terra, nec optatos poscit egena toros, Alma salutiferum medicos tibi gramen in usus Praebet, & hinc titulos adjuvat ipsa tuos. Quòd si te pretium, si te fulgentia tangunt Munera, (muneribus faepe coemptus Amor) Illa tibi ostent quascunque sub aequore vasto▪ Et superinjectis montibus abdit opes. Ah quoties cum tu livoso fessus Olympo In vespertinas praecipitaris aquas, Cur te, inquit, cursu languentem Phoebe diurno Hesperiis recipit Caerula mater aquis? Quid tibi cum Tethy? Quid cum Tartesside lymphâ, Dia quid immundo perluis ora salo? Frigora Phoebe meâ melius captabis in umbrâ, Huc ades, ardentes imbue rore comas. Mollior egelidâ veniet tibi somnus in herbâ, Huc ades, & gremio lumina pone meo. Quáque jaces circum mulcebit lene susurrans Aura per humentes corpora fusa rosas. Nec me (crede mihi) terrent Semeleia fata, Nec Phäetontéo fumidus axis equo;
Cum tu Phoebe tuo sapientius uteris igni, Huc ades & gremio lumina pone meo. Sic Tellus lasciva suos suspirat amores; Matris in exemplum caetera turba ruunt. Nunc etenim toto currit vagus orbe Cupido, Languentesque fovet solis ab igne faces. Insonuere novis lethalia cornua nervis, Triste micant ferro tela corusca novo. Jamque vel invictam tentat superasse Dianam, Quaeque sedet sacro Vesta pudica foco. Ipsa senescentem reparat Venus annua formam, Atque iterum tepido creditur orta mari. Marmoreas juvenes clamant Hymenaee per urbes, Littus io Hymen, & cava saxa sonant. Cultior ille venit tunicâque decentior aptâ, Puniceum redolet vestis odora crocum. Egrediturque frequens ad amoeni gaudia veris Virgineas auro cincta puella sinus. Votum est cuique suum, votum est tamen omnibus unum▪ Un sibi quem cupiat, det Cytherea virum. Nunc quoque septenâ modulatur arundine pastor, Et sua quae jungat carmina Phyllis habet. Navita nocturno placat sua sydera cantu, Delphinasque leves ad vada summa vocat.
Jupiter ipse alto cum conjuge ludit Olympo, Convocat & famulos ad sua festa Deos. Nunc etiam Satyri cum sera crepuscula surgunt▪ Pervolitant celeri florea rura choro; Sylvanusque suâ Cyparissi fronde revinctus, Semicaperque Deus, semideusque caper. Quaeque sub arboribus Dryades latuere vetustis Per juga, per solos expatiantur agros. Per sata luxuriat fruticetaque Maenalius Pan, Vix Cybele mater, vix sibi tuta Ceres, Atque aliquam cupidus praedatur Oreada Faunus▪ Consulit in trepidos dum sibi Nympha pedes▪ Jamque latet, latitansque cupit male tecta videri▪ Et fugit, & fugiens pervelit ipsa capi. Dii quoque non dubitant caelo praeponere sylvas, Et sua quisque sibi numina lucus habet. Et sua quisque diu sibi numina lucus habeto, Nec vos arboreâ dii precor ite domo. Te referant miseris te Jupiter aurea terris Saecla, quid ad nimbos aspera tela redis? Tu saltem lentè rapidos age Phoebe jugales Quà potes, & sensim tempora veris eant. Brumaque productas tarde ferat hispida noctes, Ingruat & nostro serior umbra polo.
Elegia sexta. Ad Carolum Diodatum ruri commo∣rantem. Qui cum idibus Decemb. scripsisset, & sua carmina excusari postulasset si solito minus essent bona, quòd inter lautitias quibus er at ab amic is exceptus, haud satis felicem ope∣ram Musis dare se posse affirmabat, hunc habuit responsum. MItto tibi sanam non pleno ventre salutem▪ Quâ tu distento forte carere potes. At tua quid nostram prolectat Musa camoenam, Nec sinit optatas posse sequi tenebras? Carmine seire velis quàm te redamémque colámque▪ Crede mihi vix hoc carmine scire queas. Nam neque noster amor modulis includitur arctis, Nec venit ad claudos integer ipse pedes. Quàm bene solennes epulas, hilaremque Decembrim Festaque coelifugam quae coluere Deum, Deliciasque refers, hyberni gaudia ruris, Haustaque per lepidos Gallica musta focos. Quid quereris refugam vino dapibusque poesin? Carmen amat Bacchum, Carmina Bacchus amat.
Nec puduit Phoebum virides gestasse corymbos▪ Atque hederam lauro praeposuisse suae. Saepius Aoniis clamavit collibus Euoe Mista Thyonêo turba novena choro. Naso Corallaeis mala carmina misit ab agris: Non illic epulae non sata vitis erat. Quid nisi vina, rosasque racemiferumque Lyaeum Cantavit brevibus Tëia Musa modis▪ Pindaricosque inflat numeros Teumesius Euan, Et redolet sumptum pagina quaeque merum. Dum gravis everso currus crepat axe supinus, Etvolat Eléo pulvere fucus eques. Quadrimoque madens Lyricen Romanus Jaccho Dulce canit Glyceran, flavicomamque Chloen. Jam quoque lauta tibi generoso mensa paratu, Mentis alit vires, ingeniumque fovet. Massica foecundam despumant pocula venam, Fundis & ex ipso condita metra cado. Addimus his artes, fusumque per intima Phoebum Corda, favent uni Bacchus, Apollo, Ceres. Scilicet haud mirum tam dulcia carmina per te Numine composito tres peperisse Deos. Nunc quoque Thressa tibi caelato barbitos auro Insonat argutâ molliter icta manu;
Auditurque chelys suspensa tapetia circum, Virgineos tremulâ quae regat arte pedes. Illa tuas saltem teneant spectacula Musas, Et revocent, quantum crapula pellit iners. Crede mihi dum psallit ebur, comitataque plectrum Implet odoratos festa chorea tholos, Percipies tacitum per pectora serpere Phoebum, Quale repentinus permeat ossa calor, Perque puellares oculos digitumque sonantem Irruet in totos lapsa Thalia sinus. Namque Elegia levis multorum cura deorum est, Et vocat ad numeros quemlibet illa suos; Liber adest elegis, Eratoque, Ceresque, Venusque▪ Et cum purpureâ matre tenellus Amor. Talibus inde licent convivia larga poetis, Saepius & veteri commaduisse mero. At qui bella refert, & adulto sub Jove caelum▪ Heroasque pios, semideosque duces, Et nunc sancta canit superum consulta deorum▪ Nunc latrata fero regna profunda cane, Ille quidem parcè Samii pro more magistri Vivat, & innocuos praebeat herba cibos; Stet prope fagineo pellucida lympha catillo, Sobriaque è puro pocula fonte bibat.
Additur huic scelerisque vacans, & casta juventus, Et rigidi mores, & sine labe manus. Qualis veste nitens sacrâ, & lustralibus undis Surgis ad infensos augur iture Deos. Hoc ritu vixisse ferunt post rapta sagacem Lumina Tiresian, Ogygiumque Linon, Et lare devoto profugum Calchanta, senemque Orpheon edomitis sola per antra feris; Sic dapis exiguus, sic rivi potor Homerus Dulichium vexit per freta longa virum, Et per monstrificam Perseiae Phoebados aulam, Et vada foemineis insidiosa sonis, Perque tuas rex ime domos, ubi sanguine nigro Dicitur umbrarum detinuisse greges. Diis etenim sacer est vates, divûmque sacerdos, Spirat & occultum pectus, & ora Jovern. At tu siquid agam, scitabere (si modò saltem Esse putas tanti noscere siquid agam) Paciferum canimus caelesti semine regem, Faustaque sacratis saecula pacta libris, Vagitumque Dei, & stabulantem paupere tecto Qui suprema suo cum patre regna colit. Stelliparumque polum, modulantesque aethere turmas, Et subitò elisos ad sua fana Deos.
Dona quidem dedimus Christi natalibus illa, Illa sub auroram lux mihi prima tulit. Te quoque pressa manent patriis meditata cicutis▪ Tu mihi, cui recitem, judicis instar eris. Elegia septima, Anno aetatis undevigesimo. NOndum blanda tuas leges Amathusia norm▪ Et Paphio vacuum pectus ab igne suit, Saepe cupidineas, puerilia tela, sagittas, Atque tuum sprevi maxime, numen, Amor▪ Tu puer imbelles dixi transfige columbas▪ Conveniunt tenero mollia bella duci. Aut de passeribus tumidos age, parve, triumphos, Haec sunt militiae digna trophaea tuae. In genus humanum quid inania dirigis arma? Non valet in fortes ista pharetra viros. Non tulit hoc Cyprius, (neque enim Deus ullus ad iras Promptior) & duplici jam ferus igne calet. Ver erat, & summae radians per culmina villae Attulerat primam lux tibi Maie diem: At mihi adhuc refugam quaerebant lumina noctem Nec matutinum sustinuere jubar.
Astat Amor lecto, pictis Amor impiger alis, Prodidit astantem mota pharetra Deum: Prodidit & facies, & dulce minantis ocelli, Et quicquid puero, dignum & Amore fuit. Talis in aererno juvenis Sigeius Olympo Miscet amatori pocula plena Jovi▪ Aut qui formosas pellexit ad oscula nymphas Thiodamantaeus Naiade raptus Hylas; Addideratque iras, sed & has decuisse putares, Addideratque truces, nec sine felle minas. Et miser exemplo sapuisses tutiùs, inquit, Nunc mea quid possit dextera testis eris. Inter & expertos vires numerabere nostras, Et faciam vero per tua damna fidem. Ipse ego si nescis strato Pythone superbum Edomui Phoebum, cessit & ille mihi; Et quoties meminit Peneidos, ipse fatetur Certiùs & graviùs tela nocere mea. Me nequit adductum curvare peritiùs arcum, Qui post terga solet vincere Parthus eques. Cydoniusque mihi cedit venator, & ille Inscius uxori qui necis author erat. Est etiam nobis ingens quoque victus Orion, Herculeaeque manus, Herculeusque comes.
Jupiter ipse licet sua fulmina torqueat in me, Haerebuntlateri spicula nostra Jovis. Caetera quae dubitas meliùs mea tela docebunt, Et tua non leviter corda petenda mihi. Nec te stulte tuae poterunt defendere Musae, Nec tibi Phoebaeus porriget anguis opem. Dixit, & aurato quatiens mucrone sagittam, Evolat in tepidos Cypridos ille sinus. At mihi risuro tonuit ferus ore minaci, Et mihi de puero non metus ullus erat. Et modò qu nostri spatiantur in urbe Quirites Et modò villarum proxima rura placent. Turba frequens, faciéque simillima turba dearum Splendida per medias itque reditque vias. Auctaqueluce dies gemino fulgore coruscat, Fallor? an & radios hinc quoque Phoebus habet. Haec ego non fugi spectacula grata severus, Impetus & quò me fert juvenilis, agor. Lumina luminibus malè providus obvia misi, Neve oculos potui continuisse meos. Unam forte aliis supereminuisse notabam, Principium nostri lux erat illa mali. Sic Venus optaret mortalibus ipsa videri, Sic regina Deûm conspicienda fuit.
Hanc memor objecit nobis malus ille Cupido, Solus & hos nobis texuit antè dolos. Nec procul ipse vafer Iatuit, multaeque sagittae, Et facis a tergo grande pependit onus. Nec mora, nunc ciliis haesit, nunc virginis ori, Insilit hinc labiis, insidet inde genis: Et quascunque agilis partes jaculator oberrat, Hei mihi, mille locis pectus inerme ferit. Protinus insoliti subierunt corda furores, Uror amans intùs, flammaque totus eram. Interea misero quae jam mihi sola placebat, Ablata est oculis non reditura meis. Ast ego progredior tacitè querebundus, & excors, Et dubius volui saepe referre pedem. Findor, & haec remanet, sequitur pars altera votum, Raptaque tàm subitò gaudia flere juvat. Sic dolet amissum proles Junonia coelum, Inter Lemniacos praecipitata focos. Talis & abreptum solem respexit, ad Orcum Vectus ab attonitis Amphiaraus equis. Quid faciam infelix, & luctu victus, amores Neclicet inceptos ponere, neve sequi. O utinam spectare semel mihi detur amatos Vultus, & coràm tristia verba loqui;
Forsitan & duro non est adamante creata, Forte nec ad nostras surdeat illa preces. Crede mihi nullus sic infeliciter arsit, Ponar in exemplo primus & unus ego. Parce precor teneri cum sis Deus ales amoris, Pugnent officio nec tua facta tuo. Jam tuus O certè est mihi formidabilis arcus, Nate deâ, jaculis nec minus igne potens: Et tua fumabunt nostris altaria donis, Solus & in superis tu mihi summus eris. Deme meos tandem, verùm nec deme furores, Nescio cur, miser est suaviter omnis amans: Tu modo da facilis, posthaec mea siqua futura est▪ Cuspis amaturos figat ut una duos. HAec ego mente olim laevâ, studioque supino Nequitiae posui vana trophaea meae. Scilicet abreptum sic me malus impulit error, Indocilisque aetas prava magistra fuit. Donec Socraticos umbrosa Academia rivos Praebuit, admissum dedocuitque jugum. Protinus extinctis ex illo tempore flammis, Cincta rigent multo pectora nostra gelu. Unde suis frigus metuit puer ipse Sagittis, Et Diomedéam vim timet ipsa Venus▪
In proditionem Bombardicam. CUm simul in regem nuper satrapasque Britannos Ausus es infandum perfide Fauxe nefas, Fallor? an & mitis voluisti ex parte videri, Et pensare malâ cum pietate scelus; Scilicet hos alti missurus ad atria caeli, Sulphureo curru flammivolisque rotis. Qualiter ille feris caput inviolabile Parcis Liquit Jordanios turbine raptus agros. In eandem. SIccine tentasti caelo donâsse Jacobum Quae septemgemino Bellua monte lates? Ni meliora tuum poterit dare munera numen, Parce precor donis insidiosa tuis. Ille quidem sine te consortia serus adivit Astra, nec inferni pulveris usus ope. Sic potiùs foedos in caelum pelle cucullos, Et quot habet brutos Roma profana Deos, Namque hac aut aliâ nisi quemque adjuveris arte, Crede mihi caeli vix bene scandet iter.
In eandem. PUrgatorem animae derisit Jacobus ignem, Et sine quo superûm non adeunda domus. Frenduit hoc trinâ monstrum Latiale coronâ Movit & horrificùm cornua dena minax. Et nec inultus ait temnes mea sacra Britanne, Supplicium spretá relligione dabis. Et si stelligeras unquam penetraveris arces, Non nisi per flammas triste patebit iter. O quàm funesto cecinisti proxima vero, Verbaque ponderibus vix caritura suis! Nam prope Tartareo sublime rotatus ab igni Ibat ad aethereas umbra perusta plagas. In eandem. QUem modò Roma suis devoverat impia diris. Et Styge damnarât Taenarioque sinu, Hunc vice mutatâ jam tollere gestit ad astra, Et cupit ad superos evehere usque Deos. In inventorem Bombardae. JApetionidem laudavit caeca vetustas, Qui tulit aetheream solis ab axe facem;
At mihi major erit, qui lurida creditur arma, Et trifidum fulmen surripuisse Jovi. Ad Leonoram Romae canentem. ANgelus unicuique suus (sic credite gentes) Obtigit aethereis ales ab ordinibus. Quid mirum? Leonora tibi si gloria major, Nam tua praesentem vox sonat ipsa Deum. Aut Deus, aut vacui certè mens tertia coeli Per tua secretò guttura serpit agens; Serpit agens, facilisque docet mortalia corda Sensim immortali assuescere posse sono. Quòd si cuncta quidem Deus est, per cunctaque fusus, In te unâ loquitur, caetera mutus habet. Ad eandem. ALtera Torquatum cepit Leonora Poëtam, Cujus ab insano cessit amore furens. Ah miser ille tuo quantò feliciùs aevo Perditus, & propter te Leonora foret! Et te Pieriâ sensisset voce canentem Aurea maternae fila movere lyrae, Quamvis Dircaeo torsisset lumina Pentheo Saevior, aut totus desipuiiset iners▪
Tu tamen errantes caecâ vertigine sensus Voce eadem poteras composuisse tuâ; Et poteras aegro spirans sub corde quietem Flexanimo cantu restituisse sibi. Ad eandem. CRedula quid liquidam Sirena Neapoli jactas, Claraque Parthenopes fana Achelöiados, Littoreamque tuâ defunctam Naiada ripâ Corpora Chalcidico sacra dedisse rogo? Illa quidem vivitque, & amoenâ Tibridis und Mutavit rauci murmura Pausilipi. Illic Romulidûm studiis ornata secundis, Atque homines cantu detinet atque Deos. Elegiarum Finis.
Sylvarum Liber. Anno aetatis 16. In obitum Procancellarii medioi. PArére fati discite legibus, Manusque Parcae jam date supplices, Qui pendulum telluris orbem Japeti colitis nepotes. Vos si relicto mors vaga Taenaro Semel vocârit flebilis, heu morae Tentantur incassùm dolique; Per tenebras Stygis ire certum est. Si destinatam pellere dextera Mortem valeret, non ferus Hercules Nessi venenatus cruore Aemathiâ jacuisset Oetâ. Nec fraude turpi Palladis invidae Vidisset occisum Ilion Hectora, aut Quem larva Pelidis peremit Ense Locro, Jove lacrymante▪
Si triste fatum verba Hecatëia Fugare possint, Telegoni parens Vixisset infamis, potentique Aegiali soror usa virgâ. Numenque trinum fallere si queant Artes medentûm, ignotaque gramina, Non gnarus herbarum Machaon Eurypyli cecidisset hastâ. Laesisset & nec te Philyreie Saitta echidnae perlita sanguine, Nec tela te fulmenque avitum Caese puer genitricis alvo. Tuque O alumno major Apolline, Gentis togatae cui regimen datum, Frondosa quem nunc Cirrha luget▪ Et mediis Helicon in undis, am praefuisses Palladio gregi laetus, superstes, nec sine gloria, Nec puppe lustrasses Charontis Horribiles barathri recessus▪ At fila rupit Persephone tua ata, cum te viderit artibus Succoque pollenti tot atris Faucibus eripuisse mortis.
Colende praeses, membra precor tua Molli quiescant cespite, & ex tuo Crescant rosae, calthaeque busto, Purpureoque hyacinthus ore. Sit mite de te judicium Aeaci, Subrideatque Aetnaea Proserpina, Interque felices perennis Elysio spatiere campo. In quintum Novembris, Anno aetatis 17. JAm pius extremâ veniens Jâcobus ab arcto Teucrigenas populos, latéque patentia regna Albionum tenuit, jamque inviolabile foedus Sceptra Caledoniis conjunxerat Anglica Scotis: Pacificusque novo felix divesque sedebat In solio, occultique doli securus & hostis: Cum ferus ignifluo regnans Acheronte tyrannus, Eumenidum pater, aethereo vagus exul Olympo, Forte per immensum terrarum erraverat orbem, Dinumerans sceleris socios, vernasque fideles, Participes regni post funera moesta futuros; Hic tempestates medio ciet aëre ditas,
Illic unanimes odium struit inter amicos, Armat & invictas in mutua viscera gentes; Regnaque olivifera vertit florentia pace, Et quoscunque videt purae virtutis amantes, Hos cupit adjicere imperio, fraudumque magister Tentat inaccessum sceleri corrumpere pectus, Insidiasque locat tacitas, cassesque latentes Tendit, ut incautos rapiat, seu Caspia Tigris Insequitur trepidam deserta per avia praedam Nocte sub illuni, & somno nictantibus astris. Talibus infestat populos Summanus & urbes Cinctus caeruleae fumanti turbine flammae. Jamque fluentisonis albentia rupibus arva Apparent, & terra Deo dilecta marino, Cui nomen dederat quondam Neptunia proles Amphitryoniaden qui non dubitavit atrocem Aequore tranato furiali poscere bello, Ante expugnatae crudelia saecula Troiae. At simul hanc opibusque & festâ pace beatam Aspicit, & pingues donis Cerealibus agros, Quodque magis doluit, venerantem numina veri Sancta Dei populum, tandem suspiria rupit Tartareos ignes & luridum olentia sulphur. Qualia Trinacriâ trux ab Jove clausus in Aetna
Efflat tabifico monstrosus ab ore Tiphoeus. Ignescunt oculi, stridetque adamantinus ordo Dentis, ut armorum fragor, ictaque cuspide cuspis. Atque pererrato solum hoc lacrymabile mundo Inveni, dixit, gens haec mihi sola rebellis, Contemtrixque jugi, nostrâque potentior arte. Illa tamen, mea si quicquam tentamina possunt, Non feret hoc impune diu, non ibit inulta, Hactenus; & piceis liquido natat aëre pennis; Qu volat, adversi praecursant agmine venti, Densantur nubes, & crebra tonitrua fulgent. Jamque pruinosas velox superaverat alpes, Et tenet Ausoniae fines, à parte sinistrâ Nimbifer Appenninus erat, priscique Sabini, Dextra veneficiis infamis Hetruria, nec non Te furtiva Tibris Thetidi videt oscula dantem; Hinc Mavortigenae consistit in arce Quirini. Reddiderant dubiam jam sera crepuscula lucem, Cum circumgreditur totam Tricoronifer urbem, Panificosque Deos portat, scapulisque virorum Evehitur, praeeunt summisso poplite reges, Et mendicantum series longissima fratrum; Cereaque in manibus gestant funalia caeci, Cimmeriis nati in tenebris, vitamque tahentes,
Templa dein multis subeunt lucentia taedis (Vesper erat sacer iste Petro) fremitúsque canentum Saepe tholos implet vacuos, & inane locorum. Qualiter exululat Bromius, Bromiique caterva, Orgia cantantes in Echionio Ara cyntho, Dum tremit attonitus vitreis Asopus in undis, Et procul ipse cavâ responsat rupe Cithaeron. His igitur tandem solenni more peractis, Nox senis amplexus Erebi taciturna reliquit, Praecipitesque impellit equos stimulante flagello, Captum oculis Typhlonta, Melanchaetemque ferocem, Atque Acherontaeo prognatam patre Siopen Torpidam, & hirsutis horrentem Phrica capillis. Interea regum domitor, Phlegetontius haeres Ingreditur thalamos (neque enim secretus adulter Producit steriles molli sine pellice noctes) At vix compositos somnus claudebat ocellos, Cum niger umbrarum dominus, rectorque silentum, Praedatorque hominum falsâ sub imagine tectus Astitit, assumptis micuerunt tempora canis, Barba sinus promissa tegit, cineracea longo Syrmate verrit humum vestis, pendetque cucullus Vertice de raso, & ne quicquam desit ad artes, Cannabeo lumbos constrinxit fune salaces,
Tarda fenestratis figens vestigia calceis. Talis, uti fama est, astâ Franciscus eremo Tetra vagabatur solus per lustra ferarum, Sylvestrique tulit genti pia verba salutis Impius, atque lupos domuit, Lybicosque leones. Subdolus at tali Serpens velatus amictu Solvit in has fallax ora execrantia voces; Dormis nate? Etiamne tuos sopor opprimit artus Immemor O fidei, pecorumque oblite tuorum, Dum cathedram venerande tuam, diademaque triplex Ridet Hyperboreo gens barbara nata sub axe, Dumque pharetrati spernunt tua jura Britanni; Surge, age, surge piger, Latius quem Caesar adorat, Cui reserata patet convexi janua caeli, Turgentes animos, & fastus frange procaces, Sacrilegique sciant, tua quid maledictio possit, Et quid Apostolicae possit custodia clavis; Et memor Hesperiae dis jectam ulciscere classem, Mersaque Iberorum lato vexilla profundo, Sanctorumque cruci tot corpora fixa probrosae, Thermodoontéa nuper regnante puella. At tu si tenero mavis torpescere lecto Crescentesque negas hosti contundere vires, Tyrrhenum implebit numeroso milite Pontum,
Signaque Aventino ponet fulgentia colle: Relliquias veterum franget, flammisque cremabit, Sacraque calcabit pedibus tua colla profanis, Cujus gaudebant soleis dare basia reges. Nec tamen hunc bellis & aperto Marte Iacesses▪ Irritus ille labor, tu callidus utere fraude, Quaelibet haereticis disponere retia fas est; Jamque ad consilium extremis rex magnus ab oris Patricios vocat, & procerum de stirpe creatos, Grandaevosque patres trabeâ, canisque verendos; Hos tu membratim poteris conspergere in auras, Atque dare in cineres, nitrati pulveris igne Aedibus injecto, quà convenere, sub imis. Protinus ipse igitur quoscumque habet Anglia fido Propositi, factique mone, quisquámne tuorum Audebit summi non jussa facessere Papae. Perculsosque metu subito, casúque stupentes Invadat vel Gallus atrox, vel saevus Iberus. Saecula sic illic tandem Mariana redibunt, Tuque in belligeros iterum dominaberis Anglos. Et nequid timeas, divos divasque secundas Accipe, quotque tuis celebrantur numina fastis▪ Dixit & adscitos ponens malefidus amictus Fugit ad infandam, reguum illaetabile, Lethn.
Jam rosea Eoas pandens Tithonia portas Vestit inauratas redeunti lumine terras; Maestaque adhuc nigri deplorans funera nati Irrigat ambrosiis montana cacumina guttis▪ Cum somnos pepulit stellatae janitor aulae Nocturnos visus, & somnia grata revolvens. Est locus aeternâ septus caligine noctis Vasta ruinosi quondam fundamina tecti, Nunc torvi spelunca Phoni, Prodotaeque bilinguis Effera quos uno peperit Discordia partu. Hic inter caementa jacent semifractaque saxa, Ossa inhumata virûm, & trajecta cadavera ferro; Hic Dolus intortis semper sedetater ocellis, Jurgiaque, & stimulis armata Calumnia fauces, Et Furor, atque viae moriendi mille videntur▪ Et Timor, exanguisque locum circumvolat Horror, Perpetuoque leves per muta silentia Manes Exululant, tellus & sanguine conscia stagnat. Ipsi etiam pavidi latitant penetralibus antri Et Phonos, & Prodotes, nulloque sequente per antrum Antrum horrens, scopulosum, atrum feralibus umbris Diffugint sontes, & retrò lumina vortunt, Hos pugiles Romae per saecula longa fideles Evocat antistes Babylonius, atque ita fatur.
Finibus occiduis circumfusum incolit aequor Gens exosa mihi, prudens natura negavit Indignam penitùs nostro conjungere mundo; Illuc▪ sic jubeo, celeri contendite gressu, Tartareoque leves difflentur pulvere in auras Et rex & pariter satrapae, scelerata propago Et quotquot fidei caluere cupidine verae Consilii socios adhibete, operisque ministros. Finierat, rigidi cupidè paruere gemelli. Interea longo flectens curvamine caelos Despicit aethere â dominus qui fulgrat arce, Vanaque perversae ridet conamina turbae, Atque sui causam populi volet ipse tueri. Esse ferunt spatium, quà distat ab Aside terra Fertilis Europe, & spectat Mareotidas undas; Hic turris posita est Titanidos ardua Famae Aerea, lata, sonans, rutilis vicinior astris Quàm superimpositum vel Athos vel Pelion Ossae Mille fores aditusque patent, totidemque fenestrae, Amplaque per tenues translucent atria muros; Excitat hic varios plebs agglomerata susurros; Qualiter instrepitant circum mulctralia bombis Agmina muscarum, aut texto per ovilia junco, Dum Canis aestivum coeli petit ardua culmen
Ipsa quidem summâ sedet ultrix matris in arce, Auribus innumeris cinctum caput eminet olli, Queis sonitum exiguum trahit, atque levissima capta Murmura, ab extremis patuli confinibus orbis. Nec tot Aristoride servator inique juvencae Isidos, immiti volvebas lumina vultu, Lumina non unquam tacito nutantia somno, Lumina subjectas late spectantia terras. Istis illa solet loca luce carentia saepe Perlustrare, etiam radianti impervia soli. Millenisque loquax auditaque visaque linguis Cuilibet effundit temeraria, veráque mendax Nunc minuit, modò confictis sermonibus auget. Sed tamen a nostro meruisti carmine laudes Fama, bonum quo non aliud veracius ullum, Nobis digna cani, nec te memorasse pigebit Carmine tam longo, servati scilicet Angli Officiis vaga diva tuis, tibi reddimus aequa. Te Deus aeternos motu qui temperat ignes, Fulmine praemisso alloquitur, terrâque tremente: Fama files? an te latet impia Papistarum Conjurata cohors in meque meosque Britannos, Et nova sceptrigero caedes meditata Jacobo: Nec plura, illa statim sensit mandata Tonantis,
Et satis antè fugax stridentes induit alas, Induit & variis exilia corpora plumis; Dextra tubam gestat Temesaeo ex aere sonoram. Nec mora jam pennis cedentes remigat auras, Atque parum est curfu celeres praevertere nubes, Jam ventos, jam solis equos post terga reliquit: Et primò Angliacas solito de more per urbes Ambiguas voces, incertaque murmura spargit, Mox arguta dolos, & detestabile vulgat Proditionis opus, nec non facta horrida dictu, Authoresque addit sceleris, nec garrula caecis Insidiis loca structa silet; stupuere relatis, Et pariter juvenes, pariter tremuere puellae▪ Effaetique senes pariter, tantaeque ruinae Sensus ad aetatem subitò penetraverat omnem Attamen interea populi miserescit ab alto Aethereus pater, & crudelibus obstitit ausis Papicolûm; capti poenas raptantur ad acres; At pia thura Deo, & grati solvuntur honores; Compita laeta focis genialibus omnia fumant, Turba choros juvenilis agit: Quintoque Novembris Nulla Dies toto occurrit celebratior anno.
Anno aetatis 17. In obitum Praesulis Eliensis. ADhuc madentes rore squalebant genae, Et sicca nondum lumina Adhuc liquentis imbre turgebant salis, Quem nuper effudi pius, Dum maesta charo justa persolvi rogo Wintoniensis praesulis. Cum centilinguis Fama (proh semper mali Cladisque vera nuntia) Spargit per urbes divitis Britanniae, Populosque Neptuno satos, Cessisse morti, & ferreis sororibus Te generis humani decus, Qui rex sacrorum illâ fuisti in insulâ Quae nomen Anguillae tenet. Tunc inquietum pectus irá protinus Ebulliebat fervidâ, Tumulis potentem saepe devovens deam: Nec vota Naso in Ibida Concepit alto diriora pectore, Graiusque vates parciùs
Turpem Lycambis execratus est dolum▪ Sponsamqne Neobolen suam. At ecce diras ipse dum fundo graves, Et imprecor neci necem, Audisse tales videor attonitus sonos Leni, sub aurâ, flamine: Caecos furores pone, pone vitream Bilemque & irritas minas, Quid temerè violas non nocenda numina, Subitoque ad iras percita. Non est, ut arbitraris elusus miser, Mors atra Noctis filia, Erebóve patre creta, sive Erinnye, Vastóve nata sub Chao: Ast illa caelo missa stellato, Dei Messes ubique colligit; Animasque mole carneâ reconditas In lucem & auras evocat: Ut cum fugaces excitant Horae diem Themidos Jovisque filiae; Et sempiterni ducit ad vultus patris; At justa raptat impios Sub regna furvi luctuosa Tartari, Sedesque subterraneas
Hane ut vocantem laetus audivi, cito Foedum reliqui carcerem, Volatilesque faustus inter milites Ad astra sublimis feror: Vates ut olim raptus ad coelum senex Auriga currus ignei, Non me Boötis terruere lucidi Sarraca tarda frigore, aut Formidolosi Scorpionis brachia, Non ensis Orion tuus. Praetervolavi fulgidi solis globum, Longéque sub pedibus deam Vidi triformem, dum coercebat suos Fraenis dracones aureis. Erraticorum syderum per ordines, Per lacteas vehor plagas, Velocitatem saepe miratus novam, Donec nitentes ad fores Ventum est Olympi, & regiam Crystallinam, & Stratum smaragdis Atrium. Sed hic tacebo, nam quis effari queat Oriundus humano patre Amoenitates illius loci, mihi Sat est in aeternum frui.
Naturam non pati senium. HEu qum perpetuis erroribus acta fatiscit Avia mens hominum, tenebrisque immersa profundis Oedipodioniam volvit sub pectore noctem! Quae vesana suis metiri facta deorum Audet, & incisas leges adamante perenni Assimilare suis, nulloque solubile saeclo Consilum fati perituris alligat horis. Ergóne marcescet sulcantibus obsita rugis Naturae facies, & rerum publica mater Omniparum contracta uterum sterilescet ab aevo? Et se fassa senem malè certis passibus ibit Sidereum tremebunda caput? num tetra vetustas Annorumque aeterna fames, squalorque situsque Sidera vexabunt? an & insatiabile Tempus Esuriet Caelum, rapietque in viscera patrem? Heu, potuitne suas imprudens Jupiter arces Hoc contra munisse nefas, & Temporis isto Exemisse malo, gyrosque dedisse perennes? Ergo erit ut quandoque sono dilapsa tremendo Convexi tabulata ruant, atque obvius ictu Stridat uterque polus, superâque ut Olympius aulâ Decidat, horribilisque retectâ Gorgone Pallas.
Qualis in Aegaeam proles Junonia Lemnon Deturbata sacro cecidit de limine caeli. Tu quoque Phoebe tui casus imitabere nati Praecipiti curru, subitáque ferere ruinâ Pronus, & extinctâ fumabit lampade Nereus, Et dabit attonito feralia sibila ponto. Tune etiam aërei divulsis sedibus Haemi Dissultabit apex, imoque allisa barathro Terrebunt Stygium dejecta Ceraunia Ditem In superos quibus usus erat, fraternaque bell. At Pater omnipotens fundatis fortius astris Consuluit rerum summae, certoque peregit Pondere fatorum lances, atque ordine summo Singula perpetuum jussit servare tenorem. Volvitur hinc lapsu mundi rota prima diurno; Raptat, & ambitos sociâ vertigine caelos. Tardior haud solito Saturnus, & acer ut olim Fulmineùm rutilat cristatâ casside Mavors. Floridus aeternùm Phoebus juvenile coruscat▪ Nec fovet effoetas loca per declivia terras Devexo temone Deus; sed semper amicá Luce potens eadem currit per signa rotarum▪ Surgit odoratis pariter sormosus ab Indis Aethereum pecus albenti qui cogit Olympo
Mane vocans, & serus agens in pascua caeli, Temporis & gemino dispertit regna colore. Fulget, obitque vices alterno Delia cornu, Caeruleumque ignem paribus complectitur ulnis. Nec variant elementa fidem, solitóque fragore Lurida perculsas jaculantur fulmina rupes. Nec per inane furit leviori murmure Corus, Stringit & armiferos aequali horrore Gelonos Trux Aquilo, spiratque hyemem, nimbosque volutat. Utque solet, Siculi diverberat ima Pelori Rex maris, & raucâ circumstrepit aequora conchâ Oceani Tubicen, nec vastâ mole minorem Aegaeona ferunt dorso Balearica cete. Sed neque Terra tibi saecli vigor ille vetusti Priscus abest, servatque suum Narcissus odorem▪ Et puer ille suum tenet & puer ille decorem Phoebe tuusque & Cypri tuus, nec ditior olim Terra datum sceleri celavit montibus aurum Conscia, velsub aquis gemmas. Sic denique in aevum Ibit cunctarum series justissima rerum, Donec flamma orbem populabitur ultima, latè Circumplexa polos, & vasti culmina caeli; Ingentique rogo flagrabit machina mundi.
De Idea Platonica quemadmodum Aristoteles intellexit. DIcite sacrorum praesides nemorum deae, Tuque O noveni perbeata numinis Memoria mater, quaeque in immenso procul Antro recumbis otiosa Aeternitas, Monumenta servans, & ratas leges Jovis, Caelique fastos atque ephemeridas Deûm, Quis ille primus cujus ex imagine Natura sollers finxit humanum genus, Aeternus, incorruptus, aequaevus polo, Unusque & universus, exemplar Dei? Haud ille Palladis gemellus innub ae Interna proles insidet menti Jovis; Sed quamlibet natura sit communior, Tamen seorsùs extat ad morem unius, Et, mira, certo stringitur spatio loci; Seu sempiternus ille syderum comes Caeli pererrat ordines decemplicis, Citimúmve terris incolit Lunae globum: Sive inter animas corpus adituras fedens Obliviosas torpet ad Lethes aquas:
Sive in remot forte terrarum plagâ Incedit ingens hominis archetypus gigas, Et diis tremendus erigit celsum caput Atante major portitore syderum. Non cui profundum caecitas lumen dedit Dircaeus augur vidit hunc alto sinu; Non hunc silenti nocte Pleiones nepos Vatum sagaci praepes ostendit choro; Non hunc sacerdos novit Assyrius, licet Longos vetusti commemoret atavos Nini, Priscumque Belon, inclytumque Osiridem. Non ille trino gloriosus nomine Ter magnus Hermes (ut sit arcani sciens) Talem reliquit Isidis cultoribus. At tu perenne ruris Academi decus (Haec monstra si tu primus induxti scholis) Jam jam pöetas urbis exules tuae Revocabis, ipse fabulator maximus, Aut institutor ipse migrabis foras. Ad Patrem. NUnc mea Pierios cupiam per pectora fontes Irriguas torquere vias, totumque per ora
Volvere laxatum gemino de vertice rivum; Ut tenues oblita sonos audacibus alis Surgat in offlcium venerandi Musa parentis. Hoc utcunque tibi gratum pater optime carmen Exiguum meditatur opus, nec novimus ipsi Aptiùs à nobis quae possint munera donis Respondere tuis, quamvis nec maxima possint Respondere tuis, nedum ut par gratia donis Esse queat, vacuis quae redditur arida verbis. Sed tamen haec nostros ostendit pagina census, Et quod habemus opum chartâ numeravimus ist Quae mihi sunt nullae, nisi quas dedit aurea Clio Quas mihi semoto somni peperere sub antro, Et nemoris laureta sacri Parnassides umbrae. Nec tu vatis opus divinum despice carmen, Quo nihil aethereos ortus, & semina caeli, Nil magis humanam commendat origine mentem, Sancta Promethéae retinens vestigia flammae. Carmen amant superi, tremebundaque Tartara carmen Ima ciere valet, divosque ligare profundos, Et triplici duros Manes adamante coercet. Carmine sepositi retegunt arcana futuri Phoebades, & tremulae pallentes ora Sibyllae; Carmina sacrificus sollennes pangit ad aras
Aurea seu sternit motantem cornua taurum; Seu cùm fata sagax fumantibus abdita fibris Consulit, & tepidis Parcam scrutatur in extis. Nos etiam patrium tunc cum repetemus Olympum, Aeternaeque morae stabunt immobilis aevi, Ibimus auratis per caeli templa coronis, Dulcia suaviloquo fociantes carmina plectro, Astra quibus, geminique poli convexa sonabunt. Spiritus & rapidos qui circinat igneus orbes. Nunc quoque sydereis intercinit ipse choreis Immortale melos, & inenarrabile carmen; Torrida dum rutilus compescit sibila serpens, Demissoque ferox gladio mansuescit Orion; Stellarum nec sentit onus Maurusius Atlas. Carmina regales epulas ornare solebant, Cum nondum luxus, vastaeque immensa vorago Nota gulae, & modico spumabat coena Lyaeo. Tum de more sedens festa ad convivia vates Aesculeâ intonsos redimitus ab arbore crines, Heroumque actus, imitandaque gesta canebat, Et chaos, & positi latè fundamina mundi, Reptantesque Deos, & alentes numina glandes, Et nondum Aetnaeo quaesitum fulmen ab antro. Denique quid vocis modulamen inane juvabi,
Verborum sensusque vacans, numerique loquacis? Silvestres decet iste choros, non Orphea cantus, Qui tenuit fluvios & quercubus addidit aures Carmine, non citharâ, simulachraque functa canendo Compulit in lacrymas; habet has à carmine laudes. Nec tu perge precor sacras contemnere Musas, Nec vanas inopesque puta, quarum ipse peritus Munere, mille sonos numeros componis ad aptos, Millibus & vocem modulis variare canoram Doctus, Arionii meritò sis nominis haeres. Nunc tibi quid mirum, si me genuisse poëtam Contigerit, charo si tam propè sanguine juncti Cognatas artes, studiumque affine sequamur: Ipse volens Phoebus se dispertire duobus, Altera dona mihi, dedit altera dona parenti, Dividuumque Deum genitorque puerque tenemus. Tu tamen ut simules teneras odisse camoenas, Non odisse reor, neque enim, pater, ire jubebas Quà via lata patet, quà pronior area lucri, Certaque condendi fulget spes aurea nummi: Nec rapis ad leges, malè custoditaque gentis Jura, nec insulsis damnas clamoribus aures. Sed magis excultam cupiens ditescere mentem▪ Me procul urbano strepitu, secessibus altis
Abductum Aoniae jucunda per otia ripae Phoebaeo lateri comitem finis ire beatum. Officium chari taceo commune parentis, Me poscunt majora, tuo pater optime sumptu Cùm mihi Romuleae patuit facundia linguae, Et Latii veneres, & quae Jovis ora decebant Grandia magniloquis elata vocabula Graiis, Addere suasisti quos jactat Gallia flores, Et quam degeneri novus Italus ore loquelam Fundit, Barbaricos testatus voce tumultus, Quaeque Palaestinus loquitur mysteria vate▪ Denique quicquid habet caelum, subjectaque coelo Terra parens, terraeque & coelo interfluus aer, Quicquid & unda tegir, pontique agitabile marmor, Per te nosse licet, per te, si nosse libebit. Dimotàque venit spectanda scientia nube, Nudaque conspicuos inclinat ad oscula vultus▪ Ni fugisse velim, ni sit libâsse molestum. I nunc, confer opes quisquis malesanus avita Austriaci gazas, Perüanaque regna praeoptas. Quae potuit majora pater tribuisse, vel ipfe Jupiter, excepto, donâsset ut omnia, coelo? Non potiora dedit, quamvis & tuta fuissent, Publica qui juveni commisit lumina nato
Atque Hyperionios currus, & fraena diei▪ Et circùm undantem radiatâ luce tiaram. Ergo ego jam doctae pars quamlibet ima catervae Victrices hederas inter, laurosque sedebo, Jamque nec obscurus populo miscebor inerti, Vitabuntque oculos vestigia nostra profanos. Este procul vigiles curae, procul este querelae, Invidiaeque acies transverso tortilis hirquo, Saeva nec anguiferos extende Calumnia rictus; In me triste nihil faedissima turba potestis, Nec vestri sum juris ego; securaque tutus Pectora, vipereo gradiar sublimis ab ictu. At tibi, chare pater, postquam non aequa merenti Posse referre datur, nec dona rependere factis, Sit memorâsse satis, repetitaque munera grato Percensere animo, fidaeque reponere menti. Et vos, O nostri, juvenilia carmina, lusus, Si modo perpetuos sperare audebitis annos, Et domini superesse rogo, lucemque tueri, Nec spisso rapient oblivia nigra sub Orco, Forsitan has laudes, decantatumque parentis Nomen, ad exemplum, sero servabitis aevo.
Psalm 114. , . . . , . , . ; ; ; ▪ , ▪ ▪
Philosophus ad regem quendam qui eum ignotum & insontem inter rees forte cap∣tum inscius damnaverat,  haec subito misit. , . Ad Salsillum poetam Romanum aegrotantem. SCAZONTES. O Musa gressum quae volens trahis claudum. Vulcanioque tarda gaudes incessu, Nec sentis illud in loco minus gratum, Quàm cùm decentes flava Dëiope suras Alternat aureum ante Junonis lectum. Adesdum & haec s'is verba pauca Salsillo Refer, camoena nostra cui tantum est cordi, Quamque ille magnis praetulit immeritò divis. Haec ergo alumnus ille Londini Milto, Diebus hisce qui suum linquens nidum Polique tractum, (pessimus ubi ventorum, Insanientis impotensque pulmonis
Pernix anhela sub Jove exercet flabra) Venit feraces Itali soli ad glebas, Visum superbâ cognitas urbes famâ Virosque doctaeque indolem juventutis, Tibi optat idem hic fausta multa Salsille, Habitumque fesso corpori penitùs sanum; Cui nunc profunda bilis infestat renes, Praecordiisque fixa damnosùm spirat. Nec id pepercit impia quòd tu Romano Tam cultus ore Lesbium condis melos. O dulce divûm munus, Osalus Hebes Germana! Tuque Phoebe morborum terror Pythone caeso, sive tu magis Paean Libenter audis, hic tuus sacerdos est. Querceta Fauni, vosque rore vinoso Colles benigni, mitis Euandri sedes, Siquid salubre vallibus frondet vestris, Levamen aegro ferte certatim vati. Sic ille charis redditus rursùm Musis Vicina dulci prata mulcebit cantu. Ipse inter atros emirabitur lucos Numa, ubi beatum degit otium aeternum, Suam reclivis semper Aegeriam spectans. Tumidusque & ipse Tibris hinc delinitus Spei favebit annuae colonorum:
Nec in sepulchris ibit obsessum reges Nimiùm sinistro laxus irruens loro: Sed fraena melius temperabit undarum, Adusque curvi salsa regna Portumni. Mansus. Joannes Baptista Mansus Marchio Villensis vir ingenii laude, tum literarum studio, nec non & bellicâ virtute apud Italos clarus in primis est. Ad quem Torquati Tassi dialogus extat de Ami∣citiâ scriptus; erat enim Tassi amicissimus; ab quo etiam inter Campaniae principes celebratur, in illo poemate cui titulus Gerusalemme con∣quistata, lib. 20. Fra cavalier magnanimi, è cortesi Risplende il Manso— Is authorem Neapoli commorantem summâ benevo∣lentiâ prosecutus est, multque ei detulit huma∣nitatis officia. Ad hunc itque hospes ille anto∣quam ab eâ urbe discederet, ut ne ingratum se ostenderet, hoc carmen misit. HAec quoque Manse tuae meditantur carmina laudi Pierides, tibi Manse choronotissime Phoebi▪ Quandoquidem ille alium haud aequo est dignatus honore, Post Galli cineres, & Mecaenatis Hetrusci. Tu quoque si nostrae tantùm valet aura Camoenae, Victrices hederas inter, laurosque sedebis.
Te pridem magno felix concordia Taso Junxit, & aeternis inscripsit nomina chartis. Mox tibi dulciloquum non inscia Musa Marinum Tradidit, ille tuum dici se gaudet alumnum, Dum canit Assyrios divûm prolixus amores▪ Mollis & Ausonias stupefecit carmine nymphas. Ille itidem moriens tibi soli debita vates Ossa tibi soli, supremaque vota reliquit. Nec manes pietas tua chara fefellit amici, Vidimus arridentem operoso ex aere poetam. Nec satis hoc visum est in utrumque, & nec pia cessant Officia in tumulo, cupis integros rapere Orco, Quà ptes, atque avidas Parcarum eludere leges: Amborum genus, & variâ sub sorte peractam Describis vitam, moresque, & dona Minervae; Aemulus illius Mycalen qui natus ad altam Rettulit Aeolii vitam facundus Homeri. Ergo ego te Cliûs & magni nomine Phoebi Manse pater, jubeo longum salvere per aevum Missus Hyperboreo juvenis peregrinus ab axe▪ Nec tu longinquam bonus aspernabere Musam, Quae nuper gelidâ vix enutrita sub Arcto Imprudens Italas ausa est volitare per urbes▪ Nos etiam in nostro modulantes flumine cygnos
Credimus obscuras noctis sensisse per umbras, Quà Thamesis latè puris argenteus urnis Oceani glaucos perfundit gurgite crines. Quin & in has quondam pervenit Tityrus oras. Sed neque nos genus incultum, nec inutile Phoebo, Quà plaga septno mundi sulcata Trione Brumalem patitur longâ sub nocte Boöten. Nos etiam colimus Phoebum, nos munera Phoebo Flaventes spicas, & lutea mala canistris, Halantemque crocum (perhibet nisi vana vetustas) Misimus, & lectas Druidum de gente choreas. (Gens Druides antiqua sacris operata deorum Heroum laudes imitandaque gesta canebant) Hinc quoties festo cingunt altaria cant Delo in herbosâ Graiae de more puellae Carminibus laetis memorant Corineida Loxo, Fatidicamque Upin, cum flavicomà Hecaërge Nuda Caledonio variatas pectora fuco. Fortunate senex, ergo quacunque per orbem Torquati decus, & nomen celebrabitur ingens, Claraque perpetui succrescet fama Marini, Tu quoque in ora frequens venies plausumque virorum, Et parili carpes iter immortale volatu. Dicetur tum sponte tuos habitasse penates
Cynthius, & famulas venisse ad limina Musas: At non sponte domum tamen idem, & regis adivit Rura Peretiadae caelo fugitivus Apollo; Ille licet magnum Alciden susceperat hospes; Tantùm ubi clamosos placuit vitare bubulcos. Nobile mansueti cessit Chironis in antrum, Irriguos inter saltus frondosaque tecta Peneium prope rivum; ibi saepe sub ilice nigr Ad citharae strepitum blandâ prece victus amici Exilii duros lenibat voce labores. Tum neque ripa suo, barathro nec fixa sub imo▪ Saxa stetere loco, nutat Trachinia rupes, Nec sentit solitas, immania pondera, silvas, Emotaeque suis properant de collibus orni, Mulcenturque novo maculosi carmine lynces. Diis dilecte senex, te Jupiter aequus oportet Nascentem, & miti lustrarit lumine Phoebus, Atlantisque nepos; neque enim nisi charus ab ortu Diis superis poterit magno favisse poetae. Hinc longaeva tibi lento sub flore senectus Vernat, & Aesonios lucratur vivida fusos, Nondum deciduos servans tibi frontis honores, Ingeniumque vigens, & adultum mentis acumen. O mihi si mea sors talem concedat amicum
Phoebaeos decorâsse viros qui tam bene norit, Si quando indigenas revocabo in carmina reges, Arturumque etiam sub terris bella moventem; Aut dicam invictae sociali foedere mensae, Magnanimos Heroas, & (O modo spiritus ad sit) Frangam Saxonicas Britonum sub Marte phalanges. Tandem ubi non tacitae permensus tempora vitae, Annorumque satur cineri sua jura relinquam, Ille mihi lecto madidis astaret ocellis, Astanti sat erit si dicam sim tibi curae; Ille meos artus liventi morte solutos Curaret parvâ componi molliter urnâ. Forsitan & nostros ducat de marmore vultus, Nectens aut Paphiâ myrti aut Parnasside lauri Fronde comas, at ego securâ pace quiescam. Tum quoque, si qua fides, si praemia certa bonorum, Ipse ego caelicolûm semotus in aethera divûm, Quò labor & mens pura vehunt, atque ignea virtus Secreti haec aliquâ mundi de parte videbo (Quantum fata sinunt) & totâ mente serenùm Ridens purpureo suffundar lumine vultus Et simul aethereo plaudam mihi laetus Olympo.
EPITAPHIUM DAMONIS. ARGUMENTUM. THyrsis & Damon ejusdem viciniae Pastores, eadem studia sequuti a pueritiâ amici erant, ut qui pluri∣mùm. Thyrsis animi cau â pro∣fectus peregrè de obitu Damonis nuncium accepit. Domum postea reversus, & rem ita esse comperto, se, suamque solitudi∣nem hoc carmine deplorat. Damonis autem sub personâ hîc intelligitur Carolus Deodatus ex urbe Hetruriae Lucapaterno genere oriundus, caetera Anglus; ingenio, doctrina, clarissimisque caeteris virtutibus, dum viveret, juvenis egregius.
EPITAPHIUM DAMONIS. HImerides nymphae (nam vos & Daphnin & Hy∣lan, Et plorata diu meministis fata Bionis) Dicite Sicelicum Thamesina per oppida carmen: Quas miser effudit voces, quae murmura Thyrsis, Et quibus assiduis exercuit antra querelis, Fluminaque, fontesque vagos, nemorumque recessus, Dum sibi praereptum queritur Damona, heque altam Luctibus exemit noctem loca sola pererrans. Et jam bis viridi surgebat culmus arista, Et totidem flavas numerabant horrea messes, Ex quo summa dies tulerat Damona sub umbras, Nec dum aderat Thyrsis; pastorem scilicet illum Dulcis amor Musae Thusca retinebat in urbe. Ast ubi mens expleta domum, pecorisque relicti Cura vocat, simul assuetâ seditque sub ulmo, Tum vero amissum tum denique sentit amicum,
Coepit & immensum sic exonerare dolorem. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Hei mihi! quae terris, quae dicam numina coelo, Postquam te immiti rapuerunt funere Damon; Siccine nos linquis, tua sic sine nomine virtus Ibit, & obscuris numero sociabitur umbris? At non ille, animas virgâ qui dividit aureâ, Ista velit, dignumque tui te ducat in agmen, Ignavumque procul pecus arceat omne silentum. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Quicquid erit, certè nisi me lupus antè videbit, Indeplorato non comminuere sepulcro, Constabitque tuus tibi honos, longúmque vigebit Inter pastores: Illi tibi vota secundo Solvere post Daphnin, post Daphnin dicere laudes Gaudebunt, dum rura Pales, dum Faunus amabit: Si quid id est, priscamque fidem coluisse, piúmque, Palladiásque artes, sociúmque habuisse canorum. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Haec tibi certa manent, tibi erunt haec praemia Damon, At mihi quid tandem fiet modò? quis mihi fidus Haerebit lateri comes, ut tu saepe solebas Frigoribus duris, & per loca foeta pruinis, Aut rapido sub sole, siti morientibus herbis?
Sive opus in magnos fuit eminùs ire leones Aut avidos terrere lupos praesepibus altis; Quis fando sopire diem, cantuque solebit? Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Pectora cui credam? quis me lenire docebit Mordaces curas, quis longam fallere noctem Dulcibus alloquiis, grato cùm sibilat igni Molle pyrum, & nucibus strepitat focus, at malus auster Miscet cuncta foris, & desuper intonat ulmo. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Aut aestate, dies medio dum vertitur axe, Cum Pan aesculeâ somnum capit abditus umbrâ, Et repetunt sub aquis sibi nota sedilia nymphae. Pastoresque latent, stertit sub sepe colonus, Quis mihi blanditiásque tuas, quis tum mihi risus, Cecropiosque sales referet, cultosque lepores? Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. At jam solus agros, jam pascua solus oberro, Sicubi ramosae densantur vallibus umbrae, Hic serum expecto, supra caput imber & Eurus Triste sonant, fractaeque agitata crepuscula silvae. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Heu quàm culta mihi priùs arva procacibus herbis Involvuntur, & ipsa situ seges alta fatiseit!
Innuba neglecto marcescit & uva racemo, Nec myrteta juvant; ovium quoque taedet, at illae Moerent, inque suum convertunt ora magistrum. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Tityrus ad corylos vocat, Alphesiboeus ad ornos, Ad salices Aegon, ad flumina pulcher Amyntas, Hic gelidi fontes, hîc illita gramina musco, Hic Zephyri, hîc placidas interstrepit arbutus undas; Ista canunt surdo, frutices ego nactus abibam. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Mopsus ad haec, nam me redeuntem forte notârat (Et callebat avium linguas, & sydera Mopsus) Thyrsi quid hoc? dixit, quae te coquit improba bilis? Aut te perdit amor, aut te malè fascinat astrum, Saturni grave saepe fuit pastoribus astrum, Intimaque obliquo figit praecordia plumbo. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Mirantur nymphae, & quid te Thyrsi futurum est? Quid tibi vis▪ ajunt, non haec solet esse juventae Nubila frons, oculique truces, vultusque severi, Illa choros, lususque leves, & semper amorem Jure petit, bis ille miser qui serus amavit. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Venit Hyas, Dryopéque, & filia Baucidis Aegle
Docta modos, citharaeque sciens, sed perdita fastu, Venit Idumanii Chloris vicina fluenti; Nil me blanditiae, nil me solantia verba, Nil me, si quid adest, movet, aut spes ulla futuri. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Hei mihi quam similes ludunt per prata juvenci, Omnes unanimi secum sibi lege sod ales, Nec magis hunc alio quisquam secernit amicum De grege, sic densi veniunt ad pabula thoes, Inque vicem hirsuti paribus junguntur onagri; Lex eadem pelagi, deserto in littore Proteus Agmina Phocarum numerat, vilisque volucrum Passer habet semper quicum sit, & omnia circum Farra libens volitet, serò sua tecta revisens, Quem si fors letho objecit, seu milvus adunco Fata tulit rostro, seu stravit arundine fossor, Protinus ille alium socio petit inde volatu. Nos durum genus, & diris exercita fatis Gens homines aliena animis, & pectore discors, Vix sibi quisque parem de millibus invenit unum, Aut si sors dederit tandem non aspera votis, Illum inopina dies quâ non speraveris horâ Surripit, aeternum linquens in saecula damnum. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni▪
Heu quis me ignotas traxit vagus error in oras Ire per aëreas rupes, Alpemque nivosam! Ecquid erat tanti Romam vidisse sepultam? Quamvis illa foret, qualem dum viseret olim, Tityrus ipse suas & oves & rura reliquit▪ Ut te tam dulci possem caruisse sodale, Possem tot maria alta, tot interponere montes, Tot sylvas, tot saxa tibi, fluviosque sonantes. Ah certè extremùm licuisset tangere dextram, Et bene compositos placidè morientis ocellos, Et dixisse vale, nostri memor ibis ad astra. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni▪ Quamquam etiam vestri nunquam meminisse pigebit Pastores Thusci, Musis operata juventus, Hic Charis, atque Lepos; & Thuscus tu quoque Damon▪ Antiquâ genus unde petis Lucumonis ab urbe. O ego quantus eram, gelidi cum stratus ad Arni Murmura, populeumque nemus, quà mollior herb, Carpere nunc violas, nunc summas carpere myrtos, Et potui Lycidae certantem audire Menalcam. Ipse etiam tentare ausus sum, nec puto multùm Displicui, nam sunt & apud me munera vestra Fiscellae, calathique & cerea vincla cicutae, Quin▪ & nostra suas docuerunt nomina fagos
Et Datis, & Francinus, erant & vocibus ambo Et studiis noti, Lydorum sanguinis ambo. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Haec mihi tum laeto dictabat roscida luna, Dum solus teneros claudebam cratibus hoedos. Ah quoties dixi, cùm te cinis ater habebat, Nunc canit, aut lepori nunc tendit retia Damon, Vimina nunc texit, varios sibi quod sit in usus; Et quae tum facili sperabam mente futura Arripui voto levis, & praesentia finxi, Heus bone numquid agis? nisi te quid forte retardat, Imus? & argutâ paulùm recubamus in umbra, Aut ad aquas Colni, aut ubi jugera Cassibelauni? Tu mihi percurres medicos, tua gramina, succos, Helleborúmque, humilésque crocos, foliûmque hyacinthi, Quasque habet ista palus herbas, artesque medentûm, Ah pereant herbae, pereant artesque medentûm Gramina, postquam ipsi nil profecere magistro. Ipse etiam, nam nescio quid mihi grande sonabat Fistula, ab undecimâ jam lux est altera nocte, Et tum forte novis admôram labra cicutis, Dissiluere tamen rupta compage, nec ultra Ferre graves potuere sonos, dubito quoque ne sim Turgidulus, tamen & referam, vos cedite silvae.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Ipse ego Dardanias Rutupina per aequora puppes Dicam, & Pandrasidos regnum vetus Inogeniae, Brennúmque Arviragúmque duces, priscúmque Belinum, Et tandem Armoricos Britonum sub lege colonos; Tum gravidam Arturo fatali fraude Jogernen Mendaces vultus, assumptáque Gorlöis arma▪ Merlini dolus. O mihi tum si vita supersit, Tu procul annosa pendebis fistula pinu Multùm oblita mini, aut patriis mutata camoenis Brittonicum strides, quid enim? omnia non licet uni Non sperasse uni licet omnia, mi satis ampla Merces, & mihi grande decus (sim ignotus in aevum Tum licet, externo penitúsque inglorius orbi) Si me flava comas legat Usa, & potor Alauni, Vorticibúsque frequens Abra, & nemus omne Treantae, Et Thamesis meus ante omnes, & fusca metallis Tamara, & extremis me discant Orcades undis. Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni. Haec tibi servabam lentâ sub cortice lauri, Haec, & plura simul, tum quae mihi pocula Mansus, Mansus Chalcidicae non ultima gloria ripae Bina dedit, mirum artis opus, mirandus & ipse, Et circùm gemino caelaverat argumento:
In medio rubri maris unda, & odoriferum ver Littora longa Arabum, & sudantes balsama silvae, Has inter Phoenix divina avis, unica terris Caeruleùm fulgens diversicoloribus alis Auroram vitreis surgentem respicit undis. Parte alia polus omnipatens, & magnus Olympus, Quis putet? hic quoque Amor, pictaeque in nube pharetrae, Arma corusca faces, & spicula tincta pyropo; Nec tenues animas, pectúsque ignobile vulgi Hinc ferit, at circùm flammantia lumina torquens Semper in erectum spargit sua tela per orbes Impiger, & pronos nunquam collimat ad ictus, Hinc mentes ardere sacrae, formaeque deorum. Tu quoque in his, nee me fallit spes lubrica Damon▪ Tu quoque in his certè es, nam quò tua dulcis abiret Sanctáque simplicitas, nam quò tua candida virtus? Nec te Lethaeo fas quaesivisse sub orco, Nec tibi conveniunt lacrymae, nec flebimus ultrà, Ite procul lacrymae, purum colit aethera Damon, Aethera purus habet, pluvium pede reppulit arcum; Heroúmque animas inter, divósque perennes, Aethereos haurit latices & gaudia potat Ore Sacro. Quin tu coeli post jura recepta Dexter ades, placidúsque fave quicúnque vocaris▪
Seu tu noster eris Damon, sive aequior audis Diodotus, quo te divino nomine cuncti Coelicolae norint, sylvisque vocabere Damon. Quòd tibi purpureus pudor, & sine labe juventus Grata fuit, quòd nulla tori libata voluptas, En etiam tibi virginei servantur honores; Ipse caput nitidum cinctus rutilante corona, Letáque frondentis gestans umbracula palmae Aeternùm perages immortales hymenaeos; Cantus ubi, choreisque furit lyra mista beatis, Festa Sionaeo bacchantur & Orgia Thyrso. FINIS.
