M236 669.f.16[32] 99870135 163188
A MAD DESIGNE: OR, A Description of the King of Scots marching in his Disguise, after the Rout at Worcester, With the Particulers where He was, and what He and his Company did, every day and night after He fled from WORCESTER. I. CHARLES STƲART sits upon the Globe, in a melancholly posture, between hope and fear, hee fixeth his eyes up∣on Brittainy and Ireland, and viewes not onely Europe, but the world in a landskip, and hath both Pope, Car∣dinall and the Fryers Pouch, tyed to his Girdle by imagination. II. The Bishop of Clogher, General to the Scots King in Ireland, at Masse with the Marquesse of Ormond, and the Lord Inchequeen attending with Tor∣ches at the Altar upon him, and the Lord Taaffe holding up his train. III. The Scots Army consisting of four parties and Factions. 1. Papists, represented by the Cardinall and his troop in the Van, whereof the Mar∣quesse of Huntley is Generall. 2. Pre∣laticall Malignants, represented by the Bishop and Callis, and that fry, the Generall of which was the Duke of Buckingham. 3 Presbyterians represen∣ted by the two burning Torches, one of English Fugitives, the other of Scottish brethren, that came for our gueds, the two Generalls of which are Major Generall Massey, and the Earle of Leven. And 4. Old Cavallers, represented by the fooles head upon a pole in the Rear, whereof the Earle of Derby hath been Generall, and the foole upon an Hobby-horse; wherein the Earle of Cleaveland hath been his Competitor. IV. The two ridiculous Anticks one with a Fiddle, and the other with a Torch, set forth the ridiculousnesse of their condition when they marched into England, carried up with high thoughts yet altogether in the darke, having onely a fooles bawble to be their light to walke by, mirth of their own whim∣sies to keep up their spirits, and a shea∣thed sword to trust in. And a fooles cap was the best peece they had to make them merry with, as appeared by severall intercepted Letters from Duke Hamilton, the Earle of Laudor∣dale, and others. V. Lamenting posture of Ladies, Papists, Children, and Scotch wo∣men resemble the rout at Worcester on the third of September 1651. bemoa∣ning the sad conditions of themselves, and their unhappy Cause, and unfor∣tunate Husbands, Fathers, and friends. VI. The Scots Kings flight from Worcester represented by the Foole on Horse-back, riding backward, turning his face every way in feares, ushered by Duke Hambleton and the Lord Wilmot, the particulers of which perambulation was thus. 1 While he called upon Duke Hambleton to stirre up his men, to keep the Royall Fort at Worcester, September 3. himselfe gave the slip to his Lodging, and fetched away the richest Treasure he could presently come at. 2 Whilst Major Cobbet was entring on the one side of his House, he escaped out at a back doore on the other, and a∣bout seven a clock that night with a party of Horse posted away from Worcester, flying towards Scotland. 3 The next day being September 4th. Charles Stuart the Scots King, with the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Wilmot came to a Country-mans house in Cheshire that stood alone, and asked for Victuals; the man told them he had none fit to entertaine his Majesty, but if they pleased to light, he would get what the Country would afford; but seeing themselves discovered they were afraid, and yet being very hungry and dry, asked for any thing they had, and some cold powthered Beefe was brought to them; the Scots King drunke off a Flaggon of Beere, and with a peece of Bread in one hand, and of Beefe in the other, the others also having got each a slice away they all rid, and that mor∣ning marched into the borders of Lancashire, and all that day after lay close in a hollow Tree, turning loose their Horses at a farre distance before they came to the place where they resided. 4 On the fourth of September at night, they came like so many Hermits, or Diogenes's out of their Tubs, and went a Pilgrimage all that night on foot, 5 The next day, Septemb. 5. they betooke themselves to hide them in a Wood, and got among Thickets to hide themselves as well as they could, and got some Hips and Hawes, and such things as they could conveniently get (without venturning too farre) in the Wood, where every noyse put them into a feare of being surprized. 6 On the fifth of September at night they went on their journey. 7 On the sixth of September, they came early in the mor∣ning to a Shepherds Tent, which they surprised, and called to the Shepherd, who when he had opened the doores, they kept him in the House, and would not let him goe out, nor his Wife, but discoursed about the Gentry thereabouts, by meanes whereof they came to know that a Lady in which they had some confidence Lived neare, whither they hasted with all speed; and the Lord Wilmote comming to the doore got admittance to the Lady, and prevailed with her to give them all possible assistance; and the Scots King being come to the Lady, and having saluted her, they sate in Counsell to consider how the businesse should be ordered, and it was a∣greed, and accordingly done. 1 That they should have their haire cut in the Country fa∣shion, like plaine Country Fellowes, which was done accor∣dingly. 2 That they should weare plaine Country fashioned cloathes, which were presently got for them. 3 That they should be reputed to be Servants to the said Lady. 4 That in this pretence she should goe with them to Bristol, or some other Port, to endeavour the transporting of them beyond the Seas. 8 On the seaventh and eighth dayes of September they lay there, and waited on the Lady in severall offices, and places, and the Scots King himselfe stood bare before her when he waited on her, as well as the rest. 9 On the ninth of September, they tooke an intended voyage for Bristol, and the Scots King rid before the Lady on one Horse, the Duke of Buckingham before her Gentle∣woman upon another Horse, and the Lord Wilmot as her Groome upon an Horse by himselfe. 10 About the middle of September they got to Bristol, but they heard in their Inne so great talke what search was made after them, that they presently tooke Horse, not da∣ring to stay there, and away they came for London. 11 About the twentyeth of September they got to London, and went abroad sometimes in the mornings, and at evenings, but generally lay very close all day, and the Scots King and Wilmot waited upon the Lady at one Lodg∣ing, and the Duke of Buckingham waited as a Serving-man to the Gentlewoman at another. 12 About the latter end of September, the Scots King with the Lady came to see his. Souldiers in the Tuttle Fields at Westminster, and the Lady threw them some monies, but they stayed not. 13 Another day the Scots King came into Westminster Hall, and viewed the States Armes over the places of Judi∣catory, and viewed the Scots Colours hanging on both sides the Hall, that were taken from his Father, and from him. 14 The Lord Wilmot procured a Merchant to hire a ship of forty tuns to transport them, which cost them 120. l. 15. About the middle of October having taken leave of, and thanked the Lady, with many salutations and promises, to Graves-end they went, and from thence on, and a ship∣board. 16 As soon as my Lord was entred the Barque, and the King as his Servant; the Master of the Vessell came to my Lord, and told him, that he knew the King, and told him, That in case it should be known he could expect no mercy; which saying troubled them: But at length what with mony and promises, they prevailed, and so set saile for Havre de Grace, where they landed; and from thence to Roven, where they cloathed themselves, and writ to Pa∣ris. 17 The late Queen of England his Mother receiving an expresse from him, made present supplication to the King of France for his reception, in which the Queen Mother was no little active with her, and so he was permitted, and an Expresse sent to the Duke of Orleans for instructions there∣in. 18 Answer was returned back to appoint him Jesse by the way of Rhoane, and some supplyes of money from his Mother was sent to him; for his better accommodation in the way. 19 The Scots King being upon his march sent an Ex∣presse, giving many thanks for the courtesie, and inform∣ing his intentions to be at Maguy the 28 (alias 18) October: and hee being advertised that there should bee provisions made for him at the Louver, he sent word that he intended the 29 (alias 19 present) to goe from Maguy thither. On the said 28 of October, (which was the Saturday) the Scots King had laine the night then pst within a dayes journey of Maguy; from whence came an Expresse to his Royall Highnesse the Duke of Orleance, as also Letters from his Mother. 20 The Duke of Orleance sent forth some Coaches from Paris, to meet him at Maguy, where he lay that night. 21 And the next day being the Lords Day, Scots King came to Paris, being met a little from the Townes end by the Duke of Orleance and some others. His Highnesse the Duke of Orleance conducted the Scots King through part of the City to the Louver, but with no small discontent of the Citizens, who are some of them rea∣dy to mutiny about it, and yet many flocked to see him, and amongst those divers mocked and jeered; so that the great resort seemed to be rather in derision and scorn, then out of any good will. His Mother knew so well the dis-affections of the people, that she did not come along at all with him, nor did meet him, untill she heard that he was come to the Louver, and then presently she repaired to him. She hath spent most part of her time of late about the raising of a Fabrick at Chaliot, for the making of a Nunnery, from whence she now came to visit her son. 22 There was then a grave Coun∣cell held at the Louver, of the Scots King, the Duke of Orleance, the late Queene of England, and some others, who after some complements, re∣quired a Narrative of the English Af∣faires, the relation whereof produ∣ced some laughter, at the rediculous∣nesse of his condition. 23 The Substance of the Scots Kings Speech. The Scots King told them what hap∣pened at the fight at Worcester; gave some reproachful words against the Scots, put some scurrilous lan∣guage on the Presbyterian party in England, and boasted much of his own valour. Told them how hee slipt out of Worcester, and how near he was taking there, first in the Fort, and after in his Chamber: How he disguised himselfe and went from County to County, and what shift he made for victualls and lodging. Sometimes being driven to beg a peece of bread and meat, and ride with bread in one hand and meat in the other. And sometimes setting a Guard about a little Cottage while hee rested there untill the morning. That he went up and down London, in a Gentlewomans habit, where he saith, he never saw handsomer Coaches then they have now; that he met with severall persons that wished him no harme, and that at last he got to the Sea-coast, and there imbarqued himselfe for this Coast, in a Boat that my Lord Wilmot had provided and hired beforehand. He said he knew no∣thing what was become of the Duke of Buckingham; and that he had no other Company or Followers but the said Wilmot, since he lan∣ded. He said further, that he was never in better health, having got no harm at all in the fight. 24 Ormond and Inchequin are sent for from Caen, my Lord Taaffe from Holland, who hath been Treating with Loraine to undertake the busi∣nesse of Ireland, which is all agreed on, if the King will consent that Lor∣raine shall have the Title of Protector, and the Towne of Lymrick, a cau∣tionary Garrison for his Souldiers. Upon these conditions he hath under∣taken to land six thousand Horse and Foot before Christmas in Ireland. Taaffe hath already received twenty thousand Pistols, and about fourteen dayes since a small Vessel was sent to Lymrick, to assure them of assist∣ance. 25 Some are of opinion that the King shall suddenly make a marriage with Madamaiselle, the Queen having treated much about it of late. VII. The late Queen of England his Mother, with the Dukes of Orle∣ance, Guise, Beaufort, and Thurenne, with divers Priests, and Nuns, came to visite him at the Louver in Paris, where after they had had conference with, and lamented him, they tooke their leave and returned; the Lords to the Court, and his Mother with her Fry to Chaliot, where she is erecting a Nunnery. FINIS. LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1651.
