R1415 36282433 150233
A True CATECHISME Concerning the word of God, and the Power of it, which is quick and lively in the heart: The manner of its work∣ing, by dividing and setting before the Creature good and evil; And also commanding to Chuse the good and shun the evil. Also several Questions an∣swered by the experimental working of the Spirit; Useful for such as truly desire to be acquainted with the way to life eternal. Written by one who is brought into the true Christian faith; and for the Testimo∣ny of the same Faith, hath been cast into prison, and continued also, through the en∣vious Priests of Ely, above one whole year, and remaineth at present in Wisbitch Goal, and scornfully called Quaker, whose name is Thomas Richardson. Wisbitch Goal, the 24th of the 2d. Month, 1664. Printed in the Year 1664.
Deutromouie 30. 1. See I have set before thee good and evil, life and death: Verse 19. I have set before you life and death, blessing and Cursing, choose life, that both thou and thy soul may live. Reason Questioneth. I would be satisfied herein, hath the Creature power to Choose the good and Shun the evil, or to Chuse the evil and Shun the good? yea or nay? Light Answereth. The Creature man hath in his own will or in his own strength, he hath power to do evil; but the power to do good standeth in the gift of God; and not in the will or wit of man. Question. But the word, Chuse life, implyeth as if the man had power to Chuse. Answer. The Creature in the fall hath chosen death, or the sin that bringeth death; but now the gift of God is given to discover the sin and the death, and the way of restorati∣on, and requires the heart and minde from the sin; and fo from the death; shewing the danger of the proceeding in the sin and evil; And that the Lord hath no delight in the sinner, and therefore it is Gods gift in man, that is the power to destroy the devil and the sin.
Question. If God do the work alone, what must the Crea∣ture do, or why doth he say Chuse life? Answer. Man in eating the forbidden fruit hath chosen the sin, and so death entred; And in this estate there is a free will, or a wil∣ling mind in all men naturally to sin: But the gift of God which is free from God is of another nature, it is revealed in the heart and revealeth the sin, and also the mind of God in the heart of man, to draw the heart from the sin, and out of it up to God; and it is Gods gift in the heart that cryeth Chuse life rather then death; and this gift of God doth afflict the soul, and heart, and Conscience, if the sin be lived in; and this is the word that is nigh thee in thine heart, that thou mayest hear it and do it, ver. 14. this word is lively, it is placed in the heart that thou mayst hear it and do it. Question. How may I know this word that is quick, that is nigh in the heart; and what is the thing requi∣red of me to do: Answer. The word is Gods gift; the Son of God is the gift of God; God so loved the world that he gave his Son whose name is cal∣led the word of God; the life is in the Son,
and he that hath the Son hath life; who hath given a manifestation of his spirit to every man; the spirit is the word; the spirit is quick, this is the word that is in thine heart, that thou mayst hear it and do it, and this is Gods gift. Question. How may I know the voice of the word or Spirit; Seeing that I am commanded to hear it and do it? Answer. The Son is life in himself, and the Spirit is life, the life that is in the Spirit, it shew∣eth what leadeth in the way to life, and the way to death also; and the word being in the heart is a speaking voice that revealeth every sin; and revealeth the righteous judg∣ments upon the sinner; for it convinceth the conscience after the manifestation, and ma∣keth the heart to understand what the Lord hath no delight in, and it calleth for a re∣turn and to forsake thy evil ways, as evil Worships, and evil Actions, Words, Cu∣stomes, and Traditions; and so the word in thy heart that thou art to hear, it abi∣deth in thy heart and standeth a witness a∣gainst all manner of sin that the heart can delight in, and if thou hear it, and do it, then thou may feel what peace of consci∣ence it bringeth, and life to thy soul, but if
thou hear it, and do it not; but live still in the disobedience, then thou shalt go with a wounded conscience and shall feel the voice behind thee saying, this is the way, & it will affiict thee and condemn thee in thine own heart for grieving of Gods holyspirit, ther∣fore to live in sin and know it, such goeth with a wounded Couscience, and such must needs have a heavy burden. Question. What is that which burtheneth, and whence comes it or what is the burden thou speakest of. Answer. That which burdens is sin which ariseth from the lust which causeth the war, and that which is burdned is the life of the soul, the delighting and living in sin burdens the soul, and burdens the conscience, And such goeth bowed down in spirit, the life of the soul cryeth under the burden being pressed as a Cart with sheaves, and all that feeleth this burden goeth with a wounded Consci∣ence; and the further they go in any known sin the greater the burden and tor∣ment. Question. I could gladly chuse life, but it seemes to be a straightway. Answer. The way is straight to that which must
never enter, but it is easie with such as are willing and obedient; for life is obtained through love, for God is love, and hath shed his everlasting love in our hearts, and by hearing and feeling the strength of his love, the heart is overcome, this thinketh no evil but overcometh evil; all that come under the yoke of Christ and taketh up his yoke, such dare not stand to look at the straitness of the way, for the Lord maketh it easie, for his yoke and burden to such as are of a rea∣dy mind, is love and mercy; but the unbe∣leivers standeth looking at the straitness of the way, what reproaches and what perse∣cutions, saying in heart, it may cost goods and lands and life also, and having the heart fixed in the earthly, such are not brought into the true faith, for the care and confi∣dence is more in the earthly then in the heavenly, their minds and hearts are not redeemed from the earth, but the believers hath a yoke that yokes the heart, and mind, and soul to God, and yokes or binds the earthly part under, and such knoweth their redeemer liveth, that hath redeemed from the vain Conversation, of the world: And such feels the soul, redeemed from death, and how there is a passing, from death to life.
Question. True it is many people in these days do not walk up to what they are perswaded in their heart is truth, they being full of fears, but if ma∣ny do so for fear of the Law, may not the Lord ardon such, and shew mercy afterward. Answer. It is in God to pardon, and to shew mer∣cy upon repentance and forsaking sin, and transgression, but it is a dangerous thing to tempt and provoke the Lord, by disobeying his voice, & slighting his visitation, for it is with him to harden, & to give the creature to unbeliefe, as he sees Cause, so to day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts, for they that neglect the day of their visitation wherein God calls them to repentance which is the day of mercy and healing, his justice will find them out, and how can it stand with the justice of God to own such as deny him: hath not the Lord called many this day that will not hear, may not the day come that such may call and cry and he will not hear? are not such as know the truth and not obey it, the fear∣ful and unbelieving whom God will judge? how dare thou, who art afraid to confesse him before men count thy self a beleever? or how dare thou build upon a hope in thy heart that he should hear thee when thou
callest, and thou deny him now he calls? not this the hippocrites hope that must perish. Question. Thou speakest of a call, that the Lord calls unto his people by, how may I know when God calleth me? or what is Gods call that I may know it. Answer. Gods call is by his word which is nigh in the heart that thou may hear it, and do it, it is so nigh thee, that thou canst neither swear nor lie but the word is so nigh it will reprove thee and condemn thee. Question. Is that Gods call, I have known that many times, but whether doth it call me. Answer. The word in the heart calleth from the sin, it is nigh to discover every sin, it is a living word, it is quick, in making the sin known and calleth to abstain, there are many are called but few are chosen. Question. What is the reason that many should be cal∣led and few chosen. Answer. The want of love to Gods word; how should God Chuse such as hates to be re∣formed, for God hath placed his word in the
heart; to reform the heart, and many will talk of the word with their mouth, but hates to be reformed by it in their hearts, so as it is written, every one that doth evil ha∣teth the light, but he that heareth the word, and doth it, such maketh their calling and election sure, such yeildeth to the word that is so nigh to discover every oath and every lie though it might bring much gain the word is so nigh that calleth to forsake, and rebukes also with such strokes of Judgement in the Conscience, the righte∣ous smiteth, the Lord hath smitten; and in smiting the fear of the Lord is learned, the word is nigh in the heart that thou should hear it, and do it: the hearers and doers are such as yeilds, and is willing to be taught by it, but such as heareth the word and doth it not, the word is as an hammer, and smiteth them in their conscience that they go with a wounded Conscience, and falleth under the wrath of God through disobedience. Question. Is there ability to be obtained as in matter of salvation, as by hearing and doing▪ or is it a matter of condemnation to hear it, and not to do it. Answer. Yea there is matter of salvation in hear∣ing
and doing for it is written, he that hear eth my word and doth it, is compared to a wise man that built upon a rock; but such as hear and do it not are compared to build upon the sand. Question. Hath man power to do the one and leave the other undone: or may it not be imputed that it is a matter of works, seeing that man may do it, or leave it undone, be∣cause thou saist hear and do, or hear and not do. Answer. Yea there is power in man given him of God, and he that is of God, heareth Gods word, the word is quick, it is a speaking word, & is revealed in the heart & speaketh against all manner of sin, that ariseth in the heart; so he that hath an ear to hear what the Lord saith, such dare not lend an ear to the sin or to the wicked, so the word is a law to the lawless, the power stands in the word which is Gods stroke to the sinful part; the love of this being felt in the heart, Constraineth unto obedience and so beget∣teth a willingness in the mind, for the word being powerful over-pours the heart, which hath had its life in evil; and over∣comes the heart by love, so that what by its love, and what by its judgements, the
honest heart is made subject; and this is none of mans works nor mans righteous∣ness, but the power of the word that the up∣right in heart heareth and doth by yield∣ing obedience in heart unto it: But he that heareth the word and doth it not, are such as ive in Pride and Pleasures, as Swearing, Lying, and even all manner of evil; and hath many secret reproofs in their Consciences, but will none of its re∣proofs, and hates to be reformed by it, for every one that doth evil hates the light, so that their is a willingness in man naturally (as being faln) to do evil; and being wholly inclined in heart thereunto, there is power enough to do evil, but hath no pow∣er of himself to do good; but to leave all without excuse, the Lord who hath no de∣light in the death of a sinner, hath caused his light to appear in the sinful heart; who by the word maketh the sin manifest, so that many can acknowledge they do live in gross sins, and that they are condemned in their own Consciences many times, that the custom or habit of sin carrieth their hearts away to delight in iniquity; so that the love of the evil carrieth or draws the heart after it and into it, and that the crea∣ture hath power naturally to chuse the evil, the heart being wholly bent thereunto;
yet this man or these sort of evil men are ready to confess upon examination that they many times do hear the word in their hearts that afflicts them and condemns them in their Consciences for not doing of it; thus with many their is a Confessing but not a forsaking: And therefore it is that they do not find mercy. Question. I astance some particulars, that I may under∣stand more plainly. Answer. For instance, some men are given to Drunkenness, and have an habit in that sin, doth the Spirit of God lead into that sin (nay) then it must needs be an evil Spirit that leads into evil ways: Now the word of God is nigh such a one, even in his heart at the very time when the mind is running after strong drink or bad Company, and the word sheweth the man the sin and the danger, yet the lustful mind rusheth into the sin as the horse to the battel; and ma∣ny times when man is overcome with strong drink, then the word that forewar∣ned of the evil when the creature is over∣come with evil, then the word in the heart afflicts the heart, and soul, and conscience: What torment is there in body, and soul, and spirit, who through the wilful mind in
vexing God. How doth the Lord vex such even in the very time, and after such evil actions are brought forth; yet the word that warned of the evil, & from it re∣mains in the heart, and condemns the crea∣ture many times for the misdeeds, so as it is written, Tribulation and Anguish upon every one that doth evil, and to be short, there may be felt in the heart good and e∣vil; the gift of God is the word of God, every good gift and every perfect gift comes from above, and God is the Author of it; and there is an evil principle in the heart, and that the Devil is the Author of, and both these will move upon the heart, the good moveth unto that which is good, and the evil moveth unto that which is e∣vil, and as their is a yielding to either of these, his servant thou art whom thou dost obey, whether of sin unto death, or obedience to righteousness, but that which moveth to good if it be not obeyed it re∣maineth in the heart and changeth not its property, but stands a witnesse in the heart against all wickedness and uncleanness, and such as regard iniquity in their hearts the Lord will not hear their Prayer, but he will make such to fear his wrath because of disobedience.
Question. I perceive that man of himself hath not pow∣er to chuse the good and shun the evil; but no want of strength to run into evil. Answer. Nay, mans heart being overcome by the Serpents subtilty; to redeem the heart a∣gain to God Christ the Way is to be made known in the heart, who openeth the un∣derstanding, and enlighteneth the heart, and causeth man and woman to see into their own hearts; what the hearts delight is in, and whether they do to all men as they would be done by, in outward dealing or no; for he that is not faithful in the unrigh∣teous Mammon, who will commit to him the trust of the true riches. Question. It is true, to deal justly, and to love mercy is required, and many men I hope who are in se∣veral forms of worship, are indeavouring there∣after, if that sacrifice be acceptable with the Lord. Answer. The acceptable sacrifice is from a Belie∣ving heart; who believes that God is, and that he is a rewarder, which is beyond a self righteousness which doth to be seen of men, or to be so and so accounted; for the just Spirit of God in the heart believed in,
constrains the creature to deal justly in all his dealings, as in the sight of God; for Gods fear stands in the heart, which awes the man or woman who believe in Christ, to deal justly; and the same spirit constrain∣eth to love mercy, and also to walk humbly with God; and this humility that I write of goes before honour. Question. How may I know a believer and an unbelie∣liever assunder, seeing that the believers saeri∣fice is accepted, and the unbelievers rejected? Answer. By their fruits, for a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit; for such as the tree is such is the fruit; a good man out of the treasure of his heart brings forth good fruit; and an evil man out of the treasure of his heart, brings forth evil fruit, even as Cain and Abel, for Abels sacrifice was accep∣ted, and Cains sacrifice was rejected. Question. What is the fruit that a good man brings forth out of his heart, that I may take notice of it? Answer. The fruits of the Spirit, is Love, joy, peace long-suffering, gentleness, patience, and the like, according to the Scripture.
Question. What are the fruits that an evil man bring∣eth forth out of his heart? Answer. Murders, adultery, fornication, unclean∣ness, idolatry, witchcraft, mallice, hatred, variance, strife, and the like. Question. Why doest thou tell me of Abel and Cain that were so many years ago; what doth their sacri∣fice resemble unto me? Answer. Abel and Cain they resemble two gene∣rations, the wicked and the righteous: Cain in envy persecuted the just; as it is written, He that envies is a murtherer, and no murtherer hath eternal life abiding in him: and such as live in envy this day per∣fecuting the just, are of Cains spirit, and of Cains generation, and their sacrifice is re∣jected by the Lord. Question. Why, or to what purpose doth the wicked offer sacrifice if it be rejected by the Lord? Answer. Nay to no purpose, the very prayers of the wicked are abomination with the Lord. Question. But in case I be a sinner, and in Cains na∣ture,
finding in my heart much envy and wick∣edness; wrath, and malice, and the like; is there no way to finde mercy and forgiveness, and re∣demption from sin? Answer. Yea by true repentance and godly sor∣row which worketh true desires in the heart after the Lord, and a true hunger and thirst after righteousness, and also a hatred of evil, feeling Gods fear placed in the heart; for in the true fear standing, that is the godly awe that keeps from sin, the fear restraineth from evil; and whosoever is restrained from evil, it is by an invisible arme of God that rebukes the sinner, by a secret reproof in the heart and conscience; and this secret reproof being owned and loved, and the sin forsaken, the same arme that reproves the sin begets life in the soul: so that the same arme that brings destructi∣on to the sin in the heart, the same arme which is the Spirit of God, doth bring sal∣vation to the soul: for, for this purpose is the Son of God come to destroy the works of the Devil, and to work out mans salva∣tion, by placing the fear of God in the heart; and so the fear of the Lord is to de∣part from iniquity: and iniquity depart∣ing from a love and belief is raised up in the heart by the Spirit of God: and this is the
Faith that God is the Authour of And such as come hither findes the minde chan∣ged and turned from darkness to light, from the sin and vanity to be guided by the Spirit, and such come to see that to be spi∣ritually minded is life and peace, such feel∣eth the true Faith that removes mountains, and reconcileth the heart to God: and there is no other name under heaven whereby salvation cometh but by the Spi∣rit of Jesus in the heart, believed in, that brings down pride, that brings down envy and strife, and every evil work, and breaks down the partition wall, and reconciles the heart to God, and bringeth life to the soul, who comes and his reward is with him. Question. It appears that true Faith God is the Author of: But I would learn how this Faith cometh, and how it works in its power and efficacy, that I may know the difference of a Believer and an Unbeliever; and also whether I be in the Faith or no? Answer. Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; the Word and the Spi∣rit is one, but the Spirit and the Letter is two; for the Letter killeth, but the Spirit maketh alive: the Spirit is a free gift, the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal; the nature of the Spirit is light, and with this light are all men enlightned, that all men through him might believe the manner of the Spirit working in the heart. First, a discovery of the sin, and the want of life in the soul. Secondly, it begets a true desire after the Lord, and a secret hunger and thirst after righteousness, and draws the heart to be affected into the love of the Spirit, as it is written; He that loves the light brings his deeds to the light, and through love the Spirit begets a belief in the heart to its self; and as it is written, He that believes in the light shall not abide in darkness: all sin is darkness. Mark the manifestation of the Spirit that searcheth the heart, and ma∣keth the sin known, the same sorts the sins and evil deeds; the light makes them ma∣nifest of what sort they are; and as the sin is made known to be sin, the manifestation of the Spirit that sheweth the sins and sorts them: the same Spirit convinceth the Con∣science of every sin and every evil deed, and the same manifestation of the Spirit abides in the heart, which is the onely means to work out mans salvation, and the manner of its working in the heart: as its nature is light, and love, even so it begets the heart into union with it self. As
it is written, Of his own will begot he us, by the word of truth: and as the heart is drawn through love into union with the Spirit, it is drawn from the sin, and from the evil; for the love of Christ constrain∣eth: and the same manifestation of the Spirit which is Gods free gift to work out mans salvation, that begets the heart into unity with it self, the same begets a belief in the heart to believe in Christ the Light, who is the light of the world, who hath en∣lightned every man, that all men through him might believe, and the honest heart re∣ceiveth the truth in the love of it; the Spirit begets a belief in the heart: and this is the Faith that comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and this faith is that which works by love; and this is the faith that purifieth the heart: the strength of this faith removes the sin, re∣moves mountains, and gives victory; as it is written, He that believes in the light shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life: and this is the promise and the portion which the believer re∣ceives; he shall have the light of life, and the life gives assurance, for every believer hath a seal in his soul, of life eternal, through the working of the Spirit by its power and efficacy, in mortifying and de∣stroying
the works of the Devil, that sinne and death may have no more dominion in the heart; and so death comes to be swal∣lowed up by victory, and the promise of God accomplished in Christ, who saith, I am come that you might have life, who is the life, and brings life, who cometh, and his reward is with him. Question. Thou speakest that Christ hath enlightned every man, that all men through him might be∣lieve; what is the reason that all should be en∣lightned, and yet some come short of Faith in Christ? Answer. The defect it not in the light, but their rejecting it is the cause. The mercy and justice of God through Christ by enlight∣ning all, that in the day of account all may be left without excuse, mans misery will be found to be of himself: here lieth the mat∣ter, all are enlightned, but all men have not faith, many, will not believe that the light is truth, or that it is sufficient to save the soul, and such hates the light; every one that doth evil hateth the light, and calleth the good evil, and evil good, and putteth light for darkness, and darkness for light, and such becomes reprobates con∣cerning the Faith; so that it is plain, one
sort loving the light, believing and obey∣ing it, and another sort hating, rejecting, resisting, and denying; so that such as hates to be reformed, and rejects the motions of the Spirit, and resisteth the Holy Ghost, and denyeth the Lord that bought them, their destruction is of themselves, and the Lord and his faithful people will be clear of their blood in the day of Judgement. Question. But is the light of Christ sufficient to save the Believer? Answer. Yea, the light is the author of the faith, and the faith standeth in the light, and so it is saving faith; and the light is the grace: and it is written, My grace is sufficient for thee. This grace was, and is the Saints teacher, which taught, and teacheth the be∣liever to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. Question. If the light be the authour of the true saith in the believer; and so the authour of mans sal∣vation, what is the portion of the unbeliever, seeing thou sayest that all are enlightned? Answer. The unbelievers that hate the light, the light is their condemnation: as it is writ∣ten, This is the condemnation, that light is
come, and men love darkness, because their deeds are evil; as also the grace that was the Saints teacher: the unbelievers denied the grace and turned to wantonness, and heaped up teachers to themselves, having itching ears, as many do at this day: so the grace that taught and justified, and justifi∣eth the believers living in it, the same grace condemneth the unbelievers, denying to be taught and guided by it, who have it in their hearts, but hateth to be reformed by it. Question. I am much satisfied that the word of God in the heart is the Spirit of God, and that it is Gods free gift, and the onely means to work out mans salvation, and also that by this free gift which is the manifestation of the Spirit: every unbeliever in the day of Judgement shall be left without excuse? Answer. Thus the questioner is answered in the truth concerning the word of God in the heart, and the power and efficacy of its working, by deviding betwixt the joynt and marrow, and by giving a discerning of the thoughts and intents of the heart; the discerning is the eye, by which eye the power of the word in the heart is discern∣ed. A separation being made in the heart,
by the word whereby good and evil is di∣vided; and the word in the heart giveth a discerning of the evil in the heart; and so the light of the body is the eye: this is that eye that the god of this world had blinded, which the power of the word hath opened, and anointed with eye salve, that it can see and discern the thoughts and in∣tents of the heart. And also to discern words and actions, oathes and lyes, and the intent of the heart in all carriages towards God and man; now to discern the intent of all words, and to discern the intents of the thoughts, and the intent of a lye, and the like, as in this manner how the devil worketh, who abode not in the truth, who was a lyar and mur∣therer from the beginning, who is the au∣thour of all evil; that is to say, to draw the minde and heart of man from God to believe lyes. Aud thus the Serpent did to Eve by al∣luring her to eat of the forbidden fruit, saying, it is good: and Adam in like manner by eating therof lost his blessed estate. Thus the authour of sin, the authour of evil, de∣ceived and deceiveth mankinde, by drawing the mind from the good to the evil, and in presenting the evil delightsome to the eye of the minde, and alluring the heart there∣after
to be affected therewith, as into one lust after another, and also divers lying vanities, divers lyes to get ungodly gain; and so into pride of heart, and oathes, and the like, as covetousness, oppression, en∣vy, and malice, and persecution. Thus the author of sin hath allured the heart of man from God, and inticed it to sin and sinners, that such and the like above mentioned lusts which war against the soul. Man in the fall is overcome with evil, and where the Devil sits as king in the heart, who is called the prince of the aire that ru∣leth in the children of disobedience. It is his work to blinde the eye, that such should not see the light of the gorious Gospel shining in their hearts, and such are carried captive by Satan at his will into such strong holds, and hurtful lusts, as is before mentioned. And being blinde, they cannot see nor discern the thoughts and intents of their hearts, their eyes being shut up in unbelief, in departing from the living God, and lending an ear, an eye, and an heart unto the author of sin, and so into the fleshly lusts that war against the soul. And such whose eyes are blinded, whose ears are stopped, and hearts hardned by the deceitfulness of sin; in that state such can∣not
believe that the truth is the truth: but as the unbelieving Jews that rose up against the Lord of life, even so now do such un∣reasonable men who have not faith, perse∣cute those who bear testimony to the truth as it is made manifest in them; so that as it was it is; they that are born after the flesh persecute them that are born after the spi∣rit, in such a manner, that many have thought they have done God service, as Saul did. Thus man in the fall being drove from God in the state of degeneration, his eye is blinded and heart hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, committing wicked∣ness with greediness, until the Lord opens his eyes by the manifestation of his Spirit, whereby the understanding comes to be en∣lightned, and a discerning given into his heart to discern his own estate that he is fallen into by the temptations of Satan and his instruments. And also that which gives a discerning of the heart, sheweth how the heart is run with delight into several fleshly lusts, strong holds, and wicked practices, and lying va∣nities, which the Devil is the authour of, and by so doing is overcome with evil; and as the Serpent told Eve, that the forbidden fruit was good, she might eat; so hath the
Devil taught many to call evil good, and to eat thereof; and so by eating thereof the sin is committed, and so death entered, as it was to Adam and Eve, and so it is with all the sons and daughters of Adam in the fall, as it is written, As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. But to know how all in Christ are made alive is a mystery, for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life; which gift of God is the Son of God: and he that hath the Sonne hath Life, but he that hath not the Son hath no life; for the Son is the way, the truth, and life, to the believer, which way is described how it may be obtained, by the answers of seve∣ral questions in this Book, which may be useful to the honest hearted for their reco∣very out of the state of Adam in the fall, unto Christ the second Adam that never fell. HEre followeth a declaration of an opening in my heart, as by vision in me as I lay in bed in the night season in the twelfth Moneth, 1663. in which Vision there appeared unto my view a sumptuous building, in form like to a spacious Lords Pallace standing on a hill: and I beholding of it, delighted in it; and as I looked upon
it, it appeared to me, that there were seve∣ral pipes of lead laid round about the walls of that building, ordered in mine eye to serve the whole house with water: And I stood considering from whence this water should come to serve such a spacious place, being it stood upon a hill: And it further appeared to me, that the water that served the whole house came from a Fountain; and the Lord of that building had ordered conveyance from the Fountain to serve the whole house. And it being such an excel∣lent work, I greatly desired to see the Fountain, and how the water was convey∣ed from the Fountain. And then I was shewed an excellent place called a Porters Lodge, where the Porter abode continu∣ally; and it was shewed me that that Por∣ter was highly esteemed of the Lord of the building; and commission were given to him to serve the whole house with water, and that both the Fountain and the con∣veyance of the water were to be ordered at his pleasure. Then I greatly desired to see into the house, how the house was sup∣plied with water, and withal, way was made for me to enter into the house; and as I walked into several rooms, there were several servants, and every servant had his office; and I looked for the water, and in
some of the rooms the water came in abundantly, and those servants of those rooms kept all things under their charge in good order, very pleasant to be∣hold, to the great honour of the Lord of that house; and then I walked further in the house, into other rooms, and I looked for the water, and the water came into those rooms very slowly, and the servants of those rooms were not industerous in their places, for their Lord, but were part for their Lord, and part for themselves, and their rooms were not clean: and it was shewed me that there were many of those unfaithful servants and unclean rooms. Then I desired to see further into the house, and going further along into other rooms, I looked for water, seeing the rooms ex∣ceeding foul, and the servants of those rooms wholly at ease; and it was shewed me that there was pipes to convey water unto them as the other rooms had, but the water was stopped, which caused the un∣cleanness: Then I were something troubled in minde, and desired to know the reason why some of the rooms should have such abundance of water, and some but a small quantity, and some none; but it were shewed me that the Porter that were in high esteem had power to serve the whole
house with water, and according to de∣sert he supplied the rooms thereof; and all those servants that were faithful to their Lord had water in abundance; and those servants that had had an eye to themselves their water abated, and if they did not stand up and shew themselves faithfull whilst they had water, their rooms would grow unclean, as well as those that had their water course stopped already: then I enquired in my minde what might become of those servants that were at ease, or sloathful; and it was shewed me that the Lord of the building would come, and the unfaithful servants he would cast forth of his house, and place others in their rooms, for he could not endure unfaithful servants; and it seemed to me that it would be much shame, trouble, and terrour for them that were cast out of such a Lords service for their unfaithfulness to their master. And so I awaked, and it were opened to my un∣derstanding, how my spirit hath been in this exercise as aforesaid: and it being cleared to my understanding afresh, I am constrained to write the substance of the matter, that the learned may read, and in reading every one may read themselves, lest they lose their learning and can obtain it no more. Wisbitch Goale. Tho. Richardson.
The fruits of the Priests of Ely, in the County of Cambridge, published; wherein Priest Brunsel, and Priest Holder, called Justi∣ces, and Priest Langhorn their Brother by Trade, the fruits of their Ministrey, and their practice also described, as foloweth, That people may judge whether such as these be able Ministers of the Gospel, or whether such are fit to be judges of the Law, yea, or nay; if not, whether people ought not to be∣ware of them, and such like, as Jude hath exhorted us, much more because the Spirit of the Lord hath made them manifest both in doctrine and practice. Daniel Langhorn Priest of Ely, THis is to thee, who were at Ely Goale door, speaking to a friend of God, and I being a Prisoner, told thee the Tree was known by its fruit; and that both thou and thy fruits was manifest: and thou went away, and bid me look in the Epistle of Jude, as if Jude described such as we are to be out of the truth: therefore to satisfie thee and others, I have read Judes Epistle, and do herein write a testimony of Judes testimony, that thou and all other who shall see this Letter may be perswaded, or however, left without excuse, what sort of
people Jud wrote against, or exhorted the Saints to beware of, as may be seen being upon record. Jude a servant of Jesus, to them that are sanctified, (saying) when I gave diligence to write unto you of the common salva∣tion, it was needful for me to write unto you, and to exhort you, that you earnestly contend for the Faih that was once delivered to the Saints; for there were certain men crept in unawares, who were ordained of old for condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of God into lascivious∣ness, and denying the Lord Jesus: How canst thou clear thy self here (Daniel) art thou not one of those that are crept in, or art thou entered in by the door; (if not) what are they that climbe up another way, or such as are crept in at unawares into a Steeple-house for so much a year: though some of the world are not aware of you, yet the children of Light can see you: And Juds exhortation we dearly own, as to beware of such as Jude describes, who were ordained of old for condemnation. Like∣wise Judes exhortation is to the Saints to beware of the filthy dreamers that defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Now (Daniel) wouldst thou turn these words upon us, or they stand a witness against thee and thy brethren; for I testifie as before the Lord, that we whom thou in scorn callest Quakers, do not deny
dominion, but are real in heart for the esta∣blishing thereof: therefore own thy own Scriptures, which is for thee and thy Bre∣thren, who are the filthy dreamers for fil∣thy lucre: and upon thy head I leave it; he that hath a dream let him tell a dream, saith the Lord; and he that hath my word let him speak it faithfully. If thou canst not believe that thou and thy beethren are of that number before mentioned, whom Jude hath sentenced filthy dreamers like the Sodomites, who were ordained of old for condemnation. For a further description mark the 11th. ver. for the proof and con∣firmation, and also thy portion: thou art used to divide the Scriptures for money, divide this verse amongst thee and thy bre∣thren: Woe unto them (saith Jude) for they have gone in the way of Cain, and runned gree∣dily after the errour of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gain-saying of Core: Did not Cain persecute about Religion, and did not Balaam love the wages of unrighteous∣ness? doth not thou and thy brethren run greedily after the errour of Balaam for re∣ward: therefore in Cains way and Balaams way own your own Scriptures, and Judes sentence, which is perishing in the gain∣saying of Core. Did not Cain in envy per∣secute about Religion? doth not the Do∣ctor Priests in Ely and thou also persecute
about Religion in Goales and Pulpits; your tongues and actions make you mani∣fest to go in the way of Cain: and further, for the clearing of your practise, Iude in the 12. verse describes such out, how they may be known, speaking of the spots in your Feasts of Charity, feeding without fear, clouds without water, carried about with windes, trees without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots: how canst thou clear thy self here. Daniel, doest thou not use to feast? I heard thou wert at a Feast in Ely, and called for the other Song; is not this one of thy spots that thou art known by? what could a drunkard have done more: is this the practice of a Minister of Christ, or of such an one as Iude hath sen∣tenced, which is crept in at unawares, who were of old for condemnation. Again, carried about with windes, is not thy Do∣ctrine windy? how hath it wrought effect so in any of thy hearers as to change their hearts from evil; or what fruits are brought forth to God in thee and thy brethren or in your assemblies: Thou may read what the fruit of the Spirit is, it is love, joy, peace, and the like: how little of these fruits doth appear, either in you that are called teachers, or in those whom you etach: but instead of love and peace, we
finde pride, envy, strife, and persecution abounds: and these fruits shews that you are carried about with windes, without fruit, as to God. And further in the 13th. verse, Iude describes such more at large, as raging wayes of the Sea, foaming out your own shame, wandering stars: and your portion he hath described, saying, To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. And further, Iude brings Enochs prophe∣sie of the Lords coming with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgement upon all the ungodly, for their ungodly deeds and hard speeches. And Iude further de∣scribes them, that the Lord would execute judgement upon, stiling them that they might be known, in the 16. ver. These are they which are murmurers, complainers, walk∣ing after their own lusts speaking great swelling words, having mens persons in admiration be∣cause of advantage: Do not you Priests be∣lieve that you are of this number whom Iude hath described in matter of practise; yet further Iude openeth such more in the 18. and 19. verses, saying, how the Apostle spoke of such before, how there should be mockers in the last time who should walk after their own ungodly lusts, saying, These be they who separate themselves sensual, having not the Spirit. (Mark) Iude saith these who
walk after their own ungodly lusts; such as are sensual, separated from the Spirit. Con∣sider therefore if Iude have not given a clear description who they are that the Saints are to be aware of; and how such as thou may be discerned from them that fear the Lord, both by doctrine and conversa∣tion. Now consider if thou can contrary this, and bring a proof of any of the Ministers of Christ that persecuted any about Reli∣gion, for an example for thee and thy bre∣thren, who profess your selves Ministers, but prove your selves persecutors. Then shew me who they are that Jude wrote to the Saints to be aware of, that goes in Cains way, and Balaams way; or who they are that turned the grace of God into lascivi∣ousness; who are crept in at unawares, and who are the filthy dreamers; as bruit beasts separated from the spirit, and know nothing but what they know naturally, that walks in Cains way and Balaams way, and loves to feast, and the upper rooms also; raging waves, foaming out their own shame, fruit∣less trees who liveth in their own ungodly lusts, aving mens persons in admiration because of advantage. Now Daniel, if thou and the Doctor Priests of Ely called Justices, can clear your
selves to be none of this number abovesaid, whom Jude hath described how such might be known, both by doctrine and practise, and also set forth their portion; then let us whom you cast into Ely Goale hear from you who they are that walk in Cains and Ba∣laams way; for it will lie upon you to clear your selves by doctrine and example, ac∣cording to Scripture Rule, or else own your own Scriptures and Iudes sentence, your portion. For Daniel, according to thy words I have read Iudes Epistle, and do bear my te∣stimony against all such as walk in Cains way, persecuting the just; and also against all such as run greedily after the errour of Balaam for reward, and against such filthy dreamers which are crept in at unawares, who were ordained of old for condemna∣tion; and against such as are sensual, ha∣ving not the Spirit, who live in their own ungodly lusts. And for a farther testimony that you are of that number that Iude hath sentenced, who walk in Cains way persecutig the just, remember Ely Goale, and all that take no∣tice of your actions stand witness against you: have you not cast fourteen men into prison, and kept us twenty weeks from Ses∣sions to Sessions, when no evil can he pro∣ved
against us, done either to God or man; and you Priests have set on the Bench both to be our Accusers and Judges: how much false imprisonment have we received by you must not a record of this be kept think you with the Lord, who assuredly takes notice of all your proceeding against the Innocent. And thou Daniel cryed, keep them up Goaler, who came by the Goale door and smote a prisoner on the face: where is there any such persecuters in England as you Priests shew your selves to be: Well might Jude say, Woe unto such as go in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, such murmurers and complainers: do you not murmur and grudge that we whom you persecute should live amongst you; and do you not com∣plain to the Magistrates against us; have you not informed the Judge of the Assize to keep such and such in prison whom your envy is against; let the witness in you speak: for whatsoever is committed in darkness is made manifest in the light: do you not believe that the Lord will avenge for these things. Now Daniel, its like thou wilt call this a railing accusation; but Jude did not rail when he said such and such were to perish,
and that such as were crept in at unaware were ordained of old for condemnation and that such as walked in Cains way; a Balaams way, dreamers, murmurers, com∣plainers, and the like, that walked afte their own ungodly lusts, that to such was re∣served the blackness of darkness for ever this was, and is no railing accusation, bu the words of truth which is and must b fulfilled. Be warned therefore, O ye Priests, an take heed of fighting against the Lord,  persecuting his people; for what is done unto his is done unto him, for the Lord is on our side: In vain it is for man to strive against him, who will by no means acqu the wicked: and if you have any regard unto your own souls; take heed what you do, the day of account hastens; and I ne∣ver knew any fight against God and pros∣per. Tho. Richardson The End.
