R1917B 99895342 152711
The late conflagration consumed my own, together with the Stock of Books (as it were) of the Company of Statio∣ners, London: since that lamentable disaster, next my own loss; this doth trouble me, that when any of those few Ingenious Persons who desire books inquire after them, they are often answered by such as have them not, That they are all burnt, which discourageth any further enquiry, not only to the learned, but even of Country Chapmen, wherefore to let all men know notwithstanding the late dreadful Calamity, that there are Books yet to be had, And for the conveniency of the Ingenious Buyers, I publish this ensuing Catalogue. For the Litteral faults of the Printer to Book-Buyers, I need not make any Apology, but for my self, that I did only name the Books, and not more largely deliver their several Titles and Subjects, that would have swell'd the Ca∣talogue: To supply which if any that desire to be acquainted with the particulers, upon repairing or sending to me, may have full satisfaction from the Books themselves, if they send before they are sold. From my Shop in Gresham-Colledge, next the Stairs, or Ware∣house in Moore-Fields against the Cardinals-Cap. BOOKS in Large Folio. ASsemblies Annot. 2 Vol. Notes on the New Testament. Ainsworths annotations. Andrews Sermons. Biblia Polyglotta, with the Lex. 7 vol. Beza in Testament. Novum Babbington's Works. Bakers Chronicle. Beamont, and Fletchers Playes Bochattes de animal. in 2 vol. Bodinus in Ephesios. Broughtons Works. Book of Martyrs, 3 vol. Bleau's Art of Navigation. Church-Bible. Cotgraves French Dictionary. Counsel of Trent. Coopers Dictionary. Camdens Britannia. Compleat Ambass. Carews History of Ireland. Calvin on Iob Englisht. Crookes Anatomy. Chaucers Works. Coopers Works. Digby of Bodies. Downhams Christian Warfare Dons Serm. Compleat 2 volumes. Davila's Hist. of France Compleat. Dugdals History of Warwickshire. Of St. Paules, Description of the Indies Latin. Davila's History of France, 2 vol. Dee of Spirits. Erasmi Adagia, Estates and Empires by Grimston. French History, Fulke on the Remish Testament. Flories Italian Dictionary, Fullers Church History, Feratius Lexicon, Fullers Church History with Appeal Pisgah sight, Froisarts Chronicle. Grimstons History of France, Gouges Workes, Gesner of Beasts, Gerards Herbal, Hammond on the New Testament, Holy Court, by Causinus. Hexams Millitary Discipline Compleat, Heylin's Cosmography. History of the Netherlands, Of Serpents, Hall's Works 3 volume, Howels Dictonary, Hookers Policy, Isaacksons Chronology, King Jame's Works, Luthers Table Talke, Lusiads of Portugal, Eng. by Fanshaw. Lex Marcatoria Morrisons Travailes, Marchants Mirrour, Mathew Paris Hist. Meed's Works 2 vol. Minshaw, Dictionary 9 Languages Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 vol. Newmans Concordance
Ogilby's Bible. Virgil with Cuts, Homers Hiads with Cuts, Odisses with Cuts Aesop with Cuts, Plutarcks Morals, Englisht. Plutarcks Lives Englisht Parkinsons Herbal. Plinies Natural History, Perkins Works, 3 vol. Parkinsons Garden, Peter on Mark, 2 vol. Poultons Statutes, 1660 Continuation to 1667. Purchase Pilgrimage, in 4 volumes Purchases Pilgrims. Polibius in English, Perron against King James. Rawleigh Hist. World, Rosses Cont. of Rawleigh, Romant of Romants, Rushworths Collect Reynolds Works, Rastals Statutes at large. Stapleton's Juvenal, with Cuts, Speed's Chronicle, Maps of the Chronicle, Spelmani Concilia. Seneca's Works Englisht, Sands Ovid with Cuts, Spencer's Similies, Stillingfleet Vindica. of Laud Spotswood Hist. of the Church of Scotland. Spanish History. Simsons Chronicle, Stowes Chronicle, Survey of London, Scapulae Lexicon, Silvesters Works, Leigh of Breda and Buss, Spelmans Glossarie. Shakspears playes, Seldeni Eadmeri Hist. Noverum. De Successionibus. Theater of Honor, Turkish History, Titus Livius English, Taylors Cases of Conscience, Toriano's Italian Dictionary, Ushers Annalls. Uenetian History, Ward on Matthew Willets Sinopsis, On Genesis and Exodus Wilsons Dictionary. Withers Emblems, Books in Small Folio. ANdrews on the Commandments, Antiens Authors, Alexaders sentences Aelians Tackticks, Attersol on Philemon, Amadis de Gaule, Austins Meditations, Amianus Marcellinus, Adam in Eden, herbal by Dr. Cole an Herbal by Doctor Cole, Arcadia, Romance Alisons parts in 4 pieces. Aristotles Politicks, Astrea Compleat, Romance Andrews Lectures, Affairs of Germany, Ashe's Tables of the Law, 2 vol. Enterleaved with pap. 4 vol. Allen doct. of Gosp. Benlows Reports, Book of assize, & pleas of the Crown, Of Offices, Bonaventures life of Christ, Bibles with Service and Psalms. Barnes 4 Books of Offices, enabling private-per∣sons, to serve in state affairs. Brownrigs Sermons Compleat, Brevia Judicialia, 2 vol. Brownes vulgar Errors, Bulstrods Reports, Burtons Melancholy, Boyses Postlis. St. Bennets rule of Life. Baptista Porta, Bolton, dead Saint speaking, Bacons Refussitation, rol. Natural History, Henry the seventh. Barrets Discipline, Bullemi Annot. Banisters Annot. Brownes Britt. Pastoral Burton on Antonius, Ben Johnsons Works, 2 vol. marb, Three volumes. Burgesses of Refining, Compleat, Original Sin. On Corinthians. Balls power of Godlinesse, Bain on Ephesians, Brooks Heraldry, Beccons Works in 2 vol. Second volume. Bilsons Christian Suffering. Bunny's Corner stone, Lord Brook's Works, Bifeild on Peter, On Colossians. Boultons Works.
De Blanches Travails. Broughtons Church History. Bodins Common-wealth, Babingtons Fire works, Bassa. Romance Bannished Virgin, Ditto Barrets Dictionary. Binghams Art Millitary, Bucks Rich 3d. Bentivoglio Hist. Fland. Compleat, Warrs, Relation, Beards Theater of Gods Judgments Barnards Concordance, Brittain's Pastorals, Benlow's Poems, Cook on Littleton. Civil Wars of Spain, Crook on the Hippocrite, Caesars Coment, with Edmonds Notes. Civil Considerations, Cosens Tables, Cotton on John, Clark's Examples. Case of Conscience, Martyrologie Compleat. Marrow of Divinity. Cranmer against Gardiner. Chirurgions Mate. Civil wars of Lancast. and York compleat. Collect. of Protectors Ordinances. Cowels Interpreter. Crooks Reports 3. voll. Compleat Surveyer. Calvins Institutions. On Job. On Deuteronomy. Cartwrights Rhem. Testament. Crackinthorps Vigil Dormetant. Cyrus le grand, compleat. 2 vol. in several parts. Cowleys Poems. Clelia compleat in one voll. in two voll. in several parts. Cleopatra compl. in 2. voll. In several parts. Cura Politia. Coralbo, Romance. Chillingworth against the Papists. Cabala compleat. Collection of the Parl. Ordinances from 40 to 46. Common Prayers Edenburgh 1637. with singing Psalms. Cotgraves Distionary Common prayers and Psalms London, Cassandra Romance. Daniels Hist. of England compl. Dubartas Works H. Summary. Dyal of Princes. Downham on Justification. Don Quixot. Diodorus Siculus. Davis Welch Dictionary. Draytons Poems. Polyalbion. Drummonds History of Scotland. Day on Itaah. Dutch Physick. Dixon on the Epistles. Diodates Notes. Dicksons Cases of Conscience. Dodonens Herbal. Dalton Justice of Peace. Sheriffs. Davis Reports, Diers Reports. Euclids Elements English. English Gentleman, and Gentlew, Law. Erasmus on the Epistles English. on the Gospel and Acts. Eusebius History. Elton on the Colossians. On the Romans. On Romans Chap. 9. Extravagant Shepherd. Elise, Romance. French Grammar. Frosts Sermons, French Virtuosi compleat 2d. voll. Fabians Chronicle. Fullers Holy War and State. Fisher on Baptism. Felthams resolves. Four Sons of Amon. Florio Italian Dict. Fartingdons Serm. first voll. second voll. Fenners Works. Fearlys Sermons. Foster Miscelanius. Fulke on Rhem. Testament. Fotherbys Atheomastix. Fanshaw's Luciad. Flouds Philosophy. Foulis History of Sectaries. Feild on the Church. The Forrest of Ratities. Fishers Justification of the Anabaptists. French Academy. The Flower of the Commandements. Fonseca 42. Serm. on the Quadragesimal Gospel, Englisht by I. M. Gatakers Sermons. Guill on the Creed. Gauden on the Church. Greenhams Works. Godfrey of ulloign. Gouge on the Hebrews in 2. voll, compleat,
Gadburys Doctr. of Nativities. Collect. of Gent. Grand Scipio Romance. Guillims Heraldry. Gowers Poems. Godolphins holy Arbor. Gusman. Holy Court. Herberts Travels. Hall on Timothy. History of Sweedland and Poland. Of the Banished Virgin. Of Specturs. Habbingtons Edward the fourth. History of Italy. Wonders of Nature Presbyterian Plots. Mary Queen of Scots. Douglas and Angus. Charribby Islands Iron Age. Hungary. Ariana Warrs of Italy. Of Venice by Paruta. Hist. Of Cheshire. Hicks on the Revelations, Hall on Government. Howell of Venice. Presidency of Kings. Of London. Of Naples. German Diet. Lewis the thirteenth. Hutchinson on John. On the Prophets. Howels Institutions of History, being the History of the World. Hobarts Reports. Hollingsheds Chronicle in 2. voll. Halls Chronicle. Heirons Works compleat. 2. voll. Heywood of Angels. Hulots Dictionary. Homers Works in English. Frogs and Mice. Hawkens Observat. Heylin on the Creed. Historical Meditations. Herberts Henry the eighth. House of Mourning. Heldersham on John. Harringtons Commonwealth of Oceana. History of Africa. Helvicus Chronology. History of Justinian. Francion Of Scanderbeg. Doctor Heskings Parliament of Christ. Hearns President of Pleadings. Hetley's Reports Knights Concordance, Kellit on the Sacrament. Miscelanies. Killigrews Playes. Kings Declarat. about the Scots. Kendal against Goodwin. Kings Description of Cheshire. Lucians Dialogues English. Lightfoots Harmony. Lucans Phatsalia English. Lestrange on the Liturgies. Lasander and Calista English. History of the Barbadoes. Jones on the Hebrews. Jewel against Harding. His Apology. Jermin on the Proverbs. On Ecclesiastes. Jacksons Works compleat. first, second, and third voll. Inigo Jones Stoneheng restored. Jenkings Poems. Leighs Body of Divinity. On Job and Psalms. On Learning. Critica Sacra. Lushington on the Hebrews. On Galatians. Ludgates History. Latches Reports. Leonards Reports. Life of Don John of Castro. Lanes Reports. Ley's Reports. Life of the Grand Cyrus. Mountagues Act of the Church. Morlands History of Piedmont. Marbecks Concordance. Morton on the Mass. Mercators Atlas. Morleys Introduct. Markhams Decad, of Watr. Honour, Of Watr. Epistles with assent of Cyrus, Ministers of State. Marrow of the French Tongue. Moon's Expedition. Moores Collections. Mystery of Godliness Of Iniquity. Mossoms Sermons. Morrice on the Sacrament. Mornay on the Sacrament. Mutability of France. Malvezzi on Tacitus Morelius Dictionary. Martyr on the Romans, On Judges.
Mayor's Works in 4. vol. Musculus Common places. Martyns Chronicle. Mountgomerys Urania. Maunsels Catalogue of Books. Moores Reports. Meads Works 2. voll. Machivels Discourses of Government. Doctor Mortons Catholick Appeal for Protestants. Map of Commerce. Minshaw's Spanish Dictionary. Notes on Don Quixot. Northampton Prophecies. Nordens English Traveller. Nicholson on the Psalms. Newtons Trigonometria Nowel of Pleasure. Dutchess of Newcastles Philosophy Poems Tales. Life of her Lord. Newton on John, Nordens Gunnery. Orlando Furioso Owens Reports. Oceana. Otes on Jude Owen of perseveration. Olaus magnus. Olivers Acts. Ovids Metamorph. by Sands. Phillips Dictionary. Prinn's Canterbury's Doom. Life of Bishop Laud. Parliament Register. Peirson on the Creed. Portas Natural Magick. Part's Works. Phatamond English, a Romance. Protestants Evidence. Poor Mans Liberty. Pateus on Revelations. Practice of Physick. Pembles Works. Philpot of Kent. Peels Debtor and Creditor. Pettavius History of the World. Parutus Politick Discourses. Procopius in English. Pembrokes Arcadia. Pinto's Travels. Purchas his Pilgrimage. Pultons Abridgment of the Statut. Plowdens Comment. of the Law. Mris. Philips Poems and Plays. Long Parliaments Ordinances, and Declarations. A Romance in Manuscript. Rogers Exposition of the Creed. Roberts on the Covenant. Key of the Bible. Romant of Romants. Rogers seven Treatises. On Naaman On Judges. Rous Works. Renodeus Dispensatory. Reynolds on Murder. Reverius Practice. Body of Physick. Richardsons Annotations. Rastal's Abridgment. Revolutions in Holland. Riolanus Anatomy English. Ramsey's Astrology. Richlieu's Government of France. Review of Trent Reves Sermons of Ninivee. Sandival's Civil wars of Spain Eng. Slatyrs Pale Albion Lat. & English. Salust's Works Eng. by Heywood. Sanderson's Physiogmony and Chiromancy. Scots discovery of Witchcraft. State of Europe. Simpson's Lexicon or Goncordance. Scotch Laws. Stock on Malechi. Selden on the Seas. Sands Travels Smith of Virginia. Sprigs History. Ships of Fooks. Sanderson's Sermons compleat. Summary of Dubartus. Shephard's Parable of the Virgin. Sands Ovid. Sanderson of Painting. Senertus Works English. Stonehenge by Jones, Sibb's Saints Cordial, On Corinth. Stetline's Poems. Soveraign Prerogative, or Sheppard's Epitomy of the Law. Of Deeds. Rolles. Strada. Shute's Sarah and Hagar. Sanderson's King James, King Charles. Queen Mary. Stanley's Philosophy compl. 1 vol. In three voll. Several parts. Shepheards Callender. Trap on the Bible in 5 voll. His several Vollue. Tayler the Water Poet Works. Twist. against Hoord. Theophania a Romance.
Jer. Tayler's Sermons. Treverius Herball. Tully de Senecture Eng. Triumphs of Nassau. Theater of Gods Judgments. Thesautus Brevium. Thorndikes Epilogue. Tayler's Works compleat. 1 vollume. On the Psalms. Tables of Chiturgery, Ushers Body of Divinity. Variety of memorable things. Ursinus Catechismes. Veres Commentary. Wilson's History of King James. View of the Scripture. Vertuosie of France 2 vol. Vigoes Chirurgery. Wilson of the Romans. White's Works. Weavers Monuments. Wingate's Maxims. Wheatleys Prototypes. Williams of Antichrist. Best Religion. Seven Treatises. Wihers Psalter. Welch Dictionary. White on Genesis. Willet on Leviticus. World of Wonders. Waggoner in Dutch. Wottons State of Christendom. Woodals Chirurgery. Wings Harmony Coelestial. Winch's Reports. Yorkes Heraldry. Yelverton's Reports. Year Books of the Law compleat Books in large Quarto. APocripha English. Antiquities of Canterbury. Ainsworth on the Psalms. on Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Deuteronomy. Brightman on the Revelations. Bullinger's Sermons. Ball against Cann. Brownlow's Reports. Bridges Defence. Critica Sacra. Concordance of the Bible. Christian Policy. Calvin on Timothy and Titus. On Tymothy. Compleat Clark. Consent of Time. Callis Readings. Declarations in the Kings Bench. Doway's Bible in 2 vol. King Edward the sixth Testament. Gitbiers Academy. Giffard on Cantieles. On Revelations. Gouldman's Dictionary. Grand Abridgment of the Law, In all, three volumes. Greek Testament. Gadbury's Ecclesiastical Ambassad. Hoptons Topograph. Glass. Glass and Geomet. Staffe. Hackwell against Carrier. Hughes Abridgment of the Acts. Hughes Survey of the Tongues. Holy History by Causin, Herodian English. Howels Letters. 1. With Dodona's Grove. Jackson's annotations compleat. Fourth volume. On the Pentiteuch. Mossom's Sions Prospect. Moyle's Book of Entries. Mountagues Essayes the first part. Essayes the second part. Nash's Way to Happiness. Quaternio. Natura Brevium French. Peacham's Emblems. Potter on the Number 1666. Perkins Golden Chain. On Galatians. Protestants Evidence. Prinn's Power of Parliaments. Policies revived. Pastor Fido. Queen Elizabeths Annals in 2 vol. Rogers 7 Treatises. Riders Dictionary. Sherman of Infallibility. Smith's select Discourses. Saltmarsh's small Works. Senalt's Christian Man. Swinbourn of Wills. Testament Greek. Shepherds Touchstone of Assuran. Thomas Dictionary.
Travels of the Patriarchs. Thomatius Dictionary. Vanes Meditations. Watsons Quodlibets. Way of Reconciliation to the Sacrament. Whitney's Emblems. Weemes Synagogue. Wilsons Ayers in 3 parts. Willetts Synopsis. Welden of Dominion. Books in Small Quarto. ANtiquities of Westminster and Pauls. Abbot on the Psalms. Against Hill. On the Sabboth. On Job. Ames on Peter. Art of Poetry. Annatomy of Wit by Euphues. Arrowsmith's Chain. On John. Austin of Fruit trees. Anthony's Gospel Physitian. Agrippa's Philosophy 3 part. Fourth part. Vanity of Sciences. Abridgment of the Martyrs. Appian of Alexandria. Arraignment of the Creature. Attersols 3 Treatises. Almanacks of Mirth 45 sheets. Aschams School of Shooting. Ascues Hist. of Scotland. Brotherly Reconcilement. Art of Painting. Analisis on Timothy. Artificial Changling. Amendment of Life. Apology for Actors. Allens Chronology. Arrow against Brownists. Abstract of Queen Elizabeth. Adams 9 Sermons. Aliens Histories. Answers to Downam. Admonition to England in Defence of Bishops. Assertion of Church Policy. Araignment of Venice. Albions Eng. Answer to the Treat. of the Cross. Answer to Milton. Adventures in Love. Ainsworth on the Cant. Orthodox Foundation, Astrea Alector. Arcadia. Absolute Monarch. Aurelia. Amadis de Gaule. De Gaule the fifth part. His Letters. Admirable Events. Argalus and Parthenia with Cuts. Without. Arnalt and Lucenda. Ambross looking to Jesus 1st part. Appian his Roman History. Aurelia the Paragon of pleasure. Saint Ambrose's Christian Offices. M. Aurelius Antoninus Meditat. Apocripha English. Baxter of Church government. Of Baptism. Of Justification. Of the Sacrament. Of Mortification. Divine Life. Conversion. Confession of Faith. Apologic. or against 5 Men. Balzack's Letters. Bilson's Sermons. Church Government. Barnards Faithful Shepherd. against Ainsworth. On the Sabboth. On the Revelations. On Ruth. Burroughs Evil of Sin. Saints Treasury. On Beatitudes and Gospel Revelation. Gospel Worship. Irenicum. On Matthew. Jewel of Contentment. Moses Choice. Bacons advancement of Learning. Bayle's Direction for health. Biggs Vanity of Physick. Brooks Riches of Christ. Parclays Summum bonum. Benefield's 20 Sermons. On Amos Chap. 1. On Chap. 3. Buck on the Beatitudes. Brightmans Works. Becons Postils. Buchanans Body of Divinity. Birth of Mankind. Bruels Praxis. Buckler of Faith. Bullinger on the Revelations. Banisters Chirurgery. Baines on the Collossians. Bridges Supremacy. Burgis Vind. Legis with Justifi. 1st. Justification compleat. Bolton's Works 4 vol. Instructions.
Directions. Arraignment of Error. Walking with God. Blake on the Covenant. Bastwick of Church government. against Independency. Bacon's Norman Hist. compleat. Remains. Boyse's Postils. Remains. Bocalini's new found Polliticks. Boyles Experiments Philosophy. Ayer. Usefulness of Philosophy. Ball's Pulpit Patronage. Of Faith Bastingus Catechism. Book of Duels. Benthams Conflict. Society of Saints. Barker on the Commandements. Babingtons Works. Babington on Gen. Exod. Levit. Behmens Aurora. Remains. Epistles. Signa retum. Blundevils Exercise. Logick. Bedwels Geometry. Bulkley on the Covenant. Bruce on the Sacrament. Barlows Conference. Defence of Protestants. Beards of Antichrist. Motive. Theater of Gods Judgments. Browning's Sermons. Bancrofts dangerous Positions. Of publick Prayers. Brerwoods Enquiries. Baker on the 51 Psalm. Baker on the consolatory Psalms. On the Lords Prayer. Book of Nobillity. Of the Monarchy. Of Fortune. Of Battels. Italian and English. Of St. Alban. Of Speeches of the Long Parl. Bell's Popes Funeral. Bunny of Divorce. Truth and Falshood. Bourne of Inventions. Beza on the Canticles. Basilicon Doron. Balzacles Letters. Burthen of England. Borrace Fiameta. Belgick Common wealth. Breviary of Health. Burton's Questions. Sermons. Bonners Homilies. Religion. Bound on the Sabboth. Broughton on Daniel. Parker's Portraicture of the Kings of England. Bradshaw on Thessalonians. Book of Histories 13 sorts. Brocard on Revelations. Brooks Reading of the Law. Bilson of Christian Subjection. Blagraves Mathematical Jewel. Book of good Manners. Browning of publick Prayer. Blith's Husbandry. Brinsley's true Watch. Brathwaight on the Evangelist. Bryskets Discourse of Civil Life. Boothes Chirurgery. Bacons Essayes. Rules and Max. Com. Law. Botero of the Greatness of Cities. Bancrofts dangerous Politicks. Baldestard's Courtier, French, Ital. and Eng. Bishop Barlow's answer Engl. to Engl. Catholicks. Bifeild on Peter. Barrow's Method of Physick. Braithwaight's Survey of History. Calvin on the Ephesians. On the Acts. On the Galatians. Commentary on the Galat. Corinthians. On Genesis. On Psalms. Harmony. Sermons. Jacob and Esau. On Jonah. On Hebrews. On Daniel. On Philippians. Jeremiah. Lamentations. Romans. 199 Psalm. His 4 Sermons. On the Com. Institution. Chilestor of Institution of Christian Princes. Campanella's Spanish Monarchy. Collings Sector and Quadrant. Plain Scale. Dyaling. Culverwell's light of Nature. Cupids Camells. Cruso's Castram. Cart wright against Whitgift. Second Reply. On Colossians. Christian Religion. Christs Sermons on Emaus.
Cartwright against Enthusiasts. On the Collossians. Caril on Job the 6 parts in 12 vol. Compleat several vol. 5 part. 6 part. 11 part. 12 part. Culverwell's Light of Nature. Compleat Gardiner. Crandan against Baxter. Carpenter's Geography. Collection of the Spanish practice. Of Letters. 12 sorts. Colson's Arithmetick. Charlton's Jurisdiction. Catter on the Covenant. Cooper on Hester. On the Gospels. On the Revelations. Anatomy of a Christian. Chambers Astrology. Clowes Chirurgery. Courtiers Academy. Chewny against Socinianisme. Catalogue of Chancellors. Crowly against Warson. Castle of Health. Christian Prayers. Coverdale on the Passions. Christ's Star. Chitteus Postells. Champneyes vocat. of Bishops. Carrions Chronicle. Cromptons Justice of Peace. Calvert on Isaiah. Countrymans Recreat. Collins Ephata. Cottons Way of Life. Cottons Sermons. Collins Cordial, 1st, & 2d part. Third part. Compleat Gentlem. by Peacham. Clarkes Worthyes. Childbirth. Cradocks Gospell-Holiness. Liberty. Works. Coles Assurance. Preservatives against Sin. Cleaver on the Proverbs. Crashawes Works. Cawdry's Similies. Camdens Remains. Conquest of the West Indies. Of Peru. Calamy's Sermons bound together Ceremonies of the Pallatinate. Certamen Religiosum. Cambines Turks Affairs. Courtier in 3. Languages. Court of Request. Continuation of Commines. Cade of the Church. Caesars Comment. Custom of Nations. Church-yards choice. Challenge. Cokes Copie holder. Covel against Burges. Polymenteis, Defence of Hooker. Croyes S. Conformities. Cranmer against Transubstantiat. Censures of the Church. Civel Rights of Titles. Councellor of Estate. Princes. Chirurgions Questions. Castrews defence of 3 Ceremonies. Councel of Princes. Of State. Chirurgions Closet. Dr. Charlton thankful remembran. Charron of Wisdom. Crakenthorps defence of Constant. Common-prayer and Psalms, 1625. 1627. Charlton's Paradoxes. Charlton's Natural History of the Soul. Coal from the Altar. Charlton of Atheisme. Cabala's Mysteries of State. Curtis Theater of Navigation. Corles Hist. of the West-Indies. Cowels Interpreter. Concordance to the Bible. Collection of Statutes Cottas Trial of Witchcraft. Cokes special Charge. Colling's Sector and Quadrant. Dyalling. Plain Scale. Bish. Cant. Doct. Sacrament. Collections of Ordinances of Parl. Charity maintain'd by Catholicks. Commentary on Lamentations. Dikes Works. Denison on the Sacrament. Second of Peter. Dyal of Princes. Dod's Works. On Sacrament. Destruction of Troy. Defence of Constantine. Day's Sermons. Daniell's Poems compleat. Dyke on Philemon. Evangelical Histories. On the Heart. On Repentance. Works. Dariot on the Stars.
Deacon and Walter on Spirit. Davis Mic to cosmus. Works. Davis art of war. Downham on Hosea. Christian Divinity. 4 Treatises. Plea for the Poor. Downham on the Covenant. Defence of Bishops. Of Prayer. 4 Treatises. On the 15th Psalm. Downing's State Ecclesiastical. Discourse of Allegiance with Barcklays Temporal Power of the Pope. Discourse against new Discipline. Divine Vetities. Dialogue of the Creature. Directions for Health, by Bayley. Derings Speeches. Description of Jerusalem. Of New France. Dering against Harding. On the Hebrews. Deliverance of Israel. Diggs Warlike Treatise. Unlawfulness of Subjects ta∣king Armes. Stratiotives. Dodechedion of Fortune. Downe of Faith. Dayton's Elizium. Day's 12 Sermons. Discovery of Peru. Doctrine of Divinity. Demosthenes Orat. Drakes Travels. Dove of Church Covernment. Dayrels Church Government. Dells Sermons. Del Espines tranquillity of mind Englished by Smith. Dod on the ten Commandments. Duck of Free-grace. Descatts Compendium. Donn's six Sermons. Of Self homicide Dawsons 18 Sermons. Dodona's Grove with Parable. Defend. of Faith. Directions for prevention and cure of the Plague. Dodridge's compleat Parson. Daniel's Chronicle. Donn's Letters. Poems. Daniel's Works Poetry. Decl. of the Popes Impostures. Davies Nosce Teipsum. Description of the World. Dalingson's Method of travel. Descript. 3 Voyages to the West-Indies. Edwards Gangren compleat. First and second part. against Tolleration. Works. Essex's Dove. Estye on the Scripture. Enchiridion Medicum. English Gentleman. Gentlewoman. Elton on the Commandements. English Improver, by Blith. English Lawyer. Eliots French Fruit. End to Controversies. English Secretary. Epitomy of Froisard. Euclid's Elements in 6 Books. Edward the sixth Homilies. Estwick against Bidle. Edwards Chirurgery, with Feavers. English Helicon. Euphues and his England. Englishmans Treasury. Epitomy of the whole course of Physick. Essayes of an Apprentice in Poetry. Evans Childrens Dictionary. Erasmus praise of Poetry. Earl of Essex Treason. Featleys Sacriledge. Cases for Spectacles. Dippers dipt. Vertumnus Romanus. Fullwood of the Church. French Distillation. Fisher on the Liturgies. Fulbecks Parallels. Pandecks. Compleat. Fountain of Fictions. Forbes of Justification. On Revelation. Fenners Works. Alarme. Farrarius Commonwealth. Faulkland of Infalibility. Forresters Postels. Fenton of Usury. Fenn's Fruits. Fox's North west passage. Fentons Tragical Discourses. Favour of the Church. Felthams Resolves. Erancis Poems. Faius Grounds of Religion. Fragosta and his 3 Sons. Fitzherberts Policy. Fletcher on the first Psalm. Fosbrooks Sermons. Forbishers Voyage.
French Academy. Fernes Heraldry. Fidels young Lawyers guide. Fletchers Poems. Way to Blessedness. Gnevaras Works. Lives. Golden Epistles. Garden of Health. Of Charity. Of Eloquence. Gaiscons Poems. Dooms Day. Gores Sermons. Greek Antiquities. Goads Drops and Vials. Gateker of Transubstantiation. Grand Debate. Gunners Glass. Gorton on 110th. Psalm. Golden Chain. Godfry of Bullogne. Glass of the Times. Gardiners Labyrinth. Gilberts Works. Dr. Goads Disputation. Gouge's 3 Arrows. Armour. On the Lords Prayer. Saints Sacrifice. Gregories Works. Gibbons on Genesis. Gilberts Walk to Heaven. Gaul against Astrology. Greenhil on Ezek. compl. 4 vol. Garry's Diary. Griffith's Bethell. Garthwaits Harmony. Guy of Warwick. Gross of Happiness. Gallen's Method. Grand Seigniors Seraglio, Golden Ass. Guido's Chirurgery. Granger on Ecclesiastes. Guild on Samuel. Gale's Chirurgery. Gurnals Armour, compleat Goodmans Fall of Man. Goodwin of Justification. Saints dipping. Antipologia. Against Anabaptists. On the Romans. Treatises. Gunters Works. Gee's Works. Grammar School. Gifford's Sermons. Glanvils van. of Dogmatizing. Green's Never too late with works. Gardiner of the Coal Trade. Godard's Miscellanie. Grimston's Hist. of the Grand Seign. Goodwin's Child of Light. Guevoera's Mist. of Mount Calvery. Glauber's Philosophical Furnace. Granada's Sinners Guide. Guazzo of Civil Conversation. Godwin's Roman Antiquities. Jewish. Hen. 8. Obedience of Christ. Man. On the 7 Sacraments. Heywood's Henry the fourth. Haven of Health. Hoyles Rejoynder. Hardy on John. 1st, & 2d part. History of the Waldenses. Of Persilles. Holdsworth's Sermons. Hadon's Osorius. Hall on Peter. Hammond's Dispatcher dispatcht. Ten Sermons. Ignatius Epistles. Reply to White. 1st. & 2d Defence of Schism, Heylins Defence of Episcopacy. On the Sabbath. History of St. George. Quin. Articulis. Against Lincoln. Geography. Against Calvin. Survey of France. Stumbling Block. Health Improvement. Hills Arethmetick. Hudson on the Church. Halls Chirurgery. Hyde on the Church. Honnycombe of Justification. Heyward's Sanctuary. Davids Tears. Works. Hooper on the Psalms. Henry the fourth of France. Howard against Prophesies. Holyband's Dictionary. Treasury French Tongue. Harmony of Confessions. Holland on the Revelations. Experiments. History of a Magician. Of Parismus. Of King Arthur. Hills Art of Gardening. History of Indepency. Hall of Episcopacy. Hull on the Lamentations. On St. Peters Prophesies.
Harbout's Faithful Subject. Hooker's Policy. Hooker's 2 Lessons. Humiliation. Harrington's Popular Governm. Hall on Hosea. Apology. Huit on Daniel. Hist. of New England. Holydayes Sermons. Hemmings Postels. Heliodorus Aethiopian Hist. Engl. Heywoods Works. Haven of Pleasure. Homes against Tombs. Herodatus Engl. History of China. Of Brittain. Of Episcopacy. Hospital of Fooles. History of the Secrets of Nature. Hakewell against Carryer. Heylins Sermon on the Tares. Housed's to Sermons. Hunts New born Christian. Hartlib's Legacy. Hartlib of Bees. History of the Grand Seignior, by Grimston. Higgon's Mystical Babylon. Harvey's Phylosophy. Hamonds Practical Catechism. Hackwell's Liberty of the Subject. Hey wood's nine worthy Women. Hakluyts Discoveries of the World. Heyward's Edward the sixth. Herodian's Imperial History. History of Sejanus. Huraults Political Discourses. Herberts conception of the Times. Patriarkes Estate of the Church, Discourse of the Times from the Apostles to the present, the times of the Emperours, Popes, Turks, Kings of France, England, Scotland, Spain, Portugal, Denmack, with Memorable Accidents in their time. Hoby's Counter Snarl. Italian Passenger. Ironside on the Sabbath. Jeanes Divinity 1st and 2d part. Johnson's Travels. Juds Divinum compleat. Jackson's Justifying Faith. Knowledge of Christ. History of Christ. On Thessalonians. Jesuits Cat. Jackson of Consecration. Janua Linguarum. Jenison's Conpunctions. Interest of the Princes. James Corrupt. of the Fath. Instruct. for Christian Women. Introduction to the French tongue. Jorden of Bathes. Ibis ad Cesarum. Job's Conflicts. Justification justified. Iphigenis, a Romance. Journal of the Proceedings in Parl. Jones Art of preserving Body and Soul. Knox's History. Kings James Remonstrance. Kelwayes Nativities. Knight of the Sea. Of the Sun. Of the Cross. Keltridg on Luke. Kinaston's Poeme. Kings Dyalling. Key of the Covenant. Langquets Chronicle. Lockiers Works. Low's Chiturgery. Loves Works compl. 2 vol. Of Election. Combate. Dejected Souls cure. Lake on the Commandment. Luther on the Galatians. On the Psalms. On Psalms and Galat. Leigh's Divinity. Lipsius of Constancy. Politicks. Larkham on the Atributes Lucians Dialogues English. Leycester's Commonwealth. L'Estrange's Apology. Love and Valour. Laiton's spec. bell. Sacram. Lesbie on the Church. Lives of the Popes. Lightfoot on the Acts. Laurentius on the Eyes. Looking-glass for Papists. Lewkner of Cities. Lapidary by Nichols. Lithgows Travels. Lathams Falconty. Lives of 9 Women worthy. Lakes 10 Sermons. Lawfrank's Chirurgery. Leoline and Sydanis a Romantick Poem. Lemnius his Touchstone of Complexion. Looking-glass of the holy War. Ley on the Sabboth. Lawrence of Faith. Loyd's Pilgrimage of Kings and Princes. Leigh's Art of Surveying. Accidence of Armory. Lambert's Preambulation of Kent. Lord Marquess Idleness Lyfords Errors.
Manton on James. On Jude. Mayers Treasury. Markhams Masterpiece. Husbandry English Husbandman. Works. Mittour for Magistrates. Martyts Letters. Murcots Work. Morice on the Sacrament. Mosten's Imposter. Ceremonies. Mountague's Appeal. Essayes compleat. Gagg. Invocation of Saints: Works. Marrow of Physick. Matiners Mate. Meed on Revelat. Apostacy. Moulin on the Sacrament. Against Arminian. Machivel's Art of War. Mythonisses. More of Tribula. Marbury on Habakkuk. On obadia. Moral Philosophy. Mandivel's Travels. Montelion. Mirrour of States. Of Pollicy. Mount Calvary. Moulin against Phil. Anglicus. Method of Physick. Mask of the League. More's Utopia. Monard of the West-Indies. Maiden Knight. More's Demonstration of God. Morgan's Horsemanship. Marrow of the Law the 2d part. Mervin. Masterson's Arithmetick. Mascall of Cattle. Mulcasters Positions. Mela's Geography. Mercy and Truth. Manzinus Discourses. Mathematical Jewel. Manwood Forrest Laws. Manton's Christ on Earth. Maxwell's Lex Rex, Law and the King. M. Aurelius Antoninus Meditations. Moulin's Defence of the Catholick Faith. Marmiones Cupid and Psiche, a Poem. Queen Maries French Grammar. Morgan's Art of Dialling. Muffet of Health. Moxon's Tutor to Astronomy. Newton's Astronomia Britannica. Mathematical Elements. Help to Calculat. Nicholai orient. Perigrinat. No ton's Orthod. Evang. Nichols old Religion. Napire on the Revelations. Nennio of Nobility. New Age of old Names. Nettle against Selden. Norden's Mitou of Honour. Names of the Towns. News from Heaven. Norden's Labytinth of Mans Life. Nichols on Church atechism. Owen against Bidle. Of Redemption. Osorius of Nobility. Ostela. Orator by Sylvayn. Origines Sacrae. Owen's Communion with God and Saints. Patrick's Pilgrim. Prinn's Answer to the Papists about Free-will. Histrio Mastix. Loyalty. Perpetuity. Lordly Bishop compleat. More with Prelates tyranny. Vindication of the Laws. Saints Devotions to their K. Mount Orguell. Plea for the House of Lords. Anti-Armin. Prelates Tyranny. Unbishoping of Timothy and Titus. Phirovans's Secrets. Parker's Phil. with Preexist. Parthenissa 1st part, 5th part. Penal Statutes. Picture of Papist and Puritan. Preston on the New Covenant. On Atributes. Faith and Love. Remains. 5 Sermons. Physick for the Soul. Phillip's Sermons. Perkin's on Christs Sermon on the Mount. On the Creed. On Hebrews. Cases of Conscience. On Revelations. On Jude. Purple Island. Power's Experimental Philosophy. Pallace of Pleasure, 1st & 2d part. Papillion's Art of Fortification. Peirson's Varieties. Page on the Lords Prayer. Of Church Government.
Prediaux's Introduction. Paget's Hereseographia. Against the Brownist. Parable of the Virgin. Pemble on Ecclesiastes. On John. Persecuted Ministers. Proceedings against Gun powder Traytors. Physitian and Chirurgion. Primrose's Works. Cardinal Poole of Justification. Philosophical Furnaces. Passions of the Mind. Perfect Conveyancer. Page of Bowing. On the 51 Psalm. Peirce against Barlee. Against Hickman & Baxter. Peirson on the Ephesians. Palmerin of England. De Oliva. Pilgrim of Castel. Palingenius. Pastime of Pleasures Palmendos. Pilgrimage of Princes. Philoomus. Persillers. Parisinus. Panoplie of Epistles. Pitiscus in English. Politick Touchstone: Discourses. Physick against Fortune. Poole against Preachers sentences. Price's Defence of Truth. Practice of preaching. Poores Vicars Plea. Palefyman on the Romans. Pasquin in a Trance. Pilkinson on Nehemiah. Parsons Varieties. Voll. several Playes. Pathway to Health. Palestine. Potters Consecrat. Sermon. Plea for Altars. Phillips Counceller. Pearl of practice. Pinchin of Justification. Palace of pleasure. Peters Repentance. Parker's Rose and Lilly. Pasquil's Madcap Platt's substance and treasure. Hidden Treasure. Palladio's Architecture. Physick and Chirurgery. Purchase of Bees. Pemales Natural Simples. Phillips of Tenures. Powell's direction for search of Records. Parker's Portaicture of the Kings of England. Primrose on the Sabbath. Plat's Jewels of Art and Nature. Pinnels Doct. and Domin. of the Cross. Percivall's Spanish Grammar and Dictionary. Palymanteia or the mean to judge a Commonw. Pamphlets of the late times, 4 vol. Qu. Eliz. Canons and Injunctions. Quarles of Pope Paul. Quintius Curtius. Questions of Love. Quintessence of Wit. Quarles's Fancies. Quircitanus practice of Physick. Rollock on the Thessalonians. Effectual Calling. Reads Works. Reynolds 3 Treatises. On Hosea. Passions. 110 Psalm. On the Sacrament. Reynolds on Obadiah. On Haggai. Rogers Protestant Church. Rutherford of Presbytery. Survey against Hooker. Of Church government. Against liberty of conscience. Life of Grace. Roman Antiquities. Rogers of Marriage. Practical Catechism. On the Sacrament. On Sacram. and Catechism. Reading Guide. Against Anabaptists. Rogets Parable of the rich Fool. Figs. Fig-tree. Fast Friend. 39 Articles. Two Parables. Prodigal. Randal on the Sacrament. On the Church. On Romans. Works. Rogers Tabernacle. Refuter refuted. Robotham on the Canticles. Rich Storchouse Rarities of the Woild. Ridly's Givil and Ecclesiast. Law. Rich Closet. Rudes Geometry. Robinson's Defence of Separation. Rollenson's Sermons. Robinson's Essayes. Roberts sacred Sepren. Remonstrance about Ch. Discipl. Relation of Congo. Rocks of Christs Shipwrack.
Romsden's Gleaning. Regiment of the Sea. Reynard the Fox. Riches Farewell. Ross against Digby. Reply to Lawd. Rouse's Attique Antiquiries. Rome ruined. Reeve's Christian Divinity, Riders Dictionaty. Rudolph's Discipline, Receipt to stay the Plague. Regiment of Health. Right of Tythes, by E. C. Richome on the Euchatist. Rose's new Planet no Planet. Riply's Compound of Alchimy. Ramus and Bedwell's Geometry. Review of the Parl. Transactions. Ratcliff's Politick Discourses. Slater on the Psalms. On the 4th of the Romans. On the 31 Chapt. On Malachie. Deaths Summons. Tythes. Sibbs Feast. On Corinthians. On the Cantieles. Light from Heaven. Evangelical Sacrifice. On Hosea. Simpson on Unbelief. Sherly's Playes in 2 vol. 24 sorts. Martialled Souldier. Swineck's Christian mans Call. Gods are Men. Styrup's Dialling. Quadrant. Compleat. Satticen's History. Special Law Cases. Symonds Pisgah Evangel. Simonds Sermons. Sidenham's 5 Sermons. 8 Sermons. 16 Sermons. Sandys Sermons. Strife of Love in a Dream. Stanford's Pleas of the Crown. Shelford's Discourses Survey of History. Sibthorp of Suptemacy. Survey of London. Swan's Redde Debitum. Calamus Mensurans. Sedgwick's Fountaine. Speidells Geometry. Spelman of Tythes. Searles Dyalling. Swedish Discipline. Somer of Gavel kind. Stratagems of Jerusalem. Smith on Hosea. Souldiers exercise. Sins Self-murther. Scottish Academy. Smith's Art Military. Gunnery. Spanish Mandivell. More with Pilgrim. Sempill of Titles. Sandys Europae speculum. Styward's Art Military. Stalham against Quakers. Sutton on the Romans. Squires Lectures. Smith's Sermons. Sinners Guide. Surveyors Dialogue. Stonham on the first Psalm. Statans Stratagems. Safegard for Jaylers. Sejanus Life. Shepherd on the Sabbath. Swadline against Bellarmine. Sufferage of the Divines of Britt. Supreme Power. Seven Problems of Antichrist. Sherlock against the Quakers. Secretary in fashion. Skine de Verb signific. Spanish Inquisition. Speculum Egrotorum. Seamans Callender. Companion. Seneca of Benefits, English. Tragedies, English. Storke on the Attributes Stephen on Original Sin. Number of the beast. Stoughton's Dignity. Sympson's Penitent. Stoughton's 13 Sermons. 7 Sermons. 4 Sermons. Souls Progress. Stillingfleet's Origina sacra. Irenicum. Swadlius Venetian Quarrel. Silk-worms and their Fleece. Sutcliff's Chall. to the Rom Chur. Survey of Popery. Scot's Discovery of Witchcraft. Sleidan's four Empires. Speeches in Parliament a vol. Strodes Anatomy of Mortality. Silvayn's Oratour. Sermons before the Lords and Commons, 4 vol. Spelman's Villare Anglicanum. Theater of Gods Judgment. Treatise of the Loadstone. Terry's Logick. Tichbourn's Grapes.
Topsell on Joel. Theater of the Earth. Tindall of Obedience. Triumphs of Rome. Turkish History. Treatises of Baths, 8 sorts. Of Custom and Use. Tayler on the Provetbs. 1st part. 2d parts. Trap on the Pentateuch. Tayler of the Sower. On the Revelations. Types. Sermons. Treatise of Spectres. Tertullians Apology, English. Tayler of Gavel kind. Twist on the Sabbath. Treats Scripture Map. Town's Reassertion. Touchstone of Complexion. Troubles of Franckfort. Tryal of Basterdy. Torshell's Humiliation. Terence in English. Tayler's disswasive from Popery. Treatise of Magistrates. Touchstone of the Catholick Faith. Thompson Antichrist arraigned. Torquat's Tassos Aminta. Treatise of Reprobation. Tayler of Episcopacy. Thougard's Notable things. Tomes against Infants Baptism. Torshell of Hippocracy. Treatise of the state of Israel in Solomons time. Towns and Shires Names in Engl. Tillesby against Selden of Tyths. Usher of Obedience. 18 Sermons. Answer to the Jesuits. Virett of the Lords Prayer. Virtue of the Parables. Virgil in English. Venner's Via tecta. Viana & Paris. Vaughan's Water-works. Valentine and Orson. Venetian Commonwealth. Variety of Histories, 46 sorts. Viluayne's Treatises. Vicars Chronicle. Urquarts Trissoretras. Vindication of Presbyterian Go∣vernment. Unfortunate Queen. Vives Instruction of a Christian Woman. Virgil Aeneids by Phaer. Virels Christi Disputatio. Womans Lawyer. Walker on the Sabbath. Gods Works. Whetston's Rock of regard. Mirrour. Willet on the Sacrament. Webb's Pueriles. Wilson's Saints Calling. Rhetorick. Wheatly's New Birth. Gods Husbandty. Bride bush. Redemption of Times. Wotton on John. Whittel's Celestial Paradise. Watson's Works, 1st part. Compleat. Westfield's Sermons. Whistler against Anabaptists. Woodbridge of Grace. Williams Sermons. Wits, Fits, and Fancies. William's Grand Rebellion. Warning to the Dragon. Wotton of Architecture. Wilkinson's Fame of Love. Williams Account of the Low Countries. Wise old man. Wyrleys Use of Arms. Wandering Knight. Whitings Sermons. Walsingham of Religion. Wilcox on the Psalms. Whittaker against Champ. Wing's Ephemeris, 52, 58. Wharton's Refinement of Sion. Wright of the Passions of the Mind. Williams against Cotton. Wiseman's Christian Knight. Wentworth's Misselanys. Willoby's Avisa, with other Poems Woodall's Chirurgions Mate. Wurtz Chirurgery. White on the Sabbath. White's Way to the true Church. Whetston's Engl. Mirrour. Wadsworth Letters between Spain and England. Wass's Dictionary. Yates of the Gentiles. Divinity. Of Hippocracy. York against Camden.
GCTAVE LARGE ACcomplished Contrice Aylots Poems Ames Christian Divinity Apology for learning Alphabet of Proverbs Allens Henry the 7. Art of War Abstracts of humane Nature Art of making Glass Abbots Christian Family dutys Milk for Babes Auxiliary Beauty Art of Oratory Austine on the Trinity Arnaldo a Romance Andrews on the Canticles Anotomy of the Mass Ainsworths marrow Angell of thoughts Astrea A pastorall Accedences Oxon. Ascham of government Amanda a Poem by N. Hooks St. Augustines life Alleyns History Henry the 7. Aylets divine Speculation Aelians history Bosworths Field Burroughs St. Inheritance Brinselys Treatises Bibliander a Romance Belgick pismire Bridet ornament Birchenshas Musick Bacons new Atlant Basilicon Doron Birth of a day Brittains pastorall Brooks assurance Barrolus learned Man Bosleys Sermons Bushuels Narrative Black tribunall Butlers Scale Bucklers God All Bramhall against Chascedon Liberty Baxters Common Wealth reformed Pastor Boyl of Colds Cullers paradox Stile of Scriptures Saraphick love Beamount Poems Barons poems Balzack letters 4th. Vollume Beza on Job Brown of Vnes Broomes  playes 5. new playes Brewens life Brathwait Satyrs Book of psalmes Bitsons St. Subjection Burning of Pauls formerly Bergerats Characters and Letters Bathursts Shephards Calender Butlers Scale of Interest Battells of Cresey and Poutiers Brinsleys Trne watch comple at Bramhall against Hobbs Birbecks 4. last things Bramhalls reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon Barons Cyprian Accademy Boetius Philosophical Comfort Bushels Youths errour Barons Mirra a Tragedy Boots History of Ireland Brinsleys Christian duty Bulwers Chyrologia Bridges Arethmetick Brerewoods Logick Clitophon and Leucippe Cobbet on prayer Family Duties Colliers works Christian watch Concordance for the Bible Cowleys ages Calverts Iew Candish Eslayes Childrens Dictionary Carpenters experience Cloria and Narcissus Complent Chamberlains Poems Cookes Logick Crookes three Sermons guide to blessednesse Culpepers Dispensatory Physitian Aurum potabili Iudgment of Diseases Chamberlarns Midwifry Compleat Midwise Cartwright on the Creed Capell on Toutations compleat Remains Workes Crag against Anabaptist Sermons Cobbs works Carters Armory Catalogue of Compounders Cottoui posthuma warr and peace Catalogue of English writers Cotton on the Canticles Ecclesiastes Cure of the Stone of misprission prejudice Calvins Melchisadeck Christs love to usalem Cranes New years gift
Cowleys Mistrys Cyprian Accademy Crollius and Paracelsus philos. Chambre on the passions Challoners Sermons Cartwrights poems single Carylls playes compleat Deserving favourite Passionate Lovers compleat 4. Plays Choice Novells Caffandra a Romance Cleopatra by Ash Cleopatra . Vol. Catalogue of Kts. of K. Iames of the Nobility Nobility with Knights Old and New Cotgraves Eng. Treasury of wit and Language Cure for the sinne of Swearing Chaloners 6. Sermens Caundish Image of grace Drunkards Caracter Dickson on Psalms Hebrews Downhams liberty Christian Freedome Drakes life Dickes Righteous mans Tower Sacrament Sermons Conscience Days Sermons Dutch Dispensatory Devotions of the Antient Churches Dugress Dialogues Doctrine of the Bible Difference between France and Spain Davisons Poems Duke of Roans memorialls Drs. Dispensatory Draytons Agin Court Diggs unthankfulness taking Armes against K. Duckets meditation Deerings Sermons Duty of Constables Defence of Queen Marys Succession Danes light to Lilly Davids troubles Diets Sermons Determination of Tholus Discourse of Empresses Depopulation arraigned Dingleys Treatises Don Fenisse a Romance Diance a Romance Discourse of Beasts Dickinsons Casus conscienti Discourse of Auxiliary Beauty Dancers Poems Difference between France Spain and the Empire Dyke of Scandolls Davies poems Davies Heaven and Earth Shaken Durant of Salvation Dearing on the Hebrews Dayes English Secretary Divers Poems to the King & Queen Dominion of the English Seas Esops Engl. willan in prose in Verse Edward the  by Hall Eng. grammar by Robinson parnassus Lexicon Secretary Edward; by May Electra Eng a Romance Excellencies of England English Phlebotomy Helicon Enchir don of Fortification Exact Surveys Earle of Surreys Poems Enucks Conversion Evans Ephemeris Erastus Church censures Estate of the Empire Essayes politick and morall Evelins Lucretius English Rogue Eeds of Salvation Fax nova Fulk against Bristow against Stapilton Fiat Lux Fabrique of Church livings Fulter on Ruth Baptisme Reconciler Fenners Divinity. Conscience Directory French Accademy History Fides Apolostolica French garden Fords panegytick Farnabys Rhetorick English Females Duell Free Trade Goffs 8 playes Gee of Magistracy Gardners 16. Sermons Guild on the Revelation on the Canticles Grotius warr and Peace Ioseph Authority Annals English Gerardo a Romance Granados Meditations Gregorios Italian and English Graftons Tables Gunters Triangle God callor Med. for the Plague Grants observation on Bills of mortality Greaves pyramids Rom Foot. Godwine Fam. Religion
Goodwine of Dreams Goodwines Christian growth Gadburys Seamans guide Gassendus of Astrology Gyes Sermons Grand prerogative of humane Nature Gombaulds History of Endymion Eng. Gaudens Sermons Grand Imposture of Rome History of Clito and Lucippe King Henry the 8. Erudition Homer of the English Clergy Hutchinson on 6 small prophets I. H. his poraphrase on the penitent Psalmes Harveys right Rebell Hawkes ground of the Law Heydons Temple Harveys Generat Eng. Howes Abridgement Horace English Hanniball and Scipio Hughs Abridgement Heps to Heaven Harveys Astrologicall discourses Anatomical Exercise History of ustin English Heraclitus Tears Hester of Mettals Harisons spiritual Logick Hannays Poems Hoddesons Poems Howards Poems Hopper on the Commandements Higgons Venetian Triumph Harringtons Virgil Hernes conveyancer Human Actions Howell of Empire Revolutions of the 3 Kingdoms 12. History Humphery against Drake Hamonds Poems Heticks Poems Hamonds Review Halls quo Vadis Characters Passion Sermon Inauguration Sermons compleat 7. Volumes Epistles 2. Solomons divine Arts Old Religion Decades Remedies ag. proph. Funeral Sermons Henry the 7 th. 7th. Henry 2 Edw. 3 Heyline Letters Cambate against Baxter and Fuller. Holy Living and Dying Heywoods History of VVomen, Hoard Soules Mistery Gods Love. Herbal for the Bible. Howell Letters Compleate. Dodonis Grove 2. pt Harington  olindor and Flostella Hiands life of Christ Hewis Survey of the English Tongue History of the Cardinalls of Rome Hoptons Concordance Dr. Hewets Sermons Iones Church Catechism Iewel on the Thessalonians Sermons before the Queen Iudicial Astrology condemned Angelo of the Scrip. Irelands naturall History Institutions Mathemat. Ieroms  helps Iohnsons new Inne Illustrious Shepherdess Ianua Linguarism by Dugard referata Iuvenall Eng. by Stapleton Ienkings poems Introduction to the Latine Tongue Iunius his cure of Misprision Idea of humane Nature of a perfect Princess Iosephus a Tragedy by Gouldsmith Kinastons poems Key of the Bible King Davids Vow Kellisons Hierarchie Kitchings Courts in French Kings works Meditations Knox of predestination King Iames Psalmes Keckermans Mathemas. Language of the hand Lockyers balme Olive Sincerity VVorkes Christs Communion Lambarts Iustice Survey of Kent Lovell of Animalle Luthers Sermons Life of Mon, de Renry of Nerius VVallace Becket Arch-Bishop of Canterbury Prince Henry Lawson against Hobbe Lestrange against aylie Visions Lybourns Arith. Laymans A. B. C. Lawrance of Baptism Loves Naturall mans case Lucretius English Letters against Lecesters Common wealth Legend of Cardinall Lorain Life of Sir Thomas Moor
Loyds History of King Charles the . Leigh on the promises England described Littletons tenures Larkins Hist of the Fathers Lancashire lovers Letches Triumph of truth Long against Owen Life of Father Paul Inquisition Compseat Nim and Bung Peireiskins life Lyeosthenes Apopht hegmes Life of Religion Life of Mon. de Renty Leighs Caesars Lushingtons Logick Men before Adam Moor of Enthusiasm poems Meeds yearnings Maugers grammar Mystagogus poeticus Method of Chymical Physick Mathews Letters Malthus fier works Moors ground of Religion Martials Epigrams English Magazine of Hon. Mellis Deb. and Cred. Monlin Cole from the Altar Melhellicomicum Muffet on proverbs Masterson Arith. Mrrour of new Reformation Mantons Christs personal Reign Monarchie Asserted Mayes Sermons Manuell Arts Mortons 3. Fold State Miserere paraphras'd Marchants Exch. at Roan Montagues Shepherds paradise Mirrour that Flatters Not Mundays Chronicle Memorial of Brittain Milborns Sermons Monasticon Brittanicon Mosely on the soul Contemplations Mizza a play Midletons a plays No wit like a womans Mystery of Iesuitisme Mayes Edward the third Monument of Mortality Marrow of Divinity Mathematicall Recreations Nye of Gunney Natura Brevium French Naps on Parnassus Nordens sinfull mans solace Mirrour Naltons Sermons Nortons Christs sufferings Nosce teipsum Newcomes sinners hope A thousand Notable things Nisbet on Peter Nissena a Romance Oughtreds Circle of proportion Octo linguarum Orontius true Church Oliver Cromwells life and death life by Dawbenys Ostella a poem Philips succession of Queen Mary Spanish Monarchy Philpots poems Pursers Annuities Pallas armata Parker against the Assemblies Prideaux sacred Eloquence Pembertous Sermon at St. Pauls Cross at assizes Polemicall discourses by J. D. Powels Summons for Swearers Plutarchs ifes Epitomized Parsons Law Pasquiles night Cape Paracelsus of Mettals by Turner Plantagenet Perkins Cases Family government Witchcraft Playfords Int od, to Musick Prelate and Prince Palemons Vote poems Pilgrims Journey Pagets Heresiography Polanus of predestination Potter against charity Mistaken Papinius Statius' Prince of Love Pareys David restored Prestons Abridgement Pestells Sermons Playfairs Sermons Polewheel of self-deny Purnells Cabinett Purchase of grace Purchases Microcosmus Pilgrime Popular Errors Practicall Register Pells Improvement Philloxippes and Pollicritte Potters God Incarnate Incarnate and Trinity Trinity VVorkes compleat Pastor Fido Primrose his popular Errors Rawlings on the passions
Rateliffs life Ross against Brown Mystagogus Poeticus Poeticall honey View of Religion Rablais English Richlieus Defence Rous Cath. Charity Resbury against Goodwine Rastalls Computation Tables Roberts on the Sacrament Evidence Reflection on Newcastles Records Arithmetick Robinsons Birth of a day Rumps Songs Reeves straight gate Robinsons all in all Trinmph of truth Christian pattern Robertson against Baxter Reyners precepts Rawlins Arithmetick Reynolds Treatise of the Coure Rebells no Saint: Speeches of the Kings Judges Rowlands Judicial Astrology Condemned Sedgwick Sophocles his Electra by C. VV. Solomons song in Eng. Mtre Scuders triumph of the feminine sex Secret messenger or the Art of Characters Sage Senatour Seldens Christian Nativity Synopsis of Councells Soliloquies Theologicall Scepter of Iuda Standish Confutation Savadge devout protest. Straight gate Singularity and Plurality of Bonefices Seneca's consolation to Helvia Stock of repentance Sermons Scots works poems philosophers Stone Satyrs philomathie Sibbs St. safety Souls conflict. Salkeld of Angels Shalkerleys Tables Serranus on Ecclesiastes Serres mitrour of Death Sandersons Cases 5. Cases Smiths Rhetorick Senertus of Feavers Stocker on the Mass Surreys poems Sparks high way to heaven Scotch discipline Sedgwicks Councell Millitary Sermons Sixfold Polititian Story of Storys Satyticall Letters Sands Psalmes Serious thoughts Sanctuary of Salvation Spiritual treasure Strong helper Sparks devotions Scrivelius Lexicon Sclater on the Com. Cat. Self Murder Scroder of Animalls Summons for Swearers Sheffield of conscience Sherborns poems Shepherds holiday Sure guide to the French Tongue Shephard on the Sabbath Saints subjection Symonds Case and Cure sight of Faith 3. treatises VVorkes Sucklings poems with remains Stanleys poems compleat aurora with Cupid Erue. Europa Scarlet gowns Shirleys poems 6. playes 8. playes Gent. of Venice and Polit Secretary in Fashion Scots Philomathy Taylor of repentance Offices of Confirmation Real presence on the Sacrament Tuvills Essayes Taylers circumspect walking Thorndicks Assemblies Taylors poems of Kings Motto Tears of the Indians Table to the Bible 'Tis not Lawfull to wed a Bro. wife Table to Cook Treatise of the Catholick Faith Tapps Arithmetick Torrianos Grammar Triall of Faith Touchstone of Truth Topsell on Ruth Triumphant Arch Thomas 2. Assize Sermons Tossanus compendium of the fathers Tolls Female Duell Tymms silver watch bell Tillenghasts Sermons Velitations polemicall View of France and Austria Victory of patience
Vicats poems psalmes Virells grounds of religion View of Iewish religion Vshers judgment compleat Extent of Christian Death Life Vanity of the passions Vinditiae pietat. compleat Voitures Letters Eng. Virgil Traversty 2 part Verstegans Antiquities Vnheard of Curiosities Vulgar Errours Vniversal Character Vissions by Lestrange Withers Vox pacifica Campo Musae Abuses whipt and Stript Woods life of King Charles Whybeards tactometria Wintons Anatomy Wilkins of preaching Mathemat Magick Warner of Faith Wales redemption Wings Vrania practica. Wilkinson of Sheriffs Wilfords Arithmetick Scale of Commerce Secret of nature Meteors Willowby Aviza Waterhouses Meditations of Armes VVards life of Faith Apology for learning Wingates Logarithmes Arithmetick Wills of perillous times Wits Interpreter Wars of the Iews Witts or Sport upon Sports Wallers poems Wings Surveying White on Matthew Whartons palmistry Watchmans Lanthorne Wildmans Measures Whittaker against Reynolds Wards Sermons Whartons English Grammar Wren of Monarchy Way to true Happiness Williams Oceult Philosophy Wilkins Concordance Octavo Small. Agreement of Scripture Attestation of Church government Answer to a Iesuit Aristotles problems Alarum to England to Church Sleepers to Iudgment Artemidorus of Dreams Augustine of predestination Meditations Apollinus of Church government Amandus and Sophronia Aulicus Coquinarie Astreas Tears Assent to bliss Ars notoria Animadversions on Lillies Grammar Aliots poems Antiquodlibet to beware the priest Antient physick Antiquity of parliaments Answer to defence of the Surplice Arbour of Amitie Ashes flowers of the Law Ajax Metamorphosis Antichrists Reign and Growth Apollo Shroving Abridgment of the Latine Dict. Albertus Magnus Abrahams suit for Sodome Alphabet of proverbs Allens Sentences Assertion of Grace Antient Book on the Sacrament Advertisement to the new Fryers Apology for Paris Ainsworths communion of Saints Adams Tragedy Apothegms and Historys Apology of the Lincoln Ministers Arithmetick by Lilier Art of ringing the Bells Advise to Balams Ass Alcoran Fryers Arithmetick Alphabet of hard words Anatomy of Sinne Ainsworth against Idolatry Communion of Saints Accedence for Seamen Apology for young Divines Atturney of the Common pleass Arnet of Religion Arminius defence Aurelius Meditations Athertons Life America Described Anatomy of Mass Andrews of prayer Assertion of the Church policy Abridgment of Scots Chronicle of the book of Assize Henry the 7. Statutes in French Anatomie of the mind Arcadia continued Annuall world Apollogy for Ecclesiast. Hierarchy Arcadian princes Apology for private Mass Adams Life
Anatomy of Melancholly Accademy of Complements Art of Archery Ashwell on the Creed Allingtons grand Conspiracy Artificial Changeling Astrologicall Opticks Arcandum by ward Book of physiognomy Bertram on the Sacrament Burroughs Sermons Becons demands Iewel of joy Bezas Letters with 4 other tracts on the Sacrament Bradford on the Mass Bulleign on the plague Bagnalls Ridles Beaumonts poems Missives of love Braborns 7. days Sabbath Bernards picture Death of a penitent Bartons Grammas Rhetorick Bretius on Ionah Bucer on the Church of England. Blind mans Staff Bruccioli on the Canticles Baptized Turk Bulstrod Miscellanies Bohtmes peace of the Church Meditations Barras small works Book of Epitaphs Devizes Wine and Treackle Emblems with souls solace of Iewels of Grace of Cookery Burden of Conscience Bells Sermons Bunny on the Commandements Admonition Bedoms poems Bolton on the Sacrament Magicall physick bounds Bogans threats Christian Mirth Britains triumph Bales act of English Votaries Image of both Churches Baxters Sermon of salvation Grotian religion directions and perswasions against Iohnson of confirmation Balls large Catechism Bone-setter Compleat Book of knowledge Bramhall against Militiere Boyl of Formes Barbados rebellion Barnetts 2 Sermons Brisco of thoughts Free-grace Bohemian perfecution Brinsleys cordelius Sententiae Sententiae and Cato Pueriles Confabulatiunculs Esope VVatch Blood of the Grape Bayfiel on the Trinity Brownsword Romes Convict. Bakers Arithmetick Bright of Melanchloyl Book of Palmistry Bastards Epigrams Book of Oaths Bankrupts Britton Butlers Bibleman Brooks Cases French Read on stat. of Limitation Bournes Light Bacons Catechism Box of Spiknard Book of presidents Eng. and Lat. Birds Grammar Buxtorfs. Epit. English Bound of Vnbelief Brez his English Quaker Bailys life of B. P. Fisher Bentlys Harmony of Holy Scriptures Brent on Eternity Butler, Nathaniels his life and death Brooks Nature of Truth Belleys loving Enemy by weight Bellamys Caveat to Presbyterians Boytuvills Rule of the world Basilius Valentinus Bakers vindication of the Theatre Dr. Brown of mans Good Bates observations Bernards Isle of man Clarkes Vade Mecum presidents Carews description of new Ierusalem Cornwells Gospell Repent. Customes of London Colliers Epistles Chyrurgeons Directory Cambers Chiromancy Cambells Legacy Capells hinge of Faith Considerations on the Exchequet On oceana Cowleys Blossomes Country Farrier Culverwells white Stone Cotswoods poems Campians art of poetry Clay of leases Cuff of Ages Copy-Lonlder
Crompton of prayer Croo life Crompto poems Craiges Catechism against Anabaptists Chancery Orders Chancellours Office Christs Mistery Communion of Saints Charter of Rumny Marsh Christian moderator Castle of Memorie Cawdry against Hmmond Clavis Apocalipca Castlemains Letters Christian Solace Collers Experience Exaltation of Christ Charlton against Heyden Carters Tombe stone Church Common wealth Cudmores poems Calamys Arke Cure of Errors Cabinet of Invention Cottons Gospel Conversion on the Covenant waters of life Combachius Sal. lumen Engl. Casaubon on the Lords prayer Collins on Faith 5. Lessons Clarkes phraseologia Adages Comes facundus in via Csps 1 Vol. 2 and 3 Vol. Cornwallis Essayes Clerks Guide compleat Cook on Littleton Abridged Reportsabridged Cockains poems Clevo and Lozira Carpeners Rule Cleavelands poems Wat. Tyler Court K. Guide Commentary of the Law Chymicall Collection Addresses Chancery practice Choice observations on the 12 Caesars Carpenter against the Anabaptists perfect Law Comenius pattern Orbis pictus Compleat Angler Cluverius Geography English Catholick History Catalogue of English Divinity Cap. Iones Legend. Corbets poems Collops poems Catholick Meditations compleat Carews poems Chewney of hell Clarks Tutor stter Court & Kitchin of Ioane Cromwell Cawdry of Independency Cathedrall Service Cookes Guide Contemplatio Mortis Childrens Dictionary Conference between the K. & Bishop of Wo. Casmannus Vade Mecum Engl. Calvins Sermons of Melchizedeck Conquest of China Clays Tables of Interest Crofts Nuptial love Terrestrial paradise Clarks Mirrour Christs passion a Tragedy The Compass of a Christian Coopers Triumph of a Christian Continuation of Sidneys Arcadia Davenants poems Daphnis and Cloe Dents works Iohn the Baptist Dugards Rudiments Doctor and Student Epitomy Discourse of prodigies for guiding of reason Declaration of Cupiff Divine poems Disputat. at Winchcombe Daniels poems Dove against Atheisme Descartes Method Engl. Dido and Aeneas by Stapleton Despaignes works Errors on the Creed populat Errors Deaths Advantage Dia poemata Davenants Declamat. Mrs Drakes life Dingley of Angels Davids blessed man Repentance Durants Christs love with Sipps Sipps Denison on the Sacrament Dales Analysis Davisons poems Duty of Constables by Layer by Shepherd Dionysius Longinus of Eloquence Eng. Donns History of the Septuagint Digby of adheering Observations of Relig. Medic. Donns poems old Deacons guide to glory
Dyers Reports Abridged Dents pastime for parents pathway on the Revelation works Digbys Letters a Romance Dido and Aeneas a Romance Dyers Christs voice famous titles Description of the India's by N. N. Dancys Chronicle of portugall Dugress his Dialogues Eng. Lat. and Fren. Dialogue of polygamy Excellencies of Free state Essays Theologie. Egypts Favourite Enemy to Idleness Everard of Tobacco Enchirid. Med. by Sadler Elegies and Satyrs Evans voice from heaven Eccho Eurialus and Lucretia Esop Eng and Lat. Edward 2. in verse. English Dictionary Expositor Easts Summons on lames Expert Physitian Exact Clark aw-giver Euphrates Elementa Logica Entertainment at Rutland-house Eliots Castle of Health Governour Euleston of Excommunication Englands old Religion by H. B. Elizaes Babes French Verbs Gardner Grammar Alphabet Tutor Schoolmaster Fulkes Mereors Fosters Quadrant Fimers tables Fulwood of Errors Fishers life Fountain of the Law Fullers contemplations of Conscience Andronicus Fullers poems French Kings lives Finch against Vane Manuall Milk for Babes Fishers Odes English Fathers advise Four Lyers Family of love Flaming Bush False Favourite Flecknoes poems Travailes Fleet woods Iustice Index Temporum Fort Royall Fergussons on Galathians and Eph. on Philippians and Colessians Fields Caveat for parson Howlet Flecknoes Characters Falklands spiritual Returnes Farlams Characters of mans life Prophefies Gostelow emblems Garden of spiritual flowers Garland of Loyalty Goodwil Greenwoods works Goulden Mean Greenwood of love Goulden grove Key of mans Salvation Guide to Scripture Guicciardinus low Countries Gesta Romanorum Greenvils life Galeacius life Goulden Cabinet Gamges Epigrams Gellibrands just: & Logarithms Institutions Godly mans journey to heaven Gunters Triangle Garden of Eden Compl. Goodwins Description of love on the Sabboth Saints happiness Child of light Glass of humours Cospell worship Grimestones Miscellanies Gibsons Geometry Gomercels poems Gomers mystery Goldmine to the French Tongue Grotius Descrip. of Holland Goves St. Hony-combe Salve Giffords Sermons on the Canticles Game at Chess Gleanings Griffith God and King Sermons Grammar Supplim. Geneva described Gamersalls poems Gardners Mystery Glass for Papist and Pnritants Grand Case revived Gaul on the Romans Gertards Meditations Gods judgment against Drinking Grove of fancies a poem Greenhams 2 Treatises
Germans Prophesies Geneva Common-Prayer with other tracts Herberts Confessions Child bear Woman Quadripart Divot. Carefull Father Confession and Devotion Henry the 8. articles Letters for Luther Howels in spection Hurst Sermons Hawtons growth of Antichrist Humphery on the Sacrament Hermeticall Banquet Helmont Disguised Vindication Hill on the Scripture Hickman against Heylin Howes markes History of Mettals Hookers Humiliation Doubting Christian Habbingtons obseru: of History Homes plain dealing Demonology Hammond of Vrine Hope of Israel Hierocles on Pythagoras gold Verses Heaths paradox Assertor Horace odes Eng. Halls Satyrs History of Susanna Halls Vindication beauty of Molynes Bp. Hall Cases Conseence Harris Grammar Heydons Astrology Halls poems Heroick Education of youth Hills physiognomy Hills pathway to prayer Holy life History of the warrs of China Honest Ghost H. N. Prophesies Harveys poems Humes poems Hudibras compleat Harfields Essayes Hipolito and Isabella Hippoclitus Engl. Harringtons law-giving Epigrams Hell Reformed Hobsons Treatises Hollands looking-glass Hammonds life Harvys Circulation of the blood Eng. History of Iustine in Eng. of the Iews Heroicall lovers Height of Eloquence Heywoods poems Hooles Ground of Grammar Examinar. of the Grammar Grammar Hodges Catechism. Harwood on the Lords prayer History of the Cardinall of Rome Hattons psalter History of Naples Homer Allamode Harts Orthography burning Bush Holybands Italian Schoolmastes declining of the French Verbs Horatius Flavius by Ben. Iohnson Hills ordering of Bees
Johnsons Psalms Epigrams Introduction to the latine tongue Innocent lord Jeanes on the sacrament Johnston on nature Justice of peace Jacobs wrestling Joseph and his mistress Jacksons pedegree of Israel Institutions of the law Jones church catech. Jus fratrum Judgement of the eclipse 1652 Jesuitism displaid Jessey of conscience of grace Jacobs ladder Johnsons lexicon chemicum Journal, a poem in burlesque Jewel found in Worcester-streets Insurrection of Wat Tyler Isaiah on the Messiah Joscelines sermons Kitchin in french Knights of the band Knuttons sermons Kendals epigrams Kellison on the 51 psalm Kings poems Kent, Essex, and Colchester-expedit. Kings meditations life Kynsaiders poems King on the Lords prayer Kitchins authority of justice of peace Lucius Florus engl. Life of the virgin Mary Ladies dispensatory Lives of Gods prophets Latkhams parable Leeches grammar-questions Loves kingdom Leys court of wards Law and testimony Littleton in french Lingua Laws of drinking Landaff on the sacrament Laws of the rosie crucian Lands mourning for swearing Lives of the roman emperours Lovelace poems Lyfords principles Leylands antiquities Love-melancholy Ladies legacie Lluellins poems Lazarillo Lucans continuat. pharsalia Lady Janes epistles Letting of humours Lady new castles fancies Lingua linguarum Lady Ramsies pellican Lambards archeion Lumen de lumine Light to grammar Lightfoots miscellanies Leycesters commonwealth. Life of the three reformers Old castle Parker, bishop of canterbury Socinus Richlieu Life of Calvin Thauler Kath. de medicis 1 with 4 tracts Legend of St. cutbert Littletons solomons gate Lives of prince Henry and princess Mary Life of Adam Lupsers workes Leshly's epithrene Bishop Laud on the sacrament Murrels cookery Mills poems Magna charta Muses sacrifice garden interpreter Messalina Merchants royal exchange Marks of Gods childe Musarum deliciae Mumie sympathetical Markhams sermons Maidens blush Mastersons spirit. house sermons Magdalens tears Mercurius rusticus Margarita chirurgica Manual of controversies Martyrs prayers
Mirrour of health of martyrs Moores second lash Marrow of Alchimy Markhams method more with four books of farriery Munster and Abingdon Modern divines Marrow of divinity compl. second part Moral philosophy Moulins right of churches Maupas french grammar Moulins accomplishment of prophecies traditions purgatory on the mass Manual of parliaments Montross his history Marstons plays Mayes breviaty Mirrour of justice by Horn Mystery of Christ in us Masons little star Magical gold Mantuan in English, Manwaring of consumptions on the scurvy Mortons art of gageing Markhams art of fowling Man in paradice Means to make a trade flourish Militier's victory of truth, & Bramhals answer Massanello a tragedy Markhams horsemanship Maplets dial of destiny Marks of the children of God Malines english view Manly's Saints affliction Maserus laws of the Rosie cross Norwoods epigrams Newlanders cure Natural conclusions Newtons directions for health medicine Night-search, first part second compleat Owens authorit. of the scripture of mortification epigrams english english by Vicars Ovid against Ibis Metamorphosis thirteenth elegies de tristibus de ponto banquet of sence art of love with four poet. pieces works festivals Olivers rise and fall Orthodox sermons Office of an executor Overburies observations Observations on anthroposophia on King Charls history Observator observed Oganon salutis Osorius against Haddon Optick glass of humours Oveburies characters Observation of history by W. H. Office of a justice of peace Pious thoughts of death Phrases Italian and English Pimells prophesies Polidor Virgil Priers looking glass Poets-willow Practice of physick Peyton Philosophers game Panegyrick to queen of Sweden St. Pauls progress Philosophical essayes Pemel de morbis capite help for the poor Perrots epigrams characters and epigrams Ponts almanack Poor mans jewel treasure Panela medica Pathway to tongues Parable of the unclean spirit Poems, ep taphs and epigrams Parnassus biceps Paget of the creatures Perkins cases golden chain reformed catholick Preston on the sacrament Perkins of the law Purnels no power way to heaven Powel on the covenant
Poem on tobacco, latine English English and latine Paracelsus his archidoxes Paynel's regiment of health Phadro's physical works Practical catechism S. Peter's compl. and Mary Magd. suneral tears Perecius his astrologer anatomiz'd Poetry by R.C. Quintus curtius English Quarlespoems Hierogl. emblems elegies Quarles fons lacrimarum dreams Queens wells Royal buckler Religio medici Right of dominion Right devil Reractoria disput. Ramus dialects arithmetick Rigbyes poems Rogers epitomy Richards poems Racovian catechism Royal charter Buckler Revelations revealed Rates of the customs Record of urine Rivets last hours Rawleighscabinet Robothams two witnesses pretiousness of Christ Religio juris consultus Ross against brown Rawleighs essayes Reflections on des Cartes Royalpsalms Reads anatomy Robinsons essayes Robroughs balm from Gilead Rosses muses interpreter Reynolds salve for wounded spirits celestial amities Ronsevius presevation of health Shepherds guide for a justice Shepherds duty of constables Salimarsh dawnings on free grace Stockwoods figures Shiptons poems Sheltons short-hand with tutor Sions muse Souls exercise Swift on lamentations Sedgwicks sermons seven sages Sultan orchan Stock of repentance Silvesters poems Springes for woodcocks Spencers logick Spiritual grammar Speeds husbandry Sclates sermons Souldier pleading his cause Spencers poems Scope of scripture School of salern Shelford of youth Sollicitor Souls solace Streams of sweetness Sacred law Spicers sale of salt Selden of barons Succession of the church Stradlings set mon plague Sheltons poems Sectaries downfall Spirit of alchimy Shakespears poems Saunders balm on sacrament Sydneys life Spains council divulged Sydenham on baptism Sculdiers practice instruction Speech of flowers Speeds genealogies Stella contempt of the world Scourge of villanie of folly Stillingfleets divine presence Smiths convert preparation for marriage Ethiops conversion three treatises Symson of justification Silver watch-bell Strappado for the devil
Spurstow on the promises Seneca's tragedies in english Stuarts divinity Stanwix sermons Spanish grammar Schisme disarmed Spriggs testimony Surveyors dialogue school Sarah wight letters Seven wise masters more with fortunatus Shepherds country court duty of constables justice proposals of sincerity and hypocrisie epigrams School of potentates Sickmans salve Stevens essays Sandis on the passion Spelman nec. non temer. eccles. Sherlocks catechism against the quakers Siege of Antwerp Sanderson of oaths Suttons living and dying Spira's life Stema sacra Sands Ovids metamorphosis Staffords life of the vigin Mary Starkeys pyrotechny Spracklins ignorantiae Sanliens french grammar Seneca's hippolytus by prestwich Scholars companion Sermons by E. H. Safety and sweets in affliction Sadlers art of physick Secretary's study Sandfords garden of pleasure Secure choyce by H. G. Solomons gate by Littleton Topicks in the Law Taylor against popery confirmation grapes from Canaan Grammar divine epistles Treatise of barons Townsend of prayer Turners spirit of the world anatomy Tozer of wisdom Triumphant lady Traps true treasury Truth its manifesto Troughtons scripture redemption Tahams poems Tusculan in english Tamarlain first and second Tukes souls turnkey treasure of true love Treatise of the globe of the day of judgement Tullies offices in english epistles english Tables of interest Tymothy's lesson Triumphs and shews Taudi against Hobs Towgoods sermons Tillage of light Trummons memor. Tillam on the sabboth Towers against atheisme Tentzelius his sympathetical mumie Tearms of the Law, english french and english Treatise of gaming Towers four sermons Turnball on Jude Table of the bible Trelcatius divotian. Taylor of elect. Thorndick of the church Tuckneys sermon at hills funeral Thomas seven sermons Towers of atheisme Triggs secrets Tragedy of Lodowick Ssorza Vaughans directions of death Vennings works milk and hony Mysteries Vaughans silex scint. with the poems silex scintillans Ulysses on Ajax Virgils eglogus, english Unpatalleld monarch Vilvains essays Vincentius catholick religion against hereticks Ushers method Udells hebrew grammar
Venus cabinet unlockt Vaughans poems Udalls sermons Virels grounds Vocabularie english and dutch Vision concerning Cromwel Unfortunate polititian Udalls flowers out of Terence Widdows treasure Willis search for causes alchimy with spirit of alchimy Willis tutor to stenography Wakes observation Whites apology for Rushworth Womans doctor counsellor Wit and drollery restored recreation interpreter Watson of contentment Water house discourse Woods sermons Warm drink Walker against socinian Gods providence Watsons collections cordial Woods physick Wilkinsons sheriffs Wrights sermons passion of the minde Walls characters none but Christ Whitmore of diseases Wottons logick War of the Jews Watham of free grace Whittaker against Reynolds tree of life Whites sacred law Wodenots aphorisms Wilson of usury Ward sins inditement Wise virgin Wrens monarchy Winstanleys mystery and saints paradice saints paradice Wyats rebellion Websters arithmetick tables of interest Wits arithmetick Wingares arithmetick second part rule of proportion body of the law Whitlocks observations Webs pract. of quietness Woods history king Charles Winells tables Wolsal of mortification VValls commentary of the times VVells on freedom VVilliams physical rarities VVorld in the moon VVatsons histor. collect. of Scotland VVits commonwealth VVoodals physical secrets VVars of Engand Youths behaviour compleat Yarrows souls preparation Youngs cure of ignorance Twelves crown. Andrews devotion catechist. doctrine Austins presumpt. man Anatomy of conscience Abba father Ainsworths pieces Abbots geography Allingtons conspir. compleat continuation St. Austins confessions, english sermons by paynell Adam in innocencie Advice to a daughter Artificial changling Albino and Bellamia Abbots four sermons Academy of complements Abbots description of the world Ashes handful of flowers A viaticum or journey to paradice Alsords church triumphant Alphabetical table of english words Assemblies confession of faith Ashrea or the grove of beatitude Burges chain of graces zeal Tythes Burtons legacie Lord Brooks of truth Brathwaits essays Bennet on 51 psalm Bloys on 42 psalm Bernard of good works
Baker on the creed Barlows Lutheran fact. Balzac's princip. Browns natures cabinet Bacons miracles of nature catechism essayes wisdom of the ancients Brugis vade mecum Blunts voyage characters Bunny's resolutions first Baines helps directions for a godly life Boultons carnal professor on the sacrament humiliat. Book of fish Book of oaths But of grace Boats life Bedford on the sacrament Bifield of faith marrow directions Broughts feasts Bakers psalms motives for prayer Barlows spirit stedfastness Burthen of conscience Benefeild on 51. psalm Bradshaw on the sacrament sin against the holy Ghost Bulwer on the muscles deaf and dumb compleat Burles grammar Bacons life and death Burghleys precepts Buchanus derection of Mary Q of Scots Boroughs soverainty of the british seas Bovillia's quiet of the soul Brooks nature of truth Buonies problems Bramhal against Militier Barksdales memorials Barclay's mirrour of mindes Borero of the greatness of cities Blount's courtiers art Banquet of jests by Arch. Bassets curiosities of nature Bakers Davids sling Compleat citizen Curiosities of nature Cleaver on the sabboth Corpus Christi Common notions Cromptons catechism Crooks guide Carriers letters Coles christian mans walk Christian A. B. C. Cowlies visions Contemplat. mortis Claphams brief Character of a christian Christian sacrifice exercise by R. P. Chaloner on the creed Case Eliah's abatement Civil wars of France Cato Major Cokes reports abridg'd Christian combate Capel of tentations third part Coles art of simpling Camus directory of eternity Cressies motives Culverwel of faith Communion of saints Costara Crofts way to happiness Cid first part first and second Country captain with varietie variety Card of courtship Chamberlains royal penitent Closet for ladies Cozens devotions Chrisostoms paraneses golden book Causines trearise of the church militant diocess angel of peace Coopers daily sacrifice Covent's enchirdion of faith Cusanius idiot in english Christian souldier Carpenders achitophel Cowpers two treatises Cruelties of the spanish inqusition Charms of love by R. H. Daily practice of piety Dons polydoron.
serm. at Lady Ramsey's fun. meditations of atheism Dod's pieces Delherus contemplat. Dkes right receiving Discourse of eternity Dux grammat. Davids tears Diseases of the times Denisons resolut. Daniels poems Downham on the covenant Dialogue of polygamie Drexelius angel guardian Davids diamond Dictionary lat. and engl. Donnes essays in divinity paradoxes Ignatius conclave compleat Davenants poems discourse upon Gondibert Dodona's grove Doctrine of the Bible Dionysius Longinus of eloquence Detections of the devils sophistry Digby's discourse of powders of plants Drerelings court-meditat. Declarat. of christian doctrine Divine meditations of several men Dawsons right intention Duncons returns Davies muses sacrifice Aesops fables engl. Englands Elizabeth English school Equal way of God Emblems of rarities Englands summons reprover Edward the 6 his history Evens prayers and meditations Enchanted lovers, a play Eicon basilicon Featly's devotions transbstant. Fiery pillar Faithful shepher. Forbidden fruit Fenners manna grace Ferne of the reformat. French gardiner Fettiplace exercise Fruit-trees Fullers threefold romanz Gildas epistles Gilpins life Goodmans treasure Gerrards day-book Garden of spiritual flowers Groans of the spirit Grandisons S. Chrysostom Grammar-war Guntons Gods house Goodwins (John) sermons Saints interest christians engagement return of mercies Tho. of justificat. aggravation Christ in heaven Saints happiness Greenwoods works Granado's meditat. Gauls works theory distractions against Taylor Funeral-serm. Golden mean Gardiners devotions Gouldwels reason metamorphosed Henrietra Maria Hermes theologus Hunting the fox Heavenly knowledge Harringtons catal. of bishops Hackwels passing of bills Hodders arithm. Haec homo Hudsons life of faith Harrington of the Messiah Howels visions Holy flames Hammond of schism reasonableness of christian relig. Hinkley's sermons Helps to saith Hilder sham of fasing Hides christian legacie History of S. Eliz. Help to discourse History of theeves Henry the 3 & 4 by Cotton and Heywood Heavenly progress
Holy incense Hooker of perfection three sermons Lords prayer souls possession souls preparation Halls cases of conscience soliloquies holy raptures holy order occasional meditations peace-maker mourners in Sion Herberts poems Hattons psalms Hobbes of dominion of government Haywards sanctuary of a troubled soul Harsnet of repentance Hools grounds of grammar Hall of contentment Howels Dodona's grove instruction to travellets compleat Heaths poems Hills pathway to piety comments on scripture Horace art of poetry. Orations by Johnson History of Mary queen of Scots Habingtons poems Heywoods english Elizabeth Davids tears Holy sinner, by W.H. Help to discourse Hides christian legacie Horat. lat. and engl. by Hawkins Help to engl. history History of king Charles the second Interest of princes Isle of man Joseph and his mistress Johnsons arithmetick Joys of tribulation Jacksons key of knowledge History Jenisons two treatises Invitation to prayer Ideot Image of both churches Jeanes of abstinence Justice restored Jacobs ladder Instruction to pray, by H. I. Johnstons history of Scotland Instructions for forreign travelers King James apology for the oath of Allegiance psalms Key to history Looking of chism Loves heroick champion Loarts life Lots little one Ladies secretary Life of mistriss Roats more Loes mystery Lascivious queen Londons distuler Lovels Herbal Leighs faints ncouragement Lauds seven sermons Lyfords legacie Life of Alfred Lilies comedies Liptius of constancie Lusus serius Lives of seven famous women Laws physick for the poor Lants daily exercise Sir William Lowres three new playes The laymans mite Lynds by way Lucius slorus, english Mazarines entrance Moulins antibarb. against armini Majestas intemerata Mirrour of mindes Masters plea Moots relation Mirrour of complements Moors utopia, english Edward the fifth, & Richard the third Meads almost a Christian Matchiavils prince Mirrour that flatters not Mirrour of devotion Minority of king James Marriage of the Lemb Manual Magariton Miseree me dom. Miour of martyrs Manual of dotion Maions three treatises h eed state cure of ces of ying
of contentment hearing and do Method for sciences Musers Hero and Leander Marrow of complements Murfords poems Malvezzi spanish events christian favorite Roman and Tarquin Alcibiades David persecuted spanish event dav. per. favorite Mayes agrippina Agrippa and Cleopatra contemplat. mortis Matthews glorious star Napiers logarithmes Nosegay of flowres Nordens guide Neal of travel Nolins hermetical physick chimists key Narrative of the troubles in England Osborns works in four vol. advice compleat political reflections second part miscellanies Office of the blessed virgin Oyl of scorpions Ovids epistles, english De arte amandi Proceedings of the H.C. of Ju. against K. Charls Piersons cure of cares Primerose on the sacrament Peacocks desertion Paracelsus aurora Parliaments practice Prideaux of conscience Psalms in four languages Phillips of hell Partridge Rhabdologie Peters inlargement Prisoners and Claracilla Peachams variety Pckquets anatomy Practice of quietness Pathway to patience Pelham on Job Practice of christianity Philosophers banquet Prestons abridgement on the sacrament Saints infirmities Penitent pilgrim Perfect cook Poem of hunting Parrs grounds Prodigals tears Pathway to heaven Pattern of patience Popes deadly wound Parry's pious reflections Pemble on the sacrament Parry's drops Pearls of eloquence Queen of Scots Quarles divine fancies Queens closet Quarles boanerges and barnabas Ross his epitomy of Rawleigh Arcania microcosm. Reads anatomy Ravis hebrew grammar Robinsons essays Rogers of love good news Ross on Rawleigh on Hobbs and Rawleigh Resolver of curiosities Rous art of happiness psalms mystical marriage onely remedy Rivets meditat. Raymonds travels Rationale on common prayer Richelleus moral discourses Sadlers sick womans glass Shirleys manuductio Stevensons poems Spiritual thirst Siege of buss Skippon on the promises Sprint on the sabbath Saints advantage Sedgwicks wonders of God doubting christian Sinners sanctuary salvation Struthers observat. Straight gate Stoughtons two treatises Sparkes saints joy Stuarts serm. compl. four sermons second ternary Saltmarsh beams
Southwels works Samways devotion Survey of the turkish empire Spira's life State of France under Lewis 13. Spouse royal Strodes holy love Son of a rogue Sincere convert welch Smiths Moses prayer pattern of prayer Sanders palmestry Suttons live and dye live Scudders daily walk Sejanus life Smiths commonwealth Sands Europae speculum. Sands Ovid Sibbs excellencie of the Gospel Christ exalted bruised reed conference Sibbs sountain sealed glance christian portion Skilful physitian Senalt on Job Sinners tears Staffords life of the virgin Mary Sandy's works Skeffington's Hero of Lorenzo Salustius, englisht by Cross Sleidans sour monarchies Spry's council of state-policie Treatise of indulgencies Taffins marks Tables of interest Taylors circumspect walking of content Attributes principles of christian practice regula vit Table of humane passions Teats ter tria Temples master piece True catholick Terrestrial paradice Tilenus against Baxter Tombs of scandal Tulli fam. epistles in english True watch first and second, fourth part Tuckny's balm more with none but Christ none but Christ five sermons Tkes high way to heaven antiquity of the catholike faith Taylors golden grove letters to Rochester repentance time well spent Twisden of usury Treatise of pacification of liberty and servitude Five treatises of several authors Theophilus mystical divinity Vicars against Christs picture Vanity of the creature Via tuta Virels grounds Vaughans two discourses life of paulinus world controv. with Pauls life world contemned Wotton of separation Wells anchor of Hope Ward of the loadstone Walfols meditations Willis mount tabor Walker on the covenant Westfields white robe Whitfields helps Wisdom of the ancients Wits theatre commonwealth Wortons remains letters Withers juvenilia remembrancer character of man Wishart on the Lords prayer Wolfal of mortification Whites state of souls Wastels epit. of Bible Christians daily delight Wasberns poems Wakes meditat Wasses poem of hunting Yungmans warning piece Yarrows comfort St. Austins confessions in english enchiidion Glass of vain glory Apology so lovers Act for wardmoote-inquest Abridgement of doctor and student
Adams citie of peace Anchor of saith Art of thriving Atheism anatomized Apologie for young divines Art of cookery Amboyna's relation Andrews on the ceremonies Arraignment of the tongue Avener of atheism Algebra Augustus Alfords works of the soul Church triumphant Abstract of humane wisdom Art of brachigraphy Antipathy betwixt French and Spaniard Argalus and Parthenia Balm for the bruised Bay-bush Bunworths Drs. signature Beza's houshold-prayers Bedford on the Sacrament. Becon on the mass Breviary of religion Bundle of myrrhe Bacons essays apologie for Essex Babingtons farewel Bartons psalms Botero of cities Bottle of tears Bnister of the eyes Bain on the Lords prayer Brightmans self-denial Burges on the sacrament Balzac's roman. Aristippus Bakers apologie soliloquies Bacons catechism Baxter on the hypocrite assize-sermons on judgement now or never call Bakers three sermons Burgis of original sin Brooks of health Boltons helps Burleighs precepts Bunny's resolutions compl. Brathwaits spicery Bradford on the Lords prayer Bifields doctrine of Christ on the promises signes more with three other tracts directions Barnabies journil Bithner on the soul Borroughs on the sea Cousins devotions Closet for Ladies Compleat trades-man Contents of scripture Collection of capital hereticks Christs journeys on earth Courtiers art Cannons cabinet Christian state of matrimony Comforter Church incense Christian directory Cases morning exercise Carletons directions Canterburies devotions Collection of prayers Converts catechism Character of cruelty Chappels art of preaching Clergie in their colours Celestial soliloquies Lamp Crabtree-lecture Curtain lecture Comfort for conscience Conceits of noble persons Companion for a Christian Christian combat Claphams brief Crashaw's dialogues Cornwallis on Seneca Carpenters Achitophel Causins entert. for Lent diary Cooper on the affections dialogue Character of Spain Character of the times Cordial for a heart-qualm Cawdrey's fam. reform. Christian instruction Dialogue of good works Daniels Delia Divine emblems, by Mall
Dwarss newyears gift Divine eccho Denisons resolutions Drexelius Zodiack eternity right intention fore runner to eternity patience hive Defence of women Divine cosmographer Devout mans purpose Discourse against flattery on Gondibert Despain on the eclipse 1652 Drerlincourt on the sacrament Directions for our duty to God Divine meditations Discourse of temples Ephesian matron Erasmus golden work English pharisee English academ. of complements Englands Elizabeth Enchiridion physice Enemy to atheism Elenchus in english Entertainment for the soul Enemy to security Eatons dead saith Essayes philosophical Exercise of spirit, devot. Enchanted lovers Englands command at sea Fathers blessing Featley's tears Ferns divisions Felicity of queen Elizabeth Fenton of symony Four birds of Noahs-ark Form of friendship French-cook Flemings prayers French littleron Fields prayers Fragmenta regalia Fullers meditations good thoughts in bad times Gerrards weeks work conquest of temptations Granado's meditat. devotions flowers heavenly exercise paradice of prayer on the Lords prayer Garniers confession Government of thoughts Guide to honour Gaul of witchcraft Gots essayes Grounds of monarchy Gretius of providence politick maxims Game of jamesanna Godly letters Gerblers lady's vindicat. Gray's perfection of prayer Guilds penitent sinner Gurney's vindication pacification Government of vertue Greenham of conscience Garfields dialogue of polygan Grammar-school Grimstones prayers and meditations Hookers souls preparation doubting christian History of portugal Heavenly treasure Holy limbick Hall of obedience devour souls paradoxes resolutions Hesters physick Hunts mathemat. recreations christian combate Halls holy observation meditat. and vows on the creed Hothams character Heavens glory Happy minde Honest man by Grimstone Heavenly academy Henshaws daily thought miscellanies Hapiness of the english in union Hooper of Christ Heavenly thoughts and comforts thoughts Hdges of the soul of prayer Hitchcocks sanctuary Haven of the minde Heirons devotions Holy sinner
Heavenly refreshment History of Alexto Valentine Hobbs humane nature Hilliards fruits of afflict. History of the Bible Hippocrates aphorisms Hermetical physick Hermes trismegistus engl. Holybands french Littleton Hackwells vanity of the eye instruct. to prayer by H. J. Hobson on the creed Help to devotion by R. B. Hunis penitent. psalms Herles policy and prudence Jewels apology in english Jones works cry of blood Judges judged returna brevium Jenkins works lex terrae Index temporum Edw. 5. Johnsons essayes Jackson on conscience Juniper lecture crabtree, with womans revenge Jesuits policie Instructions for gentlemen Jones on resurrection Jonahs message to Nineve Ignoramus Jackson of conscience Journies of our blessed Saviour on earth King James aphorisms on Matthew psalms King Charles prayers meditations Key for Chimists Kemp is imitation of Christ Lyford of names Lewis on the promises Luthers prayers Lloyds Christs valedict. Line of life Leonards problems Lockyers little stone Littletons tenures, french Linakers comforts Ladies cabinet companion Lucans continuat. engl. Pharsalia Loving husband Liberty and servitude Life of Lueas and Lisle Londons gate Loves catechism Luptons daily imployment for the soul Lynds safe way Letters between the bishop of Sarum and doctor Cole Looking-glass for sinners Mothers blessing second part Mornayes self-knowledge life death with anatomy homilies Melancthons prayers Mirrour of mercy Modern policie Matryrs flowers Multiplicity of words Moral discourses philosophy of the stoicks Malvezzi's letters politick favorite Map of microcosmus Moulin on the sacrament Manual of spirit. exercises Manual of prayers Musculus temporizer Method to understand the bible Moustrap bayted Meditat. on Lords prayer on the 51 psalm Murrels cookery Mountgomery's Eusebia Metry of Europe Munition against mans misery Mayers cookery Moulin of the love of God Heraclitus letters Manna digested orations Manual for catholicks Mans imperfection Manzinies loving husband and careful wife Maxwels treasure of tranquility Meditations by J. H. Mystery of redemption Malvezzi's paradoxes Metamorphosis anglorum Middletons heavenly progress Nocturnal lucubrat. Newcastles call
Nomenclator Bodleyan library Newtons mathemat. instit. compl. first part second part New-engl. psalms Nosegay of flowers Nature and grace Newyears-gift Nordens load-star souls delight Owens spanish tongue epigrams in eng. Ornament of woman Picture of a careful man Picturae loquentes Prisoners prayers Parrots prayers Paget of death Fam. duties meditations Practice of charity Princes prayers Picture for Susanna Pattern for women of catechistical doctrine Pattern of imperfections of christianity Peachams truth Popish cat confuted Pathway to paradice Physick for the poor Presions saints submission Pearl of the gospel Pincks tryal Pool against blaspheming Palmers practice christian freedom Purchasers pattern Pathway to heaven Poesie of prayers Petreus caneus, eng. Pilats jests Pilgrims practice Practice of the saithful piety Pry or on the sacrament Poesie of flowered prayers Pastors plea Peace-maker Powel of lending and borrowing Precepts for christian practice Paradise for the soul Purchasers paradise Parasynagogue Pensive mans practice compl. second part Perkins seven treatises two treatises abridgement of predestination of damnation right way to dye well Protestants practice Schism Politick maxims Parr's help to devotion Pagets Hist. of the bible Packets true catholick Percy of prayer Questions on the gospel Quarles Boanerges and Barnabas Enchiridion Read on the muscles Rous on the great Oracle mystical marriage Rule of good life of perfection Richardsons saints desires divine consolations Rous Meditat. Reward of the faithful Reynolds oration divine pourtrait. on the sacrament spiritual intervals. history of Susanna Rogers faithful friend meditations Rushworths dialogues Rich treasury Rols confession Relation of a persecuted gentlewoman Ros coeli Rusha described Rawleighs remains sceptick maxims of state prerogat. of parliaments observation gospel Ross meditat. and conscience meditat. conscience Randalls visions of God Royal chain of golden sentences Sparks of the spirit Spare hours ministers
Spiritual insaruat. Sheppards cases Spiritual increase exercise Swedish devotion Satyre seriè Seven sobs Spira's life Seven penitent. and consolat. psalms Sutton of dreams Souls porter exercise Summary of the Bible Smith of mortality Syrophoenicia Supplicat. of saints Sorrowful soul-solace Staffords Niobe & meditat. Niobe Heavenly dogge meditat. Spanish school-master Scot of schism Spanish braggadocio Saints legacie Souls alarm bell Samsons jaw-bone Sacrifice of a Christian of the soul Souls comfort Seamans safety Souldiers solace Serious satyrs Solomons foundat. of Christian religion Shepherds souls solace Sellers paradoxes Sheerings Saints happiness Styles contemplations Swadlings devotions Skippons salve for every sore Thynne of ambassadours Tryal of a mans self Touchstone of a Christian Teacher of an engl. school Treatise of death of warm drink Triumph of patience Treasure of the soul Theatre of complements Treatise of temples Tuvels essays Treatise of the pike Tozers directions Tutor to astrolgie Taylors meditations Tempests meditations Topsels soliloquies Taylor of friendship Tousiains Lamentations of Jeremiah Use of the promises, by Lewes Velleius Paterculus Vanes dove and serpent Ushers catechism Vennings new com. Vision of hell Vade mecum Vade mecum for Justice of peace Vanity of the eye Vision of God Verity of believing Violets discovery of the commons cheated Winding sheet, with 3 treat, more Whimsies Walkers engl. pharisee Resolves Whites psalms Whitaker of the grape of waters Whites contemplations Wingates logarithms Weak believer Whitgift examined Wines sentences Websters hard heart Wills school-master Webbs works arraignment of an unruly tongue Wisdom of the ancients Weeks works Warmstry's fighs of the church Womans worth sharp revenge glory Walwins plea for ministery Withers remembrancer Psalms Hymns Wodenots descants upon old records Warwicks meditations Webbs practice of quietness Wilsons help to faith Large 24, and 16. Alphabet of prayers Andrews private devotions manual for the sick compleat
Book of prayers Bills accompts Bacons meditat. Bay bush Bacons prayers Brights short-hand Beza's septenar. Bulls prayers Christs pattern Chronicles epitomy Collets devotions Cato in engl. Consolat. for the fick Crums of comfort 1 and 2 part Capels meditat. Derings prayers Erasmus on pater noster Fortune-book Finsbury archers Fountain of felicity Good thoughts Godly rule Gerrards meditations Garland of godly flowers Godly garden Gees steps Handkerchif for parents eyes Hiltons scale of perfection Imanuel Kings works speeches and letters Kents receipts Key of paradise Lessius of health Life of Lopez Manna Moulin of fasting prayer Mayes epigrams Virgils georgicks Martyn on the soul Nature of charity Ovid metamorph engl. Perkins of the law Palmers practice Rule of perfection Riley of conscience Rous psalms Society of twelve, a treatise Souls exercise Staffords day of salvation Sum of the bible Samsons Prayer Tulli of friendship Treasure of gladness Vyneard of devot. Virgils Eneis fourth, engl. VVigmores poems VVithers hymns Publick devotions Valentines devot. welch Farewel prayers Groans of the spirit About 200 Manuscripts, english and latine The Publisher to the Reader. IT is to be understood that this Catalogue is not so compleat, as to contain all the books I have, since many have come to my hand since it was printing, and more do daily, as I can hear of them: ( being my request likewise, that all such as have any parcels they are willing to part with, would let me know their mindes, and I shall be ready to deal for them.) As for school-books and priviledge, together with stitcht books; I held it needless to insert them, judging that any ingenious person will conceive me furnished with such, sutable to the rest of my stock. Moreover, I desire all persons concerned to take notice, that I make and sell the best Ink for Records, &c. which hath for many years been so approved. But since my removal by the late fire, several persons have mistaken my Shop, and gone to some neigbour pretender; to their great disappointment, and my damage. FINIS
