W99 E897_2* 99865804 168432
The MESSIAH found: Being A brief and plain DECLARATION Where he is to be found, To whom The gatherings of the people shall be, And of whom Moses in the Law & Prophets did write. Also; A WARNING To flie from The IDOL-SHEPHERDS. Written for the use of all that love the appearance of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, BY R. W. Isa. 11. 12. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the out-cast of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle at the West-end of Pauls. 1656.
The Banner of God's Love displayed, and the Mystery of Christ unvail'd, acording as 'tis noted in the Scriptures of Truth. THat there is a God, and that he is good, may be known to all: that Christ is come in the Flesh, and crucified sixteen hundred yeers since at Jerusalem, is believed by some of all: but that Christ was and is in the World, is believed but by a few of all; even the Remnant of Jacob, who are in the midst of many people, as a dew from the Lord, as the showres upon grass, Mic. 5. 7, 8. And these are the Church of the living God, which is in God, the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Thes. 1. 1. 1 Tim 3. 15. That I may be useful in the hand of the Lord, to those that may read my lines, I shall, as I have laid down, proceed: And that there is a God, the visible things make it appear, to wit, the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the things that are therein; as it is written, Psal. 19 The heavens de∣clare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy-work. So that the eternal power and Godhead, which is invisible, may be cleery seen, being understood by the things that are made, Rom. 1. 20. Now where these things are made, there must be a Maker, or else the things made, makes it self: now if any thing could make it self, man might; he having all things put into his hand: for every kinde of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of Man∣kinde, Jam. 3. 7. Yet man is so unable to make himself, that he cannot add a cubit to his stature: So that I conclude, as it is written, He that made all things, is God, Gen. 1. 1. Heb. 3. 4. And that the God that made all things, is good, will appear, in that he doth good, by sending Rain and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness: for, the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercy is over all his works, Psal 145. 9. Now the Lord's goodness and tender mercies is the ground of all mens happiness, as will appear if we consider the time of his love: secondly, if we consider the gift of his love, which was his Son: as for the time, it was when Adam had destroyed himself, and we in him; for in Adam all died, 1 Cor. 15. 22. and so all men and women considered in that nature, are children of wrath,
whether Jew or Gentiles, Eph. 2. 3. and are under the power of the Prince of darkness which rules in the children of diso∣bedience: for through the subtilty of the Serpent, which is Satan, man was and is deceived: not that he compels them, for that he cannot do; but he presenting objects, inticing and per∣swading by his lying, we consenting, come to sinning, Gen. 3. 5. and the wages of sin is death, Rom. 6. 23. and the devil had power over death, Heb. 2. 14. and in these ways, and by these means, man comes to be in the hands of Satan, a captive, and alienated from God, and without Christ in the world; and the whole world lieth in wickedness, 1 Joh. 5. 19. and are enemies to God and to their own souls, wallowing in their own blood, Ezek. 16. 6. and the Lord beholding of it in that state, pitied it in his love, not as men do use to pity, in words without deeds; but doth devise means, without respect of persons, to bring back his banished, 2 Sam 14. 14. to wit, to give his Son, his only Son, the Son of his bosom, in whom his Soul delights, for the world, because he loved it as his work; his tender mercy being overall his works, and therefore sent his Son into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3. 17. and that they might, he lighteth every one that cometh into the world; for in him was life, and the life was the light of men, Joh. 1. 4. and he was in the world, and the world knew him not, though all things was made by him; for the Father by the Son made the worlds, Heb. 1. 2. and this is he that was promised to Adam that partook of the feed of the woman, which came in the fulness of time; for∣asmuch as the children are partakers of flesh & blood, he himself partook of the same, Heb. 2. 14. and was put to death in the flesh but quickned by the Spirit, which was the substance of all the types, shadows, and figures; and so was the end of the Law, that being the shadows of good things to come: but the body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17. as it is written, a body hast thou prepared me, Heb. 10. 5. and this body was the sacrifice that was offered up through the eternal Spirit, once for all, to put away sin, he being made sin for us, which knew no sin, bore our sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and so put an end to sin, he being put to death in the flesh for us, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the de∣vil; and deliver them, who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. for though he were cru∣cified
through weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13. 4. who quickned him by his Spirit, and raised his Body, which is ascended; and whom the heavens must receive until the restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. and hath all power given him: for to the Son is all power given, Mat. 28. 18. and he is the light of the world, and lighteth every one that cometh into the world. Now that which is lighted in man, is the spirit of man; for that is the can∣dle of the Lord, and he lighteth it, and searcheth the deep things of his belly, Prov. 20. 27. and makes manifest the hidden things of dishonesty unto man, that so a man may see his fallen state by nature, and so come to the light, to be judged by the light, that so the body of death, which is sin, might be destroyed in us, by him; for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil, 1 Joh. 3. 8. and so redeem his people from their sins: which cannot be, except we believe in the light, which light is in us everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. and all that by him do believe, are justified from all things, which they could not be by the law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. now how can we believe by him, if he be not first in us? who shall fetch him down for us? but what saith the Scriptures? The word is nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart: and this is the word of saith we preach, Deut. 30. 14. Rom. 10. 8. which hath been hid from ages and generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints, Col 1. 26. And this I witness, who have my self run from mountain to hill, seeking rest for my poor soul, from one form to another, but found no rest in those observations; for the kingdom of God was within me, Luk. 17. 21. and I knew not, although it did manifest sin to me, which was the trouble of my soul. And as Adam was afraid, having sinned, so was I: and as they sowed leaves together to hide their nakedness, so would I with a leaf∣like profession, hide my nakedness: and as they, when they heard the voice of the Lord God, hid themselves amongst the trees; so I separated my self from the world and their worship, to hide my self amongst the trees in a gathered way; but had no rest for the feet of my soul, but was like the Dove which was out of the Ark, whilst the waters was upon the earth, Gen. 8. 9. until I returned to the light in me, which did judge me; which I would have fled from, I being ignorant of the way of God in his judge∣ments, by which he betroths his to himself, as it is written, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness and in judgement, Hos. 2. 19.
under which judgement, I received a sentence of death upon the body of sin, which was in me; that I might not trust in my self, but in the living God which raiseth the dead, 2 Cor 1. 9. thus being put to death in the flesh, was quickned by the Spirit, and joyned to the Lord the Bridegroom of my soul, which is in me the hope of glory, for the glory is to be revealed in us, Rom 8. 18. and all that are partakers of this glory have waited upon the Lord in the way of his judgements, Isa. 26. 8. and so have witnes∣sed redemption from their sins; for Sion shall be redeemed with judgement, and her converts with righteousness, Isa. 1. 27. for judge∣ment must begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. and for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6. and so dwell with everlasting burnings, as it is written, Isa 33. 14, 15, 16. being purged by the spirit of judgement and the spirit of burning, Isa. 4. 4. and so are the habitations of God through the Spirit, Eph. 2. 22. his habitation being righ∣teousness and judgement, Psal. 97. 2. And thus man becomes the temple of the living God, as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Levit. 26. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 16. A chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his mar∣vellous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and in whose hearts is the Law and Covenant of God, as it is written, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 10. 16. I will put my law in their hearts, and in their mindes will I write them: not in a book without them, yet not contrary to the Scri∣ptures of Truth; for they are opened to them, but sealed to all the world, though they may talke of them, and trade with them amongst the simple ones; by whom the holy City hath been trodden under foot, this forty and two months, Rev. 11. 2. even all the time of the reign of the man of sin, which is now to be destroyed, the Lord being raised, Zech. 2. 13. in his witnesses, will reveal the man of sin in man, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or worshipped; so that he as God, sitteth in the Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God, 2 Thess. 2. 4. now the temple of God is your bodies, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19. and the man of sin is a mystery of iniquity in the body, which shall be revealed by the Lord, and consumed with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall be destroyed with the brightness of his coming, 2 Thes. 2. 8. For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that is shall leave them neither root nor branch: but unto you that fear my name, shall the sun of righte∣ousness arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 1, 2. Isa. 40. 5. not descend first without you; for that will not be till all things be restored, Act. 3. 21. arise within you, to heal the wounded conscience in you, and to deliver the poor captivated oppressed spirit in you, which is thy companion and the wife of thy covenant, Mal. 2. 14. Now thy covenant is the light, as it is written, I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. that thou maist be my salvation to the ends of th eah, Isa. 49. 9. and this is the salvation of God by covenant, which is ly given unto men, the light which doth manifest sin in man: and this is the Lord from Heaven, the second man; For, as by the offence of one, judgement came upon all men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men, unto justification of life, Rom. 5. 18. and they that receive him in the love thereof, and obeying him, are justified from all things; and they that receive him not, their destruction is of themselves. Now the life of the body is the spirit, Jam. 2. 26. upon which the free gift comes, and lights it: which gift is the Son of God, given of God to the world, Joh. 3. 16. And he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not, John 1. 10. Heb. 11. 3. But to as many as received him, to them he gave power to be∣come the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, John 1. 12. which is light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world, and is the way to the Father, and no man knoweth the Father but the Son, and he to whom he will reveal him; and this Son was revealed in Paul, Gal. 1. 16. and the Son which was revealed in Paul, he preached in the world, which the world knew not, but was to them a mystery, until he was revealed in the ministery of the Gospel, which was Christ in them the hope of glory: whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 27, 28. And thus the holy men of old preached him to be in their hearts, and in their mouths the word of faith, Deut. 30. 14. Rom. 10. 8. and all that believed savingly, believed in him in them, by which they are freed from all things, which they could not be by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. Isa. 50. 8. And of this am I a witness, in my measure, amongst the many witnesses, That this Faith purifieth the heart; and justifieth the spirit by which we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, which is in us the hope of glory: to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Therefore examine your selves, whether you be in the faith; prove your own selves: know you not your own selves, how that Christ Jesus is in you, except you be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. Now if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin; but the spirit is alive, because of rithteousness.
A Warning to all People to flie from their Idol-shepherds. WO from the Lord to the Idol-shepherds: they areIsa. 56. 11. Jer. 5. 13. Jer. 23. 30. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Ezek. 14. 4. 2 Thes. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 16, and 17. Isa. 40. 11. Eze. 34. 33. Joh. 10. 11. Joh. 1. 4, 9. Luk. 17. 21. Act. 26. 18. Eph. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Heb. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Heb. 3. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Prov: 1. 23. Mat. 28. 18. Joh. 1. 12. Isa. 49. 6. Isa. 40. 11. Joh. 10. 16. Joh. 10. 11. Rev. 18. 4. Zech. 11. 17. for their gain, & teach for hire; yet they say, Hear the word of the Lord, when they had not word from the Lord; but stole it from their neighbors to make a merchandise thereof: they are Idol-shepherds, and their Idols are in their hearts: depart from them, and turn to the true Shepherd, the Son of God, which lights you all; a light which doth manifest sin unto you all, and is but one in all, and all have the mani∣festation in measure of the same Son by which God made the worlds: and this is the true Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, therefore hear his voice, which is a soft moving in you, which reproves you for sin; therefore believe it and obey it: It's your Him you are to receive, with whom is power; and all that re∣ceive him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. The light which will gather you, you obeying it, into the true sheepfold, which is but one, and to it but one Shepherd, a good Shepherd, which lain down his life in the flesh for his sheep: but the hireling flieth, and leaveth the sheep: therefore flie from the hireling all of you that love your souls, that you be not partakers with him in your sins, and so of his plagues; for the sword of the Lord shall be upon his arm, and upon his right-eye, his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right-eye shall be uttterly darkned. Thus have you had Warning by R. W. FINIS.
