M241A 47012524 174491
The mad merry Pranks of Robin Good-fellow. To the Tune of, Dulcina. FRom Obon in Fairy Land, the King of Ghosts and shadows there Mad Robin I at his command, and sent to diew the night-sports here: What revel rout Is kept about, In every corner where I go, I will ore see, And merry be, And make good sport with, ho ho ho. More swift then lightning can I slie, and round about this are welkin soon, And in a minutes space descry each thing thats's done beneath y moon there's not a Hag, nor Ghost shall wag, Nor cry Goblin where I do go, but Robin I, their seats will spy, And fear them home with, ho ho ho. If any wanderers I meet, that from their nightsports do trudg home With counterfeiting voice I gréet, and cause them on with me to roam; through woods, through lakes, through bogs, through brakes, Ore bush and brier with them I go, I call upon them to come on; And went me laughing, ho ho ho. Sometimes I meet them like a man, sometimes an Ox, sometimes a hound, And to a horse I turn me can. to trip and trot about them round; but if to ride, my back they stride, More swift then wind away I go, ore hedge, and lands, through pools and ponds, I whirry laughing, ho ho ho. When Lads and Lasses merry be, with pessets and with lunkets fine, Unséen of all the company, I eat their Cakes and sip the Wine, and to make sport, I fart and snort, And out the Candles I do blow, the Maids I kiss, they shrick, who's this, I answer nought but, ho ho ho. Yet now and then the Maids to please, I card at midnight up their wool, And while they sléep, snort, fart, and sneas, with wheel to thread their flax I pull, I grind at Mill their Mault up still, I dress their hemp, I spin their tow, if any awake and would me take, I wend me Laughing, ho ho ho. The second Part, to the same Tune. WHen House or harth doth fluttish lie, I pinch the Maids there black and blew And from the bed the bed-cloaths I, pull off and lay them naked to view: twixt sleep and wake I do them take, And on the kep cold floor them throw, if out they cry, then forth flye I, And loudly Laugh, ho ho ho. When any need to borrow-ought, we lend them what they do require, And for the use demand we nought, our own is all we do desire; if to repay they do delay, Abroad amongst them then I go, and night by night, I them affright, With pinching, dreams, and ho ho ho. When lazy queans have nought to do, but study how to cog and lie, To make debate and mischief too, twixt one another secretly: I mark their glose and do disclose To them that I had wronged so, when I have done, I get me gone, And leave them scolding, ho ho ho. When men do traps and engins set, in loop-holes where the vermine créep, That from their foulds and houses set, their ducks and geese, their lambs & shéep I spy the gin, and enter in, And seems a vermine taken so, but when they there approach me near, I leap out laughing, ho ho ho. By Wells and Giles in Meadow green, we nightly dance our hey day guise, And to our Fairy King and Queen, we chant our Moon-light harmonies: when Larks gin sing, away we fling, And babes new born steal as we go, all Elf in bed we leave in stead, And wend us Laughing, ho ho ho. From Hay-bred Merlins time have I, thus mighty revel'd too and fro, And for my pranks men call me by the name of Robin Good-fellow. Fiends, Ghosts, and Sprites, that haunt the nights, The Hags and Goblins do me know, and Beldams old, my feats have told, So Vale, Vale, ho ho ho. London, Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and J. Wright.
