M118A 52529169 178834
The Last Speech of Sir GODFREY M'CULLOCH of Myretoun, Knight and Baronet, who was Beheaded at the Cross of Edinburgh, the Twenty Sixth day of March, 1697. I Am brought here good People to give Satisfaction to Justice, for the Slaughter of William Gordon designed of Cardines; And therefore I am obliged as a dying Man, to give a Faithfull and True Account of that matter. I do declare in the Sight of GOD, I had no design against his Life, nor did I expect to see him, when I came where the Accident happened; I came there contrair to my Inclination, being pressed by these two Persons, who were the Principal Witnesses against me, (they declaring he was not out of Bed) that I might relieve their Goods he had poinded; I do freely forgive them, and I Pray heartily GOD may forgive them, for bringing me to that place. When I was in England, I was ot times urged by several Persons, who declared they had Commission from Castle-Stewart and his Lady, (now the Pursuers for my Blood) that I might give up the Papers of these Lands of Cardines, wherupon they promised not only apiece of Money, But also to concurr for procuring me a Remission; And I have been several times since in the Countrie, where the Misfortune happened, and where they lived, but never troubled by any of them: Although now after they have got themselves secured in these Lands without  they have been very active in the Pur∣sute, untill at last they have got me brought to this place. I do acknowledge my Sentence is Just, and does not Repine; For albei it was only a single Wound in the Legg, by a shot of small Hail, which was neither intended, nor could be foreseen to be deadly; Yet I do believe, That GOD in his Justice hath suffered me to fall in that miserable Accident, for which I am now to suffer, because of my many other Great and Grievous unrepented for Sins: I do therefore heartily forgive my Judges, Accusers, Witnesses, and all Others who have now, or at any time Injured me, as I wish to be Foregiven. I Recommend my Wife, and poor Children to the Protection of the Al∣mighty GOD, who doth take Care of, and Provides for the Widow and Fatherless; And Prayes, That GOD may Stirr up and Enable their Friends and mine, to be Careful of them. I have been Branded as being a Roman Catholick, which I altogether disown, And Declare, as the Words of a Dying Man, who am instantly to make my Appearance before the Great Tribunal of the Great GOD, That I die in the True Catholick Reformed Protestant Religion, Renouncing all Righteousness of my own, or any Others; Relying only upon the Merits of CHRIST JESUS, through whose Blood, I hope to be Saved, And whom I Trust, will not only be my Judge, But also, Advocate with the Father for my Redemption. Now Dear Spectators, As my Last Request, Again and Again, I carnostly Desire, and Begg, The Assistance of Your Fervent Prayers. That, Although I stand here Condemned by Man, I may be Absolved before the Tribunal of the Great GOD, That in place of this Scaffold I may enjoy a Throne of Glory; That this Violent Death may bring me to a Life of Glorious Rest, Eternal in the Heavens: And that in place of all these Spectators, I may be Accom∣panyed with an Innumerable Company of Saints and Angels, Singing, Halle∣lujah to the Great KING to all Eternity. Now, O LORD, Remember me with that Love thou bearest to Thy Own, O visite we with Thy Salvation, that I may see the Good of Thy Chosen Ones, and may Glory in Thine Inheritance. LORD JESUS Purge me from all my Sins, and from this of Blood Guiltiness, Wash me into Thy Own Blood. Great are mine Iniquities, But Greater are the Mercies of GOD! O let me be amongst the number of those for whom CHRIST dyed; Be Thou my Advocat with the Father, Into thy hands do I recom∣mend my Spirit: Come, LORD JESUS Come, and receive my Soul, Amen. Sic Subscribitur Sir GODFREY M'CULLOCH. Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, and are to be sold at his Printing House in Bells Wynd. 1697.
