O995 99887396 182104
Oxford-shire BETTY: Containing her Joaking Letter to TOM the TAYLOR, near Tower-Street; who she has fairly left in the Lurch, and married with a Parson. Tune of, I love you more and more each day. POor Tom the Taylor don't lament, because I now am marry'd; To you this Letter I have sent, and tell you that I tarry'd, Too long for such a Knave as yon, who has no Sence or Breeding: I pray look on this Line or two, this Line or two, you'll find it worth your reading. I have in order here set down, your wonderful Expences; Yet never let it crack your Crown, nor rob you of your sences: Do not like one distracted Muse, such Fools there are too many, Yet Sence and Wit you cannot loose, you cannot loose, because you ne'r had any. You courted me, I most confess, in famous London City; And when you made your first Address, it was exceeding Witty. I prithee Betty, what's a Clock? or some such fine Expression: This shew'd you had a swinging Stock, a swinging Stock of Wisdom and Discretion. I tell you Tom, I han't forgot, how you did vow you'd treat me; Yet I was forc'd to pay the Shot, when ever you did meet me: What May-pole Faces would you make, and sighing, cry, Dear Hony, Supply my wants for pitty sake, for pitty's sake, alass! I have no Mony. I'd strive to keep you from Disgrace, that you might not be slighted, When other Persons was in place, where we was both invited: I'd slip a Shilling in your hand, because of your Submission; For I full well did understand, did understand, a Taylor's poor Condition. When I to Oxford-shire did go, where Pleasures I am reaping, That news I would not let you know, for fear you wou'd fall a weeping: I did from London Town remove, according to Discretion, Because I knew I could not love, I could not love, a Man of your Profession. You are a pack of nasty Curs, in e'ry long Vacation, You feed so much on Cucumers, you'd poyson half the Nation: And Gabbidge all the Year beside, of which you are no Failer, What Woman can lye by the side? lye by the side, of a Mechanick Taylor. My Husband is a Clergy-man, of worthy Birth and Breeding; I wear my Topping, Lace, and Fan, and am on Daintys feeding: Thus do I lead a splended Life, continual Joys receiving; Then who would be a Taylor's Wife? a Taylor's Wife, whose Husbands live by Theiving. Printed for C. Bates, next the Crown Tavern, in West Smithfield.
