O856 99887853 183510
OXFORD in Mourning, For the Loss of the Parliament. OR, London's loud Laughter at her late flattering her self with Excessive Trading. A Pleasant New SONG. Now Tapsters, Vintners, Sales-men, Taylors, all Open their Throats, and for their losses bawl: The Parliament is gone, their hopes now fail, Pall'd is the Wine, and Egar grow the Ale: Now Rooms late let for twenty Crowns a Week, Would let for twelve-pence, but may Lodgers seek; London Rejoyces who was sad before, And in like Coin does pay off Oxfords score. To the Tune of, Packington's Pound; Or, Digby's Farewel. London LOndon now smiles to see Oxford in Tears, Who lately decided and scoff'd at her fears; Thinking their joys they wou'd never be spent, But that always they'd last with the Parliament: But O she's mistaken, for now they are gone, And fairly have left her to grieve all alone. Now Vintners and Tapsters that hop'd for such gain, By Cheating the people have cause to Complain; The Cooks that were stor'd with Provision, now grieve Whilst London to hear it does laugh in her sleeve: And now each fat Hostis who lives by the Sins Of those who brought many to whimper, begins, So Dolefully Tool now the Bells that of late, With loud sounds did a pleasure to hear them create; The Inn-keepers late that so Prodigal were, Of Standings, have Horse-room enough, and to spare: Whilst London rejoyces to think of the time, When Oxford Bells jangl'd, and scarcely cou'd Chime Now Salesmen and Sempstresses homeward do pack, No more cryes the Shooe-maker, what do you lack; The Taylor by Thimble and Bodkin does Curse, And swears that his Trading could never be worse; Yet home again bare-foot poor Prick-louse must trudge, Whilst Oxford he bans, and his Labour does grudge, The Chair-men who thought to return with a Load Of Silver to London, to store their aboad; Now homeward do foot it, though 'tis with much pain, And creep in their Chairs to secure them from Rain: When night does approach, there their lodging thy make For a better to purchase, no monies they take. The Coffee-men wish they at London had stay'd, And not to have rambl'd in hopes of a Trade; Their Shops of Sedition did fail of their end, And back now their Puddle to London they send: While she does deride them, and flout them to scorn, To see their Ears hanging as if they were forlorn. Oh the Schollars now curse the gay Crack of the town, Who troop'd it to Oxford to trade for a Crown; The youngsters put in and bid money for all, But the jades were so scittich they gave them a fall: And many in watering their Nags have been burn'd, The Bath were so hot e're the Stream could be turn'd. Whilst Chirurgeons of all the best trading will find, For the Cracks being fled, they have left work behind; That doubtless repentance unfeigned, will cause The Gold-smiths and Drapers now stand at a pause: How in their Journey the Padders to scape, Whilst London for joy at their follies does leap. She hears the sad sounding of Oxford great Bell, Which the towns heaviness plainly do tell; How their Laughter they lately against her did vent, For injoying the Court and the Parliament: Is now turn'd to weeping, and each one sits sad, To think what a loss by dissolving he's had. Remember then Oxford how London you flout, For she'l be still even with you 'tis no doubt; Englands chief City must still bear the Bell, For near it the most part the King he will dwell: And chear her with favours, whilst Oxford sits sad, And many lament the bad trade they have had. FINIS.
