p3355a 99887530 182263
By the directions of the Scriptures, and the examples of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Written for the good of all sorts of peo∣ple, both rich and poore, in this miserable time of necessity. To the Tune of Ayme not too high. YOu that the Lord have blest with riches store, Slight not Gods word, but thinke upon the poor. Bow down your earss of pitty to the plaints, Of them which now for want of succour faints. Let charity be dealt abroad with speed, amongst such people as are in great need, Whose hunger starved soules are like to perish. Through want of food, their children for to cherish. The Scriptures bids us daily to take heed, And have a care the hungry for to feed, To cloath the naked in their deep disesse, And to give harbour to the harbourlesse. But rich mens hearts of late are grown so hard, That poore folkes wants they never a jot regard: Nor will they listen to the wofull cry, Of them that are through hunger like to dye. Do not we see poore aged men complaine. For want of food their hunger to sustain, Begging of bread of every one they meet, Till some have fallen down dead in open street, Do we not see poor widowes in distresse, Who through had times are now made husbanlesse, Their outward sorrows and heart-breaking moan, Is powred out, and to the world made known, And do not many friendlesse children lye: I'th fields and under stalls in misery, Each night being ready to be starv'd with cold, And hunger which is worse a thousand fold. There are but few regards the prisoners greif, And fewer that gives almes for their releife, Altho tis known there can no means be wrought They can have nothing but whats to them brought Yet many men heaven knows, that have too much, Whose humours and whose qualities are such Rather then to helpe poore folke to broken meate, Theyle cast it under feet for dogs to eate. Some servants also are so extreame proud, Though by their wastres daily are allou'd, Some certaine scraps to give unto the poore, Theyle rather tak't and cast it out o'th door. BY this we see, Gods word is disobey'd, Conscience is dead, and charity is decay'd Rich men that should the poor mans wants releive, Will sooner from them take then to them give, This sin, all other sinnes on earth controles, When men are so regardlesse of their soules, They will not deale according to Gods word, Nor yet take counsell of the living Lord, Wherefore deare Christians: you that are in health Having your limbs, your liberty and wealth, I do desire you all for Christ his sake, Some pitty on poor people for to take. Christ came into the world to do us good, And shed as many drops of precious blood even for the poorest wretch that goes oth ground, as for the richest man that can be found, Whilst in this world our Saviour did remain, He never spent one houres time in vaine. He preacht the Gospell freely unto all, That would give eare and hearken to his call, The tydings of salvation sweet he taught, And many miracles to passe he brought, His bounty still he gave unto the poor, And did releive the needy more and more. Five thousand poor folks on one day he fed, With five small fishes and two loaves of bread, Whereby that all the world might truly know, None but himselfe such miracles could do. The poor man that was born blind likewise, When once our Saviour had but toucht his eyes, Immediately he did receive his fight, Which wonder strange was don by Christ his might He made the deafe to hear, the dumb to talke, Hee made the sick take up his bed and walk. He curd the lame, and heal'd the Leapers evills, And by his heavenly power he cast out devills. Poore Lazarus when he had lain four dayes in grave Whom no man could from death preserve or save, Our Saviour did restore his life againe, The holy Gospell doth expresse it plaine. This was our blessed Saviours charity, Bestowed upon the poore continually, A swéet example he hath left behinde, That rich folke should have poore folks still in mind And thus the word of God hath been decreed. How they that help poore people at their need. Shall live in blisse, after this earthly trouble, And be with heavenly oyes rewarded double L. P. Finis. London, Printed for Francis Grove on Snow-Hill.
