P53 53981687 180292
GREAT and WONDERFUL News from FRANCE, Communicated in a LETTER From PARIS, to a Gentleman in LONDON, Concerning the Great Designs of that Monarch: As also an Ac∣count of the Answers of the Embassadors at FRANKFORT, to the French Embassador's Propositions lately made there. WE having very lately received this following Letter from Paris, dated April 8th. and the News being something extraordina∣ry, we have without diminishing or adding any thing to it, given it you, as it was communicated to us; and as to the Ve∣rity of it time will shortly shew; but we think it more than possible, yea, probable, that it is true, or at least, the most part of it, and may revive the Hearts of the persecuted Protestants of that and other Nations, with hopes, that upon the like Causes the like Effects may follow; and that in ano∣ther Age, if not sooner, by the Actings of this Monarch against the Church of Rome, that that great and flourishing Kingdom may more purely receive the Go∣spel, and that a thorow Reformation may be there made, as it hapned in Eng∣land after the Death of our King Henry the 8th. But as to the Letter take it as it follows. SIR, I Received yours, &c. and in return of your many Favors, shall communicate freely to you the most eminent Occurrences I have met with. You have heard, I doubt not, of the determinations of the Clergy of France concerning the Regalia, and of the Manifesto of the Most Christian King, concerning the Emperor, and the Princes of Germany; but since that, I understand there hath passed in the Cabal, or Cabinet Council of this King, what will surprize all the Catholicks of Europe, viz. these Votes following, First, That His Most Christian Majesty is desired with an hundred thousand Horse and Foot, to make this next Campaign a Descent into Italy. Secondly, To reduce Rome to his Obedience. Thirdly, To declare himself Emperor of Rome. Fourthly, To remove the Pope to Avignion in France, the place of their Residence formerly for two hundred Years. This I have from the best hand, and therefore to be credited. If His Most Christian Majesty shall pursue the Designs of these Councellors, these Conclusi∣ons will assuredly follow. First, If his most Christian Majesty shall declare him∣self Emperor of Rome, the Emperor of Germany is but an Usurper and Intru∣der upon his Dominions and Rights; and then you may guess what may be
the  Consequence. Secondly, The Donation of Constantine, the Concessions of Pepin and Charlemain will be rescinded and made null to his Holiness, and the most Christian King may resume those Dominions by them formerly granted to the Popes; and his Holiness is answerable for the mean Profits since they have been held and enjoyed by the Apostolick See. Thirdly, The Nomination or Appointment of the Popes, will be by his most Christian Majesty (being Empe∣ror) as formerly they used to be by the Emperor of Rome. Fourthly, All Gene∣ral Councils will be called by him, and no Article or Canon (tho' of Faith) shall therein pass without his Imperial Fiat. Fifthly, All matters concerning the Church, will be solely in his Majesty to declare and determine, so that there will be no more need of a Pope, than of a Sun-Dial in the Grave. Sixthly, His Holiness being seated Avignion, will in a short time, instead of Christ's Vicar, (or Supream Head of his Church on Earth) become a French Curate. And it will concern some seriously to consider, if that his most Christian Majesty may not be tempted (the better to disable all the Clergy of France to give any Opposition to so vast Designs) to seize upon the Patrimony of the Gallick Church (which is by some accounted a fourth part of France) as your Henry 8th. did in England. I shall give you no farther trouble; but I must tell you, that in a short time you may expect the greatest Changes and Revolutions that have happened in Europe for many hundreds of Years. I am Your Faithful Servant, J. P. Paris 8. Apr. 82. The Answer of the Embassadors assembled at Franckfort, to the French Em∣bassador's Propositions lately made there. THE High and Illustrious Embassadors of the Princes of the Empire met at this present Conference, by Order of his Imperial Majesty, do declare, that after they the said Embassadors having duly deliberated on the Propositions deli∣vered them as aforesaid, return this Answer; That His Majesty of France his desire of conserving the Nimeguen and Munster Peace is very acceptable to the aforesaid Ministers, and that they wish nothing more; and that they will labor with all their Might the keeping thereof, hoping and believing, that whatever places have been possessed by his Majesty of France (since the Treaty of Nimeguen) shall be restored to its former Estate; and that due Satisfaction be made for Damages sustained by the aforesaid Occupation; and that all Grievances that have been complained of (either at Ratisbone or here) by any Princes, Towns, or People, shall be redressed, and for the future forborn; and that then any other Points inserted in the French Propositions shall be farther treated of between the aforesaid Deputies and the Embassador of France, with all readiness, according to the Peace concluded at Nimeguen, &c. and ratified by the whole Empire conformable to Justice and Equity; as also to the Power they have received from their Principlas. Signed the 9th. of April, 1682. LONDON, Printed for L. C. 1682.
