S1666 53299268 180002
design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose A PROCLAMATION, Anent the Importing of Horses from England. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lovits,  Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severall, specially constitute, Greeting: Foras∣much as We are informed, there hath been of late great numbers of Horses bought with∣in Our Kingdom of England, and brought thence into this Our ancient Kingdom; And considering, that it may be for the interest of Our Government, and peace and tran∣quillity of Our well-affected Subjects, that the saids Horses brought, or to be brought from the said Kingdom of England, be so disposed of, and kept in such hands, as may give no encouragement to the secret or open Enemies of Us and Our Government. Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby Require and Command all and every Person within this Kingdom, who have brought any Horses from the Kingdom of England to this Kingdom, or bought any Horses from any persons, Impor∣ters thereof from the said Kingdom of England, that they, and ilk one of them, betwixt and the Fifteenth day of September next, give an Account under their Hands, to Our right Trusty and well-beloved Cousin, William Duke of Hamilton, President of Our Council, or to the Clerks thereof, what number of Horses, they, or any of them have Imported and brought from England to this Kingdom, or bought from such who have Imported the same since the first day of April last by-past. And sicklike, We, with Advice foresaid, Require and Command any of Our Liedges, or others, who shall Buy or Import from the Kingdom of England to this Kingdom, any Horses, betwixt and the first day of August, in the year 1692. to give an account thereof within a Month after the Buying, or bringing in of the same, in manner, and to the persons abovemen∣tioned, with Certification to such who shall failʒie herein, or do in the contrair of any of the Premisses, the saids Horses brought, or to be brought in, and bought, or to be bought from such as bring the same, shall be seized upon, and Confiscat, the one half thereof to Our use, and the other half to such as shall discover and make out the said Contravention, and that by and attour what further Penalty and Punishment Our said Privy Council shall think fit to inflict upon the transgressours, for their contempt and dis∣obedience. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and re∣manent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premisses, that none may pretend ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Thirteenth day of August, and of Our Reign the Third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, & in Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCRIEF, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties Anno DOM▪ 16
