s1769 52528956 179031
royal blazon or coat of arms PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Importing of salt Beeff from Ireland into Scotland. WILLIAM by the grace of GOD King of great Britain, France and Ireland: De∣fender of the Faith; To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute greeting: Forasmuch, as by di∣vers Laws and Acts of Parliament, made by Our Royal Predecessours, The Importing and bringing into this Kingdom, of any Cattel from the Kingdom of Ireland is Dischar∣ged, and that by former Proclamations Emitted thereupon, the Importing of salt Beeff from the said Kingdom of Ireland, to this Our ancient Kingdom, by any of Our subjects, is likewise Prohibited and Discharged under the Certifications therein mentioned: and We being resolved, that the saids Laws and Acts of Parliament and Proclamations shall be duely execute, and obeyed in time coming. Therefore We with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do strictly prohibit and Discharge the Importing, and bringing into this Kingdom any Irish salt Beeff, by whatsomever person or persons, after the first day of March next to come: unless by Merchants, who buyes the same in Ireland to be Exported, and does accordingly Export the same to any forraign Countrey, out of this Kingdom: but no ways to be sold disposed, or made use of within the Kingdom of Scotland after the day foresaid: and that the saids Mer∣chants, who shall buy any Irish salt Beeff to be Exported in manner above-mentioned, shall on no ways Liver, or put the samine on Shoar at any part within this Kingdom, but shall keep the same on Board of their Ship, or Vessel water-born, until the samine shall be Exported by them in manner fore∣said; Certifying all such who shall contraveen the Premises, or Reset, Conceal, or make use of any of the salt Beeff so Imported from the Kingdom of Ireland, the samine shall not onely be Confiscat, but the Importers, Resetters, Ʋsers and Concealers thereof shall be otherwise punished, as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall judge their transgression to deserve. And We with advice foresaid, require and Command all Magistrats of Burghs, Collectors, and Waiters at the several Sea ports within this Kingdom, to see the Premises duely observed, and exactly put to Execution, as they will be an∣swerable. Our will is herefore, and We charge you strictly aud Command, that Incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remnant Mercat-Crosses of the head Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our name and authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation of the Premises. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty two day of January, and of Our Reign the sixth year. 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1695.
