S4433 99887302 183546
The Souldier his Salutation to the wary Wench of Worcester. Who kindly intreats her to grant him a kisse, Also her Deniall, in answer to this. To a pleasant Scottish Tune, call'd Lowdens Delight. FAir Venus, I admire the power of thy Son, No sooner to give fire but straight the day is won. He'l undertake the God of war to tame, If against his bosome right he aime, Folly were it to resist the flame wherein I Cry Sweet Lady pitty My mournful Ditty do not deny To kisse thy captive Souldier Or else for grief I dye. Ile change my coat and colours, to go along with thee: No more of Mars his followers hence forwards will I be I am ever bound to be thy slave Till thou grants to me the thing I crave 'Tis thy favour I desire to have then cure my pain Oh now or never, Else captive ever shall I remain, My heart is deeply wounded But yet I am not slain. How canst thou chase but fancy a Souldier so compleat? whose fortunes may advance thee and make thy honour great I pray thee do not then so cruel prove, For my heart I cannot yet remove, More thou hates, the more I'm bound to love, thine I am still Oh fie on Cupid, Which made me stupid for want of skill I now must be contented, To serve thee at thy will. In truth I know no reason but I may be so bold To kisse that lovely Prison which kéeps my heart in hold. More cruel than a Gaoler would she be That denies me of my liberty. If a kisse or two would set me frée or ease my smart Do not absent thée Nor thus torment me, since that thou art The Prison and the Keeper, Of my imprisoned heart. The second part, to the same Tune. Come, come, do not refuse it, but let us now imbrace For once and do not use it none sees us in this place It's in thy power, with a smile or frown For to raise me up or cast me down: Let thy penalty on me be known, be it weal or woe Come kill or cure What I endure no man doth know, And then farewel for ever, My friend, or cruel foe. Farewel, there is no duty nor service due to me Then tel her not of beauty where none is plac'd you see. Do not then on Cupid thus complain Vnto her that cannot ease thy pain, Neither will I be of Venus train I am afraid Thou dost but flatter Faith no such matter, shall me perswade I will not kisse a Souldier Lest that I be betraid Change not thy coat nor colours to tarry hear with me Good Souldiers by their Valours, will first approved be Never say thou art a slave of mine Nor any thing I have of thine, Rather shalt thou dig the grave of mine here in this place Ere thou shalt wooe me So to undo me, fie it is base To bring poor Country Lasses Vnto such foul disgrace. In London you have plenty, why would you come away? I warrant you there's twenty would never say you nay. If to them thou wilt not constant be, When another thou dolt chance to see Thy affection soon will glance from me and further range Men once removers, Then constant Lovers it is most strange. To find a faithful Souldier Not subject unto change. Why cal'st thou me thy prison or Gaolor which am none? If that be all the reason I pray thee now be gone. For there is no harbour in my breast To be granted to so bold a guest Neither will I yeeld to thy request therefore in vain Is thy intrusion By no delusion thou shalt obtain From me thy fond desire My honour so to stain. Go, go or else for bear me faith I will never yeeld, Thy captain he'l cashier thee haste haste into the field, Least thy absence breed thee more disgrace By thy doting on a maiden face For the losing of thy Souldiers place would be a shame Haste now or never Else Coward ever they'l thee proclaim. To loose so great an honour By following Venus Game. FINIS.
