U83 99887384 182095
The Unkind Parents: OR, The Languishing Lamentation of two Loyal Lovers. To an Excellent New Tune. Licensed according to Order. (1.) NOw fare thou well my Dearest Dear, and fare thou well a while, Altho' I go, I'll come again; if I go ten thousand mile, Dear Love, if I go ten thousand mile. (2.) Ten thousand miles is far, dear Love, for you to come to me, Yet I could go full ten times more, to have thy company, dear Love, to have thy, &c. (3.) Thou art my Joy and chief delight, Love, leave me not behind, If from my presence you take flight, then are you most unkind, dear Love, then are &c. (4.) I cannot be unkind, my Dear, my heart is link'd to thee; But while on Shore I tarry here, thy Friends does frown on me, dear Love, thy Friends, &c. (5.) For they in Riches so bound, that I am held in scorn; This gives my heart a fatal wound, which makes my life forlorn, dear Love, which makes, &c. (6.) O cruel Parents, most unkind, the cause of all my woe; This parting to my grief I find, will prove my overthrow, dear Love, will prove &c. (7.) If thou dost cross the roaring Seas, into a Forreign Land, My heart will never be at ease, destruction is at hand, dear Love, destruction, &c. (8.) O say not so, let patience guide thy heart, and don't complain; For tho' I cross the Ocean wide, I may return again, dear Love, I may &c. (9.) Thy Parents that are so unkind, who does our peace annoy, May then be of another mind, and Crown our days with Joy, dear Love and Crown, &c. (10.) Maid.) If thou shouldst languish in distress in Forreign parts alone; Thy grief in Tears thou might'st express, and I not hear thy moan, dear Love. and I, &c. (11.) If solemnly yon do ingage to range perpetually, I will in habit of a Page, go through the world with thee, dear Love, go through, &c. (12.) Ah! say not so my Charming Fair; for why sweet Saint behold, Thy tender nature cannot bear the melting heat and cold, dear Love, the melting, &c. (13.) Altho' I may in Deserts range, my heart is linked fast; Therefore my mind shall never change, so long as life does last, dear Love, so long, &c. (14.) Mountains and Rocks on wings shall fly, and roaring Billows burn. E're I will act Disloyalty; then wait for my return, dear Love, then wait, &c. (15.) Love, might I have a Lord or Earl, the chief Nobility, Who would deck me with Orient Pearl, I'd slight them all for thee, dear Love, I'd slight, &c. (16.) And even as the Turtle Dove sits Cooing on a Tree, For the return of her true Love, so will I wait for thee, dear Love, so will I wait for thee. Printed for C. Bates, next the Crown-Tavern in West-Smithfield.
