w1282c 52529087 179234
A Well-Resolved Man; OR, Good Resolutions, & Good Endeavour PSAL. 75.9, 10. THE FIRST PART. SECT. I. THE God of all happiness having been pleased to often give Divine and Heavenly Joys to many of his people; and (amongst the many) to smile some shines thereof to one of his [though unworthy] servants▪ did thereby the rather move me to study and endeavour (aswel as  could) to declare the like Divine Joys and happiness to other. And he did by some occasions also set me on work to a little shew the evil follyness of ob∣stinate, Popish, and some kind of vitious, seditious, and ill-minded Enemies of Good∣ness (of which likewise some things may be more known in good time): And then had I occasion to think that some mens Horns (though much shorter then their Combs and Ears) did deserve a little checking, either by shewing, brushing, or dei∣ding the same, or otherwise. And what Monster-men the Wicked are, and what kind of Combs, aswel as Horns they have; and how the illness thereof may be well brushed or checked, may [in some after Parts hereof] be shewn: and likewise of be∣ing at the best side, and partaking of the much joys and happiness of God's Peo∣ple. And so it was, that (among many times) being one time so well busied, [stu∣dying and endeavouring aswel as my weakness could] to chearfully declare some things of the much goodness of our God to his people, and to give some [both use∣ful and pleasing] checks, to wicked follyness, and some encouragements to blessed Graciousness; and having God's Book before me, I (providentially) turned to the 75 Psalm, and reading towards the end thereof as followeth: But I will declare for ever, and sing praises to the God of Iacob All the Horns of the Wicked also will I cut off, &c. Psal. 75.9, 10. It then seemed to me, that no sooner had the Kingly Prophet, in much zealous-wise set himself to well declare abroad the much goodness of our God, and well-sing his praises, but the Horns of the Wicked were set in his way: Right well did he there∣fore resolve to all-cut them off, to unborn [unpower] such wicked men; aswel a also
to encourage the Righteous, as it followeth, ver. 10. Then did I from the same 9th and 10th verses, collect these four following general Observations, as the Heads of, (or pertaining to) the intended ensuing Discourse. First, (since the Divine-spirited Psalmist, was so very well-resolved to declare for ever and sing praises to the God of Jacob, &c.) that every well-resolved man should likewise do right well, (when, and aswel as they may conveniently) to cheerfully, and with divine praises declare the much goodness of our God to his Jacob-like ; yea, though if any ill-minded Esaus, (or any of old Satan's Messengers) y wicked Horn combmen, would therefore malign, oppose, or any way set Horns with Combs against them, Gen. 27.41. Psal. 75.1, 4, 5. 1 Joh. 12.13, 14, 15. Rev. 2.17. Secondly, since King David was [as all good Magistrates should be] so well re∣solved to check, or cut off the horns of the wicked, so calling the same, and figura∣tively meaning thereby their ill-used power and wrong fulness, we likewise may en∣deavour to check the ill-usedness thereof against us, and that partly by shewing and blushing their combs and long ears (so calling the same, and figuratively mean∣ing thereby their pride, folly, and wickedness) and that to be done partly by good round confutations, and both serious and deriding Reprehensions, (when good per∣swasions, and other good ways will not serve for Conversion) and chiefly by, or with the Sword of the Spirit, called the Word of God, or according thereunto, Prov. 26.3. Psal. 52.6, 7. & 59.8. & 75.4, 5. & 149.6. Eph. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Thirdly, (since this so wel-resolved Man, the Prophetical K. David, was (1.) A Type of Jesus Christ, (2.) A good Magistrate. (3.) A good Prophet. And (4.) a good man; since he did so well resolve, as before-mentioned), that we should do very well to side under our Captain-General Jesus Christ, as some of his Angel-men, against Satan and his, (Rev. 12.) also under such good Magistrates, and with such good Ministers and People, who (David-like) do most love God's goodness and prai∣ses, and most check or Horn-cut (much obstinate Antichristian and vitious) wicked men; who Comb-fully fling Horns or Harms against the same and them. And like∣wise to side with such who do most love or encourage Right, Truth, and Goodness. And so fourthly, with them to partake of the much exaltive happiness of God's people, for so it followeth, ver. 10. But the Horns (that is, the well-used power and happiness of the Righteous) shall be exalted; and that either partly on Earth, by knowing, and present enjoying as much as they can of their Divine Felicities, and Dignities in Jesus Christ; and sometimes it may be Temporal Blessings added, with exalted Heaven minded Enjoyment thereof; or however, may have Divine Joys, both in troubles and prosperity, and all things working for their good, either here, or especially hereafter in Heaven, and of their much exalted happiness therein for ever. Then did I likewise (from the same 9th and 10th verses of Psalm 75.) note or collect some more particular Observations, of which I may write more hereafter; but herein I intend some things that have some relation to the before-mentioned four general Observations [and that the rather upon some occasions] and the first general Observation thereof, with some particular Application to partly be the ground of this first Part; and so herein to write some things according thereunto: First, more particularly in the next Section; And secondly, more publiquely, and generally, in the after Section of this Part.
SECT. II. FIrst, more particularly, A much well Resolved-Man will be right willing, aswel as he can (when conveniently he may) to chearfully declare abroad the Divine Goodness and praises of Him the God of Jacob; yea, though if any wicked Horn-Combmen would therefore malign, oppose, or set Horns with their Combs much illy against him. And so this Divine-Spirited Psalmist, in many other of his Psalms, would often particularly tell what GOD had done for Him, and that sometimes notwithstanding many ill Enemies; and so what particular Blessings, Protections, Deliverances, Joys, and Felicities, his GOD had given unto him. And the like we read of many other Saints in all Ages; of which I may elsewhere give many Instancies. But here I would occasionally write a few Words of one with whom I am very well acquainted, and know or believe him to be a much Well-Resolved, and Well-endeavou∣ring Man. And here I might, to the Divine Praise, particularly declare of many bles∣sed and happy Experiences, and what Divine and Heaveny Joys his GOD hath sometimes given him both in health and sickness, in troubles and pro∣sperity. But now onely a little of some things. And so if he did formerly (in something published) to God's Glory particularly tell (and that with a much asseveration for the truth thereof, and wishing God's Blessing accor∣ding) how that he knew a man some years ago, when he was a little more then a Child, and that in a time of his much sickness, who then enjoyed such joyes, as he believes were very beginnings and partakings of Heaven: Such as the very Thoughts thereof hath often since much rejoyed him, and did much incite him to write some things of Divine and Heaveny happinesse on Earth, &c. And if he did so declare and tell the same onely to God's Glory, acknowledging his own altogether weaknesse and infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. (being ready to so much glory in such much humble acknowledgments,) as to que∣stion whether it were better for the present to be in Heaven already, or here so well preparing for more happiness therein, by such acknowledging his own weakness and infirmities, that God's grace, power, and glory, may be onely manifested thereby, vers. 5▪ 9, 10. And if any Divine Gloy shall be occasioned by this, or some other following Declarings, some Enemies might have a little thanks, aswel as something else, for the same, since to them he might say (with the much Heaven-joyed Apostle) Ye have compelled me. And therefore also he may be the better excused, if he were apt to think, that such Divine and Heavenny Joys and Encouragements, in such young∣ness and sickness, aswel as after, were a sufficient CALL to write some
things in Divinity; yea,  himself. For  a little talk or jest against Day or Temporal  (as some are  term Us) their Writing in Divinity; they may know, thee are very many Scriptures and Reasons for the same, whereof some they may see in Sir Ri∣chard Baker's ommendations thereof printed; and many other also may be given; (and the farre-fetcht Arguments to the contrary, may (if occasion) be well derided to scorn) yea, insomuch, as even the Popish Priests them∣selves, as much as they ride the people, are yet ashamed to deny them Wri∣ting and Printing in Divinity, while onely what is not contrary to their Reli∣gion; much more have good Protestant Ministers thought well of any mens such good Endeavours, which they know Orthodox. I might also, to the Divine Praise, tell how Heaven hath often smiled Joys and Blessings, upon his good Resolutions and Endeavours, (especial∣ly in Writing some things concerning Man's Happiness) and also particu∣larly of many Divine Providences, Protections, and Encouragements, some∣times notwithstanding ill Enemies, and their being evil-ey'd against a Man's good Resolutions, and of hopeful turning their wrongful Opposision to his good. And how, if any (with old Satan) will be such ill-comb Enemies, to go on to much oppose him, they are not like to get much thereby, unlesse some shewment of their Evil-Combness, if not also a little Checkment of their ill-bent Horn-ness; though he would rather hope they will not much fling Horns against him; and thereby shew long Combs and Ears, but that mistakes (if any be) may be well rectifyed; and Christian Love, Peace, and Right, well occasioned. And I might likewise further declare (to Divine Praise) that he is a Man who resolves, lives, and would endeavour aswel as he can, and when con∣vinced of any amissements, would presently resolve (and glory in) amend∣ment: A Man that hath so well resolved, lived, and endeavoured, that he doth much protest (desiring also the blessing of the Almighty, according to the truth of this Protestation) that he doth seriously wish that all his faults might be written in the face and sight of the Sun and World, to be read of all men, upon condition, that his good Intents, Endeavours, and Resolutions, (by Divine Blessing) were therewith also written, read, and seen of all men. And likewise how he is a Man that hath so well lived, and well-endeavoured, as he hopes and believes that his very Enemies (unless there be any as Kna∣vish and Impudent as old Satan) they will readily acknowledge, or how∣ever well think that he hath been, and is a much wel-endeavouring, and a Well-resolved Man. And again, I might likewise (upon occasion) tell, how when heretofore a distemper of Natural Melancholy sometimes came upon him (much at new Wakings) the thoughts of some Divine and Heaveny Joys have quick∣ly dispelled the same. And so when Enemies have sometimes occasioned in him a little just indignation; yet upon remembring such Divine Joys, his Spirits have been quickly composed again, and setled in quiet rejoying; and
then though, according to our Saviours counsel (Luke 17, 3.) when Enemies trespass against him, (yea strangely persecute him) he may well rebuke them; tyet doth his often lightsome Spirit incline to do it by some lively, mirthy, yet round Brushes, Girds, and Derisions, father then by such plainer cudgel∣ling Rebukes, and more then Rebukes as some deserve) yet if they repent (as it followeth) ver. 3, 4. and so amend, he would much freely forgive them; yea, doth so, even before they repent and amend, and while, he rebukes them; and wishing the same, or something, might occasion their Conversions with as much Blessings and Happiness, as our God will, or Heaven can give and bestow on them. And so likewise I might tell what Divine and Hea∣venny Joys he hath sometimes had in health and prosperity; insomuch, as sometimes ready to forget himself while thinking thereof; and hath gone a good time another way then intended, before he remembred himself; yea, somtimes even in company, hath bin askt a question twice, & laught at be∣fore he could pull down his Mind to answer; though he hopes not so unconve∣niently to forget himself again hereafter. And also how such Joys (while well-minding himself, and his convenient occasions, as every man should) have often made his Thoughts, Studies, Occasions, Recreations, Enjoyments, and much of his life-time more pleasant and delightsome, though yet he thinks himself altogether unworthy of the least of any such Joys and Blessings, and would the more therefore render praises to his God, the Divine Giver there∣of. And also further (the rather if, or since Enemies occasion it) I might well-tell or suppose that he is a man whom GOD hath so well blest, that how much-soever the strong and high-graced (whether low or high placed men) are beyond him in Joys and Happiness; yet, that he, while he may with Di∣vine Blessing quietly serve his God with such a sufficiency as he hath given him, if ill men do not manifestly much wrong him (as they are not like to do it very easily without Comb-brushing, if they would) yea, or if Men and De∣vils oppose to hinder, yet while he may continue to enjoy his GOD, and study to serve Him and His People, would be ready to vye Happiness even on Earth, with the most Purse-proud, Comb-proud, ungracious Man living; and that  so as not onely being ready to both pitty and laugh at him, till he shake off his Wicked-Combness; but also hoping to out-vye him so far, as some Joys, being Partakings or Beginnings of Heaven, are beyond these of Earth, or meer-Man (much more of the commonly distempered ill-passio∣nated wicked Man) besides the infusions of a kind of Heavened Joy, that an Heavenny-mind adds in, or with both Troubles and Prosperity, and so as raising all terrene good and happiness, to a much better and higher Enjoy∣ment▪ (Prov. 16.8. & 37.6) and besides (in whatsoever condition) the as∣surance of all working to his good, especially to the encrease of his everla∣sting happiness, 1 Pet. 1.8. Rom. 8.28. 2 Cor. 4.17. & 7.4. & 8.2.
In summe, If I should suppose, and particularly declare, the many Divine Experiences, Providences, Protections, Directions, Blessings, Joys, and Encou∣ragements, which he hath had in health and in sickness; and among some good friends, and notwithstanding some ill Enemies, and so both in Trou∣bles and Prosperity; and if I should so declare, that all men might fully know the same, though if evil-ey'd hinder-good men, would very much vex thereat, yet would the good or best men, all presently wel-know, or be ready to say-out that he (blessed man) though much unworthy, had, and hath yet very much reason (with the Psalmist, and other well-resolved men) to particu∣larly declare the much goodnesse of our GOD to his praise, &c. Verse 9
SECT. III. SEcondly, more publiquely also, will a much well resolved man be willing (when occasion) to speak, or any way declare abroad Gods goodnesse and praises, yea thogh if any evil ey'd ill-minded men would therefore shew horns with Combs against him, (vers. 9. &c.) And so like this well resolv∣ed Psalmist professes also in Psal. 40.3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, and in severall other of his praisfull Psalmes. And likewise many other much well-resolved Saints in all Ages have been so willing to publiquely well imploy their Talents, either by acting, speaking, studying, writing, or the like, when occasion, though often-times some ill minded men have therefore much detracted from, and opposed the. And so likewise in these and times to come, will many such well-resolved men be cheerefully willing to do any good (when conve∣niently they may) and to let their light shine to their Heavenly Fathers glory, though Owle-sighted, hate-light men, or evil-ey'd hinder-light men, or such whose hornes or Combs hang in their light, would therefore much envy maligne, gainsay, or ill oppose them, Math. 5.15, 16. and 25.17, 18.22, 23▪ Mark. 4.21. Psal. 75.1, 4, 5, 9, 10. But here a few words of some application. Good men I hope will think right well of my good endeavours and resolutions in this publique im∣pressing way; I hopeing to do some good thereby how little soever, and having more then ordinary engagements and occasions thereunto; and the rather while I do not censure or blame these, who though much able do yet think it more discretion to forbeare in this Impressing way; while yet we may well blame, check or brush some ill-detracture, sneaking, evil-ev'd, base-spirited, hinderers and opposers of goodnesse. But of this I may (if occasi∣on) write some things elsewhere; and how detracters and persecuters are the worst of men, and most Father-Satan-like, and of their base and rediculous humours; and (among other things) how they deserve to be crowned (in∣stead of Lawrell) with a Coronet of two bigg Eares on a Knaves cap with a Coxcomb and bell. And now to come to what I cheefely intend in this Section. I being wil∣ling, (for want of Tallants) to bring a few Mites into the publique Treasury. I desire upon occasion to give some very short account of some of my intend∣ed good endeavours, and resolutions tending to a declareing of Gods goodnesse to his praise, and his peoples happiness (verse 9.) And first to name one book in∣tituled, A Divine Mirrour, or, The happy Man, &c. Wherein a regenerate gracious man may behold much of his divine & heaveny happiness on Earth. Which book is well begn printed, and might have been published a good time before now, if first some intended additions, and since some occasioned
diversions had not hindered the same: By which it may be well known to our Gods praise, that a much gracious man can or may often much rejoyce in many severall respects; yea often times though if ill-minded men would comely shew their hornes against him. And so how he can rejoyce much more then the ungracious men, even in externall and morall felicities, though especially indivine and heavenny happinesse. And well is it, if therein, as likewise in some other intended Treatises, I hope to see farr better my former litte and weak (though gracious and vertuous) endeavours, and so to declare such divine and heavenny happinesse (however yet weakly) as to gve some occasion to hope as well as wish, of some conversation amongst Angells; and of learning some divinity in Heaven, and of God himself, Phil. 3.20. Heb. 12.22. Joh. 6.45. Psal. 71.17. And to give onely here this little short account of the intents of the be∣fore mentioned book. Wherein by way of Character of an happy man, is or may be shewed (as in a Divine Mirrour to such) severall things of the follow∣ing heads. Of Gods love to him in Jesus Christ. Of his blessed Union in Christ. Of the divine Spirit in him; and much blessings and felicityes of all these. Also of his divine graces; his divine happy heavenny faith; And of his such hope; And so of his divine love. Likewise of his Evangellicall humilliation, Repentance, and filiall feare, occasioning much exaltation, joy, and love in God. Also of other his divine graces; and of his morall vir∣tues ingraced and so raised to more happinesse. Of his divine gracious and of∣ten joyous, prayers, praiseings, and other good Christian exercises, and good endeavours and resolutions. Of his Orthodox Religion and felicities thereof. Of his blessed peace as farr as he may with all men; and much love to, and Communion with the Saints. Also of his divine gracious courage, and of his contentment, and often divine joyes in Troubles. And how the same and oppositions do and may often turne to his good. And of his good use and heaven-minded enjoyment of externall happinesse and prosperity. Of his much happinesse in God. And so in and with him of his divine and hea∣venny life, welfare, Wisdome, Power, Amiablenesse, Frends, Riches, Ho∣nors, pleasures, and how his God gives, is, and will be such happinesse to him. Also of his divine joyes; and how the same are alwayes habituall, and often actuall, free, ready, quick instant, lively, much Angelliseing his soul, and thereby adding to all his other felicities. And how somtimes may be unex∣pressable, and how, superterrene, super-humane, divine and heavenny. Of his entertayning, enjoying, and encreasing such divine and heavenly in∣fusions. And of his soul, often eying and having conversation in Heaven, and enjoying in some degrees the felicities thereof already. And of his di∣vine Communion and fruition of God. And so how his soul may be more sublimed to an heavenny temper, often entertayning and enjoying partakings of the divine self and Heaven within him. Also how such divine and hea∣venny graces, joyes, and felicityes are in some respects communicative, to such as are capable thereof, And how if all men would seriously endeavour to be such as he, we might behold a more Angellicall Heavenny age on earth, to the encrease of the everlasting happinesse in Heaven, to divine glory.
And I have declared also how I intended to write some things with divine blessing concerning publique good and happinesse (and right well is it to wish or endeavour what (with conveniency) we may thereof, Psal. 122.6, 7, 8, 9.) And in the former impression here of some yeares agoe, I did give some account of an intended book concerning much hopefull good and happinesse in these Nations, and that intermixt among and by way of severall Reasons for submission to Higher Powers. But having since above a yeare and half agoe Impressed somthing thereof called A Word in Season, or A few words of 34. heads of Reasons for submission to Higher Powers; And of much hopefull good and happinesse to these Nations. I forbeare to Reprint the same in this Im∣pression, and rather referr the Reader thereunto, intending to add the same or another Impression thereof hereunto, next after this first part. And though I wish some ill-minded-men would not be so evil ey'd against the same and other good Resolutions, as to occasion much wrongs, deceits, and hinde∣rances, and among other to occasion that in long time I could not or cannot sell, have, or dispose any thing of a messuage, and Lands, made over to me by my late brother, for some money to him, and much engaged for him, so as neither I, nor the Creditors could yet be paid thereof, nor his Chil∣dren have the Remainder as intended and offered; and also occasion such falsenesse in trust, that I could not, or cannot sell, have, or dispose any of a∣bout fourscore and ten pounds a yeare elsewhere, nor yet any (unlesse so lit∣little as lesse then charges in looking for it) of whom I trusted above two thousand pounds worth of the same Lands, at St. Peters, and Tilmston; and also goods, or of some hundred pounds of my Rent received by whom trusted, or that any would often say or threaten I should get none thereof, unlesse I would comply not to Print Books, or it seemes be engaged not to Print such things as some are evil ey'd against, though good Resolutions. And I wish I may have no occasion to Impresse a Tragicomicall Narrative of some wrongs, hinderances, Ill-triks, and persecutions, and how yet, old Satan is not like to get much by setting on to the same, unlesse some exalta∣tion of  Comb rather then hornes; though for other enemyes I wish ra∣ther their love and peace with some Rightment. But though if some discon∣centented, unpeaceable, sedicious or ill-minded men (of severall Cleaks) would be so evil-ey'd as to shew their hornes (though much longer Combs thereby) against such good endeavours and resolutions, yet well-minded, peaceable, and gracious men will (I hope) much rejoyce and praise our God for such much hopefull good and happinesse, as in the following Papers in∣tended to be added hereunto, may in some little part appeare, though espe∣cially more plainly, when such further good Resolutions thereof are finished and published. Againe, In the former Impression hereof I did also mention some things to divine praise, of another intended book to be called, A Divine Kingdom in Men, or the Heavenly age on Earth Of which I had thought likewise to have given some account in another Sect on of this Impression hereof. But having since also Imprinted somthing thereof, entituled, Exalted happi∣nesse, or, A few words concerning a Divine Kingdom, and the encrease thereof
to much happy heavenny times on earth, and to some degrees of Heaven within us; Intending likewise to add the same (with the other) hereunto. I referr the Reader (if he please) thereunto; hopeing that (though if some would be so evil or Owle-ey'd, ill, or narrow-minded, addle or thick-headed, as to de∣tract from, little mind, or shew Combs against the same, yet gracious heaven-minded men will much rejoyce at such much exalted happinesse, and much cheerefully render or sing prayses for the same to him who is so good a God to his Jacoblike (his gracious) people, verse 9. And I may also, if occasion, in a second part hereof, proceed to the next ge∣nerall observation mentioned in the first Section, of checking the ilbused∣nesse of wicked mens hornes, though by shewing and brushing their Combs and long eares and otherwise. And therein (among others) some things, if occasion, of a Tragicomicall Narrative, and round Brush, or Catechise. And some things (further then in the former Impression) of an intended Tragi∣comicall book wherein may be shewed how that old Satan hath figuratively a Comb as well as Hornes, and his Servants both Combs and long Eares. And how they may be well checked, derided, brushed, ordered, &c. And divine gracious and vertuous men rejoyce and enjoy a much happy age. I may also proceed, if God please, to his praise, to a third and fourth part, concerning the third and fourth generall observations before mentioned of being at the best side (contrary to the worst Comb-men) and much partaking of the exaltive happinesse of Gods people; according to the end of Psal. 75. vers. 10. (Of which some things may be likewise perceived in part, by the two following little discourses, (especially that of exalted happiness, &c: in∣tended to be added hereunto.) And so likewise of some more particular ob∣servations; and among other, of gracious mens exaltive dignities and feli∣cities in Jesus Christ, in our God, and Heaven-Kingdome. And of much knowing and enjoying such divine and Heavenny happinesse, and thereby also more Heaven-minded enjoyment of temporall felicities. And how all things (both troubles and prosperity) may work to their good, either on earth, or especially in Heaven. And of their much exalted happinesse (in seve∣ralls) therein. And so how at last (when the obstinate unconverted wicked men shall be all horn-cutied, and Comb-shewn elsewhere) they that are Gods Children shall (to his glory) be all exalted for ever and Triumph in Heaven. FINIS.
