57 60827547 182306
and, this present most  arkable Accidents and chiefe this Yre  Nation: Being Collected Gentleman and holler, who is the pme as it is not unknovne to many thousands. and Sinne doth still abound, can at all be found: faire England, call for Grace, ee in a minutes space. warres againe: Or, The Maying time, ise, le, s, riends, ; will spill, ; es plaies ayes, The IT is a noyse of terror, to heare the Guns like thunder, and a like unjust, to maintaine lust, and Pride by lawlesse plunder, This trade hath long been used, to many a mans undoing, from this when Peace, doth us release, our gratitude then shooing. Needs we must drink this good heal
The second part, To the same Tune. Junes Predictions. THey from the Dane doe looke for ayd, Thinking to make England affrayd; Kings, Bishops, & Deans Lands are sold, Yet still we want Silver and Gold; For some there are that coyne kéeps back, Which makes the Souldier for to lack, For good, let none with ill requite, Some shew their téeth, 'tis fear'd they'le bite. Julies Predictions. Ses-fights in many parts will be, From which no Nation scarce is frée; New treacheries they doe abound, Which amongst many will be found, And Jockey will be troublesome, But we againe shall whip him home, Warre, with Sedition, and blood-shed, In many parts abroad is spread. Augusts Predictions. The entrance of an Enemie, Amongst us now abroad doth ite, Of Government some makes a toy; And would our Nation quite destroy: Some in command doe things not right, Which will be quickly brought to light, Let Scot or Devill their wits try, Yet we shall have the Victory. Septembers Predictions. Now the Foundation it is laid Of Englands fréedome, as 'tis said; Ireland and Scotland cry alack, For one or both will goe to wrake: Our Merchants ships may have some losse But they will their procéedings crosse; The Citie will be out of square, About an unthought of Lord Mayor. Octobers Predictions. For want of Money some doe cry, And I believe they both not lye; About Religion, our Divines In Vnitie and Love now joynes, The Irish Nobles and Gentry Their Bread begs in a strange Country, A just reward doth light on them, For murthering our deare Country-men. Novembers Predictions. Now there's mutation in the Law, Or else some Iudges have a flaw, And there are some with anger swell, But we doe hope all will be well: And such as ruined the Poore, They shall be lop't and grow no more; Great stormes will be at Sea and Land what God doth please, who can withstand, Decembers Predictions. Complaints 'gainst Publick Officers, The People now their Bills preferrs, Which store of Treasure up did lay, Against a wet and stormy day: And such as did descention bréed, Due Iustice 'gainst them shall procéed, And thus I doe conclude the Year, Send peace swéet Christ our saviour dear. FINIS. London, Printed by, John Hammond, dwelling in Holborne.
