146 99887564 182291
Darling: OR,  worth liking; men, abroad and at home, at bed and  mpany. mee so; Or, Loves Tide. If thy estate be took from thee And thou art brought to poverty By crosses or afflictions strong Murmure nor grieve at any wrong 'Tis God that hath a hand o're all To raise thee up, or let thee fall Perhaps the Lord would try to finde If thou hadst Jobs contented mind. If honours or preferments great Shall raise thee up on Iustice seat Or that by place or dignity A Iudge of Causes thou must be Think that Heavens Court of Iustice high O're all your actions casts an eye That mighty Iudge be sure can finde The secrets of your heart and mind. If that Gods Laws thou break Or by oppression wrong the poor Or if of men thou stands in fear To do what they will have thee heer Or let the mighty bear the sway And turn the poor mans cause away He that doth this be sure will finde A troubled discontented id. The second Part to the same Tune. IF otherwise thou séems to be A Iudge of right and equity, And will the poor mans cause defend As well as his that hath means to spend, And rig the wrogs of fatherless: Like the widw in distress A reward in Heaven thou then shalt finde And on earth a sweet contented minde. If thou art rich, thou poor mayest be; If thou art poor, wealth mayest thou see; If thou to honour rise or fall, Be sure thou be content with all; This world is subject still to change, Then let not thine affections range, Nothing on earth be sure thou'lt finde Compared to a contented minde. If God hath sent thee children store; And yet perhaps thou art but poor; Despair not, but contented be, He will provide for them and thee; To every mouth he bread will send, ill will stand the poor mans friend, Relief from him thou sure shalt finde, If thou hast a contented mind. What if this world doth frown on thee, For thy faith and fidelity, Or that thou béest in prison cast, The Lord may bring thée out at last; If not thou hadst better there to dye Than from the true Religion fly: Kéep but thy faith, and thou shalt finde In prison a sweet contented minde. If that thy conscience tells to thee Thy cause is just, be rul'd by me, Let not the threats of mighty men Take thy good conscience from thee then ey of thy body shall have power, ure thy soule they can't devour n a quiet conscience thou shalt finde ontinual feasts to feed thy minde. If that thou think a God there be, That rules the Heaven and Earth we sée, Then think he hath a hand o're all, To raise men up, or let them fall: All Rulers great, by Sea and Land Must stoop, if once he gives command He must protect you, else you'l finde A sad and discontented minde. Content is a Iewel, and a Feast, Content is a rich and welcome Guest, Content is of such high renown, 'Tis better than an earthly Crown, Content is such a precious store That he that hath it néeds no more: If you can gaine it, you shall finde No joyes like a contented minde. content ou néeds will gaine Ile tell you where it doth remain Inquire where Conscience kéeps And where plaine dealing doth re Then truth will lead you by the ha And bring you where Content doth Imbrace him then and you shall finde No wealth like a contented minde. London, Printed for Francis Grove on Snow-Hill. Entred according to Order. FINIS C. H.
