S6081A R184753 [ocm]80924213 192055
PROPOSALS For Compiling and Publishing a Book to be Intituled, Pietas Anglicana: Or, An Historical Account of all the Works of Piety, Charity, and other Acts of Beneficence, done in England since the Reformation, with respect to Religion, Learning, and Provision for all sorts of Poor; Collected from Histories, Re∣cords, Wills, Monuments, and other Authentic Evidence. WHereas the Enemies of our Reformation have invidiously suggested the want of Charity in Protestants, and have frequently made great Ostentation of the Pious and Charitable Deeds perform'd by Mem∣bers of the Roman Church, as if Good Works were a distinguishing Note of their Communion; and, Whereas the Publick Works of Piety and Charity done in England since that blessed Period, tho' great and numerous, lie scat∣ter'd and dispers'd in Private Memorials, and have not yet been collected together into one View, for the Knowledge and Satisfaction of the World; and, Whereas the representing them in due Method and Order will very much conduce to the Glory of Almighty God, the Propagation of Christianity, the Honour of this Church and Nation, the Vindication of the Protestant Re∣ligion, the doing Justice to the Memories of past Benefactors, and raising up more shining Examples in future Generations: To answer these and some other laudable Designs, This Work is undertaken, (on a just prospect of En∣curagement and Assistance from Persons of Character in Church and State) and some progress already made in it by the Reverend Mr. Philip Stubs, Rector of St. Alphage, London; who hereby humbly desires all others, of what Quality soever, who are Able and Willing to promote so useful a De∣sign, to communicate to him all proper Informations that may fall under the Heads hereafter specify'd, I. Piety. I. Churches and Chappels, and therein, 1 The Fabrick, under which is to be consider'd, 1 Building, 2 Maintenance of Repairs, 3 Ornaments. 2 The Divine Service perform'd there, as 1 Prayers, 2 Monthly Sacraments, 3 Stated Lectures, 4 Catechetic Courses, 5 Occasional Sermons. 3 Their Endowments, such are 1 Donations of Glebe, 2 Erection and improvement of Manse, 3 Restoration of Tythe, 4 Stipends of Augmentation. II. Clergy, as 1 Their Persons, 2 Their Families. III. Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, with what has been done, in 1 Plantations, by 1 Sending Missionaries, 2 Building Churches and Endowing them, 3 Erecting Schools and Li∣braries. 2 Factories. IV. Other Ways and Means taken for the propagation of Chri∣stian Knowledge and Pra∣ctice at Home, &c. II. Learning. With a particular regard to I. Charity Schools for Children. II. Grammar Schools for Youth. III. Ʋniversities for Men; in these 1 Publick Libraries, 2 Professorships, 3 Lectures, 4 Schools and Theatre, 5 Colleges and Halls, in them 1 Their Foundational Endow∣ments, 2 Additional Benefactions; IV. Colleges; In other parts of England. V. Libraries; In other parts of England. VI. Publick Lectures; In other parts of England. VII. Honorary Stipends; In other parts of England. III. Charity. I. Hospitals 1 For Children, 2 Impotent Aged persons, 3 Widows, 4 Lunaticks, 5 Sick and Wounded, 6 Seamen, 7 Soldiers. II. Work-Houses 1 For poor Children at large, 2 Parochial Children, 3 Vagrants and Lewd people. III. Gifts and Legacies, &c. to Ci∣ties, Corporations, Towns and Parishes, for 1 Cloathing poor people, 2 Apprenticing Children, 3 Disposing young Maidens in Marriage, 4 Setting up young Tradesmen, 5 Support of decay'd House-Keepers, Widows, or Orphans, 6 Relief or Redemption of Pri∣soners and Captives, 7 Aid of poor Parishioners from payments of Subsidies, setting out Soldiers, and other Taxes, 8 Entertainment of Pilgrims and Strangers, 9 Repair of Bridges, &c. and setting up Mercuries in High∣ways, &c. To which will be added, under each general Head, some Proposals relating to Charities, and Acts of Bene∣ficence yet wanting among us, such are, Retirements for superanuuate or crazed Clergymen; Lending Libra∣ries in Market-Towns; Encouragements for New Converts from Error or Debauchery; provision for Incura∣bles, penitent Strumpets, bashful Poor, &c. by Combinations or Societies, Banks of Loan, Dispensaries, with other Ways and Means.
