8892 1851.b.3[11] S123873 99892697 188362
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT ¶ The effect of certaine branches of the Statute made in Anno 33. Hen∣rici viij. touching the maintenance of Artillery, and the punishment of such as vse vnlawfull games, very necessary to be put in execution. FIrst, that all Fathers, Gouernours, and rulers of such as be tender of age, doe teach and bring them vp in the knowledge of Shooting, and that euery man hauing a man childe, or men children in his house, shall prouide, ordaine, and haue in his house for euery man child, being of the age of seuen yeeres and a∣boue, till he shall come to the age of seuenteene yeeres, a Bow and two shafts, to induce and learne them, and bring them vp in Shooting, and shall deliuer all the same Bow and Arrowes to the same yong men to vse and occupy. And if the same yong men be seruants, that then their master shall abate the mony that they shall pay for the same Bowes and Arrowes of their wages. And after all such yong men shall come to the age of seuenteene yeeres, euery of them shall prouide & haue a Bow and foure Arrowes continually for himselfe, at his proper cost and charges, or else of the gift or prouision of his friends, and vse and occupie the same in Shooting, as is before rehearsed. And if the master suffer any of his seruants taking wages, being in his houshold, and vnder the age of seuenteene yeeres, to lacke a Bow and two Arrowes, contrary to the forme of this Estatute, by the space of one moneth together, then the master or fa∣ther in whom such negligence shall be, shall for euery such default forfeit vi.s.viii.d. And that euery seruant, passing the age of seuenteene yeeres, and vnder the age of threescore yeeres, and taking wages, which can, or is able to Shoot, and shall lacke a Bow and foure Arrowes by the space of one moneth together, shall for euery such default forfeit and lose vi.s. viii.d. ITem, that no person by himselfe, Factor, Deputy, seruant, or other person, shall for his or their gaine, lucre, or li∣uing, keepe, haue, hold, occupy, exercise, or maintaine any common house, Alley, or place of Bowling, Coiting, Cloise, Coiles, halfe bowle, Tennis, Dicing, Table, or Carding, or any other manner of Game, prohibited by any Statute heretofore made or any vnlawfull new game now inuented or made, or hereafter to be inuented, found, had, or made, vpon paine to forfeit and pay for euery day, keeping, hauing, maintaining, or suffering any such game to be had, kept, executed, played, or maintained within any such House, Garden, Alley, or other place, contrary to the forme and effect of this Estatute, xl.s. and the players so taken, to pay for euery time vi.s.viii.d. ITem, That the Iustices of Peace, and euery Maior Sheriffe, Bailiffe, Constable, or other head Officer, haue au∣thority to enter into all places, aswell within Franchises or elsewhere, and the persons offending in any of the pre∣misses, to take and put in prison, vntill such time they put in Sureties no more to suffer, occupy, or commit the said offences. ITem, That all Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and other head. Officers within euery City, Borough, and Towne within this Realme, where any such Officers shall fortune to bee, aswell within the Franchises as without, shall make due search weekely, or at the furthest at all times heereafter once euery Moneth in all places, where any such Houses, Alleys, Play or Players shall be suspected to be had, kept, and maintained. And if the sayd Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and other head Officers, within their Cities, Boroughs, and Townes, aswell within Franchises as without, doe not make due search at the furthest once euery Moneth, if the case so re∣quire, according to the tenor of this Act, and doe not execute the same in all things, according to the purport and force of the same: that then euery such Maior, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, or other head Officer, to pay and forfeit for euery Moneth not making such search, nor executing the same, xl.s. ITem, That no Artificer, or handicrafts man of any occupation, Husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer, seruant of Husbandry, Iourney man, or seruant, or Artificer, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or any Seruing man, may vse any vnlawfull Game. ITem, That all that play at Bowles, or any other vnlawfull Game in the fields, to lose for euery such time vi.s. viii.d. and to be committed to prison, vnto such time they put in Sureties no more to vse the same. ITem, This Statute to bee proclaimed foure times euery yeere, and the like to be done in all Assises and Sessions, and to continue for euer. ITem, it is not the intent of the Statute, that they shall onely buy Bow and Arrowes, but the Constables, or other head officers to call them, and see they doe vse shooting monethly, if the cause so require, or else hee shall forfeit euery moueth xl.s. ITem for euery three moneths that the Buttes are out of repayre, they doe forfeit to the King, and him that shall sue for it, xx s. MEmorandum, That there is a Prouiso in this Statute, for all men of worship, which may dispend one hundred pounds yeerely and vpwards, may vse these games with discretion at their pleasures. The Messengers Fee for declaring these Branches, twelue pence. God saue the King. ¶ Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most Excellent MAIESTIE. M.DC.XXVIII.
