20621.5 S106401 99842118 176731
A SERMON VPON PART OF THE EIGH∣TEENTH PSALM: Preached to the publik assem∣bly of Scholers in the Vniuer∣sitie of Oxford the last day of August, 1586. by IOHN RAINOLDS: Vpon occasion of their meeting to giue thanks to God for the late detection and apprehension of Traitours, who wickedlie conspired against the Queenes Maiestie and the state of the Realme. PSALME 20.6. Nowe know J that the Lord doth saue his annointed, doth heare him out of his holie heauens, by excel∣lent strength, the safegard of his right hand. AT OXFORD. Printed by IOSEPH BARNES Printer to the Vniuersitie, 1586.
IOHN RAINOLDES, to the reader: grace & peace in Christ. THe reasons that moued me (good christian rea∣der) to preach this short Sermon vppon shorter warning than gladlie I woulde, haue preuailed with me to set it downe in writing also at more leasure, & to publish it. For both the godly subiectes may bee stirred vp thereby to greater thankfulnes for the manifolde blessinges that God by her Maiesties means, and in her safetie, hath bestowed vpon vs: and the disconten∣ted may be put in mind to content thē∣selues with Esai. 8.6. the waters of Shiloah, albeit running softly, least the great and mightie waters of the Riuer goe ouer all their bankes, breake into Iuda, and ouerflowe it. The for∣mer whereof I knowe that I cannot be deceiued in: because rain and snow doe not fal in vaine vpon fruitefull ground. In the latter, I hope, I shall not altoge∣ther. Vnlesse with Religion both witte & reason haue forsaken them: that they care as little for honesty, as for piety; for
profit, as for honesty. Eor what can they looke for at the handes of foreiners, though knit in neuer so strait confede∣racie with them, & ioyned in profession of the same faith, or perfidiousnes ra∣ther, of the falsly named Catholike religi∣on, more then the Iewes had of the Assy∣rians? by whom for al their 2. King. 16 10. altar erected to the pattern of the Assyrian at Damas∣cus, 2. Chr. 28.20. 2. King. 18.14. they were often grieuously vexed and pilled. Platin. de vitis Pont. in Iohanne 24. When the citizens of Papia in Italie were at dissension by reason of the faction betweene the Guelphes and the Gibellines: the Gibellines procured a fauorer of theirs, called Facinus Canis, to come and assist them with a power of men, vpon agreement & couenant that he should haue the goods of the guelphes for his pay, But he, being come once in∣to the citie with his men of warre, spa∣red neither of them: his souldiors would be serued. Whereof when the Gibellines did complain vnto him, saieng that their goods too were spoiled against agreement: he answered, that themselues were Gibellines, and should be safe: but their goods mere Guel∣phes, and must pay for it. The Gibellines of Papia could not foresee this: our Catho∣likes by them may. Let them leaue their
brainsicke desires and diuelish purposes of bringing a Facinus Canis into their countrie: least by experience they feele (which God forbid) that though them∣selues be Catholikes, their goods may bee Heretikes; perhaps some Heretick-blood in their bodies also, by cōtagion of ours. The lord take away this stony hart from them, and geue them an hart of flesh, a new spirit: that we may al iointly praise him for the deliuerance of our gratious Queene, and pray for the continuance of her blessed gouernment, to the ho∣nour of his name, the furtherance of his gospel, the welfare of his Church, the peace and prosperitie of our English Iuda, the griefe and disappointment of Popish Assyrians, and the confusion of Antichrist. At Corpus Christi College in Oxford, Octob. 24. 1586.
IT IS WRITEN IN THE BOOKE OF Psalmes, the eighteenth Psalme, the fortise∣uenth verse, & the rest that follow. 47 The Lord liueth, and my bles∣sed strength: therefore let the God of my saluation be exalted. 48 The mighty God, that geueth me reuengementes, and bringeth peo∣ple vnder me. 49 That deliuereth mee from mine enemies: yea, thou hast exalted mee aboue them that rose vp against me, thou hast deliuered mee from the cruel man. 50 Therefore will I confesse thee, ô Lord, among the Gentiles, and I will sing vnto thy name: 51 He geueth great deliuerances to his king, and sheweth mercie to his anointed; to Dauid, and to his seede for euer.
IT hath beene a godly custome of the faithfull, al∣though not obser∣ued so customa∣bly alwaies as by Phil. 4.6. Col. 3.17. 1. Thes. 5.18. the Rules of faieth it ought, that when they receiued any special bene∣fit, either in atteining to things commodi∣ous for them, or in auoiding of discōmodi∣ties: they lifted vp their voices to the au∣tor of it, the Father of mercies, the god of al cōfort, and did honour him with giuing special thankes for it. Melchisedek, king of Salem, a man of power & credit in the land of Canaan, had not so great cause to care for the state of Abram and Lot, two strangers in the land. Yet when Abram had rescued Lot being taken, & had spoi∣led the spoilers: Melchisedek brake forth into his praise who gaue the victory, Gen. 14.20. Blessed be the high God, which hath deliuered thine enemies into thy hand. The state of the Israëlites touched Moses neerer: how much the lesse is it to be mar∣ueiled at if hee thought it his duty to Exod. 15.1. ma∣gnify the Lord for guiding them out of E∣gypt through the red Sea, and drowning
Pharao with his host. Though that the children of Israel themselues, an vnchank∣ful, murmuring, and stifnecked nation, should ioyne therein with Moses, all, both men and women: it is a president woor∣thy to be noted to the shame of Christians, if in greater measure of the grace of God wee shewe lesse gratitude for his graces. The feasting and ioy that the Est. 9.17. Iewes kept for their owne deliueraunce out of the snares of Haman, and for his destruction with the partakers of his conspiracie, might seeme to bee onely a profane reioy∣cing as worldly minded men commonly do vse at their good successes. But, that it was holy & seasoned with a sacrifyce, such a sacrifice as lawfully they might offer there where then they were dispersed, the circumstance of sending partes vnto the poor, wt Deuer. 16.14. precepts & Neh. 8.11. examples of daies in like sort kept holy to the Lord doth argue. We are assembled at this present, fathers and brethren beloued in the Lord, to giue him most humble and most harty thankes for his great & singular goodnes shewed vnto vs in discouering the traiterous in∣tent of graceles wretches, who vilanously conspired to take away the life of our gra∣cious Queene (whom God long pre∣serue,)
and to kindle flames of vprores through the realme, to the vtter wasting of her faithfull subiectes. O that wee had the harts to praise him for it with the like religious affection of spirite in zeale and sincerity, as Melchisedek did for Lot re∣couered by Abram, as Moses & the Israë∣lites for the Egyptian yoke broken, as the Iewes for their safety and the destruction of their enemies. Sure we haue greater causes so to doe, then any of them had. For Lot was but one, and that a meane man: nor much indangered more then of losse of libertie. Here a most excellent Princesse was in hazard, not of libertie, but of life: with God knoweth how many righteous Lots besides. And the bodily coiles which the Israëlites endured in Egypt vnder the taske-masters that Pharao placed ouer them, were nothing in comparison of the spiritual bondage of the Antichristian ty∣rantes, to whom, might these Egyptian impes haue had their willes, we should (it is likely) haue beene most lamentably en∣thralled. Neither hath the Lord so merci∣fully deliuered vs out of the Lyons mouth at this time onely, but at sundry other heretofore often: that the Iewes could not bee so much beholding to him for that of
Hamā, who did not liue to put them more then once in danger. Wherefore that wee may accept the more thankfully and du∣tifully esteeme of his inestimable good∣nesse, in sauing our gratious Queene and vs her subiectes from so great, so ma∣ny so imminent mischiefs: I haue thought good to take for the ground of mine aduer∣tisement and exhortation these woordes, which you haue heard, written by the godly Prince and Prophet Dauid in the eighteenth Psalme, a song of thankes ge∣uing, which he made whē the Lord had deliuered him out of the hand of all his enimies and out of the hand of Saul. For so is it noted in the title thereof, and ma∣nifested farder by the course of the sto∣rie in the second of Samuel, 2. Sam. 22.1. where the same is wholly registred againe wel-nigh word for word, as a most worthy and me∣morable monument to bee thought vpon eft soones of all posterity, that on like fa∣uour receiued of the lord they might shew themselues alike grateful to him. In these wordes therefore comprehending brieflie the purport and drift of the whole Psalme by way of conclusion, two thinges are re∣commended to our considerations: one is the benefit of God in deliuering Dauid
from his enemies; the other, the thankful∣nes of Dauid vnto God for that deliue∣rance. The benefit of God in deliuering Dauid is signified by that he saith, The Lord liueth. For he meaueth not that the Lord liueth in respect of his beeing, his euerlasting essence, in which sense not∣withstanding Act. 14.15. Reu. 10.6. & 15.7. hee is said to liue, and to liue 1. Tim. 6.1. only: but in respect of his woorkes, his effects to Dauid ward, in whose pre∣seruation he sheweth that hee liueth, and saueth his, and ruleth all thinges by his e∣ternal prouidence. Which meaning Da∣uid openeth in that he adioyneth, and my blessed strēgth: calling god his strength, his fortresse, his rock, his blessed strength and foretresse, because his life, his safetie, his wel-fare is mainteined by the might and mercy of the liuing God. As in Psal. 18.2. the beginning he testified also: The Lord is my rocke, and my fortresse, and my de∣liuerer, my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my shield, & the horne of my saluation, my refuge. And this is the beni∣fite of God vnto Dauid. The thankfulnes of Dauid vnto God foloweth: Therefore let the God of my saluation be exalted. Wherein, by the way, the cause of his thankfulnes, to weet, the benefit, is repea∣ted.
For though in our toung the name of saluation is by common vse referred to the blisseful state of life eternal in the King∣dome of heauen, whereto the scripture∣phrase doth likewise oft refer it: yet is it applied in . Heb.  the Prophets language heere to bodily safety and temporal preseruati∣on of this present life. As saluations al∣so are vers. 51. afterwarde mentioned, or as our English translation interpreteth it) de∣liucrances: and vers. 3. before, he set downe the general proposition with the same worde, I cal vpon the lord who is worthy to be praised, & I am safe from mine enimies. vnto this author then of his safety he ren∣dreth praise and honour: and that in such sort as may stir vp others thereunto with∣al, that God by the thanks-giuing of more may be more glorified, let him be exalted. To the perfourmance of the which dutie that he may geue a sharper edge and hot∣ter zeale to himselfe and others: he ampli∣fieth and openeth more particularly both the cause of the duty, and the duty it selfe, in the verses following. Touching the cause of the duty, he saith, The mightie God, that giueth mee reuengementes, and bringeth people vnder me, that de∣liuereth mee from mine enemies: yea,
thou hast exalted mee aboue them that rose vp against mee, thou hast deliuered me from the cruel man. A summary but pithy rehearsal of the specialties of the fauour doone him by God against 1. Sam. 18. & 19. & 23. & 24. & 26. Saul, against 2. Sam 2. & 3 & 4. Sauls sonne Ishbosheth, against the 2. Sam. 5. & 8. Philistines, the 2. Sam. 8. Moabites, the 2. Sam. 8. & 10 Syrians, the 2. Sam 8. & 10. & 11. Ammonites, the 1. Sam. 30. & 2. Sam. 8. A∣malekites, and the 2. Sam. 8. & Psal. 60. Idumaeans, against 2. Sam. 15. & 17. & 18. Absalom, against 2. Sam. 20. Sheba, with their rebellious complices of Israël and Iuda too. Of whem a great many were puni∣shed in iustice: 2. Sam. 4.8. the Lord auenging him, of some, by other mens handes; 2. Sam. 10.18. & 18.31. of some by his owne, as being armed thereunto with Rom. 13.4. the sworde of vengeance. The rest though their liues wer spared in mer∣cy yet were they brought in awe and sub∣iection vnder him. So himselfe, his ene∣mies either not remaining or not remai∣ning enemies, at the least not daring to practise their enmitie was deliuered from them. Yea, (which he vttereth more em∣phatically by turning of his speech to god) God did exalt him & aduance him higher then any of his aduersaries that rose vp against him, & deliuered him from Saul, who of long time pursued him most fiersly and put him oft in present daunger of his
life, from the cruel, violent, Heb. the mā of violences. 2. Sam. 22.49. the most vi∣olent man. Touching his duty whereup∣on, he addeth, Therefore will I confesse thee, ô Lord, among the Gentiles; and I wil sing vnto thy name: he geueth great deliuerances to his king, and sheweth mercie to his anointed, to Dauid and to his seed for euer. To confesse the Lord, is to acknowledge him to be the autour & giuer of whatsoeuer good we haue: to sing vnto his name, is with ioyfull melodie of voice to acknowledge it. Both these thinges doth Dauid vow that hee wil do: and therein will testify, euen before the Gentiles, that the Lorde, who made him king, and anointed him, doth geue him great deliuerances, and sheweth him mercy, nor only him, but his too, his seed, his posteritie and progenie for euer. The very literal sense of the which words doth import an excellent thankfulnesse in Da∣uid, that would yeeld such tokēs therof a∣mong the Gentiles, Psal. 18.43. the heathens whō he had subdued: a more excellent goodnes and graciousnes in God, who raised him to roial state, and mightily preserued him in it, and ridde him out of many dangers, and shewed mercy still to him, yea to his ofspring also that should raigne after him.
But al this is base in respect of that which the holy ghost in a spiritual meaning doth hereby signify and botoken. For Dauid was anointed king of the Iewes, made conquerour of Gentiles, cast into perils, troubles, paines of death, and by speciall grace againe deliuered from them, to the intent he might be a figure (as wee terme it) an image and picture, an historical pic∣ture, and a liuing image, that should re∣semble and represent the person of an o∣ther Ezck. 34.23. & 37.24. Dauid, Ier. 23.5. & 33.15. his sonne our Sauiour Christ. Which mistery Act. 2.30. him self know∣ing as a Prophet, did write (by inspira∣tion from God) sundry thinges, whereof the full and perfit accomplishment appee∣reth in Christ and his kingdome, as, Mat. 27.35. Mar. 12.10. Ioh. 2 17. & 19.28. Act. 4.25. & 13.33. Rom 15.3. Heb. 2.12. & 10.5. the scriptures teach vs: though a thinne and slender performance of the same was be∣fore expressed and drawen out, as it were, by lineaments and shadowes of a type and figure in Dauid & his state. So the great deliuerāces and saluations temporal, ge∣uen and assured to Dauid, and to his seed for euer after a sort, that is for long conti∣nuance of many yeares succession, did pre∣figure greater spiritual deliuerances, and saluations simply and absolutely eternal, which should be likewise giuen to Christ
and to his Esai. 53.10. Ier. 33.22. seede, that is, to Ioh. 1.12. the faithfull, the children of God whom 2. Cor. 5.20. Christ doth beget in his Church 1. Pet 1.23. by the immortall seede of his woorde. To Gen. 3.15. Christ and to his Rom. 16.20. seede is giuen the treading downe of the serpent, Reu. 12.7. the ouerthrow and victo∣rie of Satan and his Angels. To 1. Co. 15. ver. 25. Christ and to vers. 55. his seede is death quelled, the graue vanquished, the power of hel daun∣ted, and all their enimies put to flight. To. Mat. 4.6. Christ and to Heb. 1.14. his seede is Psal. 91.12. a gard of Angels appointed for their safety, Heb. 9.12. & 10.19. an entrance into Heauen opened, and Psal. 16.11. Act. 2.28. Reu. 21, 4. the ioyes of life, of euerlasting solace, of end∣lesse rest, assured. Which most excellent mercies, deliuerances, saluations, as the Prophets commonly in the ende of their prophecies doo commend to men by figu∣ratiue speeches of Israël, of Iuda, of Sion, of Ierusalem, & blessinges incident there∣too: so in this conclusion of his song of thankes doth Dauid ascend to them by the other, to shew himselfe grateful vnto God for them. A proofe whereof we haue in the last woordes that he concludeth with. For therin he seemeth to respect the promise, that Sam. 7.12. the Lorde woulde set vp his seede after him, and stablish the throne of his kingdome for euer. Which the Angel
Gabriel, sent to the Virgine Marie, ex∣poundeth of Christ, telling her that Luk. 1.32. God shal giue vnto him the throne of his Fa∣ther Dauid, and hee shall raigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome shall be no end. And a farder proofe in the former clause touching his confessing of God among the Gentiles: cōsidering that S. Paul declareth the good∣nes of Christ in Rom. 15.9. receiuing the Gentiles to his glory to be meant thereby. As if the holy Prophet had said that he would vse a newe and vnaccustomed thankfulnesse to God for his passing singular and vnspeak∣able benefits: neither would confesse him among the Iewes onely, as then the faith∣ful did according to their order of praying in the Temple; but among the Gentiles also in time to come, when they being cal∣led to the church of Christ should be made acquainted with his Psalms and Hymns, and learne to praise the Lorde with him. So that I may saie the same of these words, that on like occasion our Sauiour did of other, Luk. 4.21. This day is the scripture fulfilled in your eares. Howbeit not only these words of this scripture are fulfilled this day: but the other too, that lay foorth the fauour of God vnto his children in sa∣uing
his anointed. For what more com∣moditie did the Iewes receiue by King Dauids meanes, then we by our soueraine Lady Queen Elisabeths? What enimies, what dāgers, what deaths did he escape: from the like whereof the Lorde hath not as often, as woonderfully, preserued her Maiestie? The arke of the couenaunt, wherein Exod. 25.16. the testimonie was laid, wher∣on the mercie-seate was placed, from which Numb. 7.89. the voice of God was hearde, at which 2. Sam. 6.2. his name was called vpon, where∣to 1. Chro. 13.3. they had not sought in the daies of Saul, 2. Sam. 6.12. King Dauid brought into his cittie: and caused 1. Chr. 15.16. the Leuites ioyfullie to play on instrumentes of musicke, and lift vp their voices at the bringing of it. Queene Elisabeth hath brought vs the body and trueth of that whereof his cere∣monies were but shadowes onlie, the free vse and Christian doctrine of the Gospell, the word of God, the holy Scriptures, the praiers and publike seruice of the highest, al in a language knowen to all: and hath mooued her Subiectes to receiue these means of their 1 Cor. 14.19. instruction and 2. Tim 3.15. saluatiō with Col. 3.16. Psalmes, and hymnes, and spiri∣tual songs, singing with a grace in their harts vnto the Lord. Dauid to those hea∣uenly
treasures added earthly, & enriched his kingdome 2. Sam. 8.10. & 12.30. with siluer and goulde. The puritie of coine restored by her Ma∣iestie for base and copper moonies where∣with she found the realme pestered, doth say no lesse for her: beside place of siluer and golde with other ornamentes in so great plenty, as if God would verifie ac∣cording to the letter that which he promi∣sed his Church in a mysterie, Esa. 60.17. For brasse wil I bring gold, and for yron wil I bring siluer. Much did it make for the safetie of Iury, that 2. Sam. 8. Dauid put garisons in Syria and Idumaea, countries that bordered vp∣on the North and South thereof. Much. But more for England, that Elisabeth (to passe ouer the fortifieng of borders) hath furnished it with all sort of armour, and munition, neuer more or better: and thereto with a roiall nauie of vessels, so stately, so strōg, so wel apointed for wars, that our lande is fensed wt walles, not on∣ly of wood Herodot. in Polymnia. as Gręcia was against Xer∣xes, but of brasse & yron too against forein enimies. The people of Israel confessed of them-selues that 2. Sam. 19 9. they were deliuered out of the hand of the Philistines, and o∣ther enemies by that King. The warres which our Queene hath had for our safe∣gard
in Scotland and France, euen Lod. Guicci∣ardin com∣ment. de reb. memorab in Europ. lib. 3. Buchana. rer. Scot. lib. 16. & 17. Com∣ment. de stat. rel & reip. in Gal. lib. 5. & 6. a∣liens haue seen and shewed to the worlde that they were atchiued with maruellous honour and aduantage to her selfe & her realm. As this (by Gods grace) which she hath presently The Queens declarat. tou∣ching aide geuen to the low countries. vppon the like ground in the low countries, shal be in due time also. Again, how sweet a peace haue we so long enioied vnder her at home, as vnder a King. 4.25. Sa∣lomon in that consideration rather then a Dauid? The fruites whereof, if nothing from abroade had sprong to our wealth and wel-fare (which hath notwithstan∣ding in no smal abundance) might coun∣teruaile the profites 2. Sam. 8.2. that did growe to Iury by Dauids warres and victories, Yea, our dearth and sickenes the chastise∣mentes and afflictions that nowe we doe tast, or did heretofore, (as Heb. 12.7. needes wee must some, and Psal. 119.71. expedient wee should) haue been but gentle threats to her Maie∣sties subiectes, in respect of his: 2. Sam. 21.1. the fa∣mine, that lasted three yeares together; the plauge that consumed 2. Sam. 24.15. seuenty thou∣sand men. And though by occasion of dif∣ficulties and wants, what of men, what of maintenance, her highnes hath not yet bin able to prouide that wise & faithful work∣men for the perfite edifieng of the house of
God with doctrine and discipline shoulde be set in euery Church through her domi∣nion; as neither was 1. Chr. 22.8. Dauid by reason of his warres to build vp the Temple: yet as hee prepared thinges necessarie for it, that it might be the better doon whē time should serue, so hath shee by fostering Col∣leges and Schooles, the nurseries of the ministerie. Her princely care wherof hath appeered specially of late vnto vs in a branch of our Oliue that was almost wi∣thered, the state of Queenes College. Which she hath refreshed, confirmed, ad∣uaunced, with benefits and immunities so bountifully and noblely: that wee and our posteritie haue as iust cause to thinke of Queene Elisabeth in the name therof, as of Queene Philippa. Our whole Oliue∣tree did generally feele it before in the fa∣mous and woorthy Act of Parlament 18. El. c. 6. for the maintenance of Colleges & the reliefe of Scholers in both the Vniuersi∣ties, & also Winchester & Eaton. An Act that I haue hard men of iudgemēt say & I am perswaded that they said truely, (God grant the care of Heades and industrie of Students do bring it to effect,) may proue as beneficial for the encrease of learning, as might the erecting at least of two Col∣leges.
The commodities then, which wee haue receiued by her blessed gouernement are as great & many, as those which the Iewes did receiue by Dauids. That we cā not chuse but acknowledge gods fauour to haue been as singularly extended vnto vs in preseruing her, as it was to thē in pre∣seruing him. For although her Maiestie hath not been assaulted by so many foreine enimes as Dauid: yet by more domestical. Wherein her deliuerances are to be estee∣med so much the more precious, by howe much it is easier to beware of open foes, then of secret; of vipers that are farder off, then in our bosomes; of 2. Sam. 2.22. Abners, though valiant, who professe hostilitie then of tre∣cherous 2. Sam. 3.27. & 20.9. Ioabs, who pretend amitie. First (in Queen Maries time) the house of Saul, I meane the broode of them who 1. Sam. 15.21. prefer will woorships before obedience to God, fearing, as 1 Sam. 20.31. Saul did, that their seedes suc∣cession should not be established as long as Dauid liued, desired & deuised to bring that to passe which D. Story. Sander. visib. Monar. lib. 7. one of them sithence made mone it was not done, the boughes were cut off, the root was not hewed vp. But the axe, which he wished to the plea∣sant roote, fel on the roote of bitternes his owne hearie scalpe: the deuises of the wic∣ked
were disappointed by the Lorde, and their desires frustrated. Afterward the v∣surper, the Ish-bosheth of Rome, indeed an That is to say, a man of shame and confusion. Ish-bosheth, when she was anointed and settled in her throne, sought to dispos∣sesse her by his accursed curse and Anti∣christian sentence declared and published in his Bul. Moorton sent from him, to stir vp wicked spirites to the executing of it. The Earles of Northumberland & West∣merland in armes, with thousands of re∣bels. When they were fled and scattered: their outrage renued by Dacres and his legion. The Bull it selfe proclaimed, as it were, by Felton, to gather mo conspira∣tours to it. Al in vaine stil. For the hand of the Lord was ouer his handmaid, & made his woord good, that Prou. 26.2. the vndeserued curse came not vpon her: it Ps. 109.17. came to them who loued it and they were clothed with it as with a garment. Yet behold an other rebellion intended by certaine Norfolk gentlemē, chiefly Iohn Throck∣morton. But crushed in the shel, before it was hatched. And looke what successe had the gentlemen of Norfolke, the same had the Duke. Whose purpose to de∣priue her Highnes of the crowne and set it on his own head by mariag of the Scot∣tish
Queene: howe hee was incouraged thereto by the Pope, Dodici mille scudi. how much mony of∣fered by him: in the mean time, & at a time appointed Diece mille fanti. how many thousand souldi∣ours, with as many thousand moe by the king of Spaine: Ad Harwich where they should haue landed, and thence (being ioyned with the Dukes forces) haue gone to surprise the Tower of London: on of their own sect a man of reputation, Histor. nou. da l'ann. 1570. sino all ann. 1572. lib. 3. Emilio Maria Mano∣lesso doth write in his Italian storie: la∣mēting the case, that so braue a com-plot had so vnhappy an ende. Nowe what should I say of the traitours in Ireland? of Stukeley the rakehell, Pontificius Prefectus, Marchio Hi∣bernae Gene∣brad. Chro∣nog. lib. 4. the Popes Irish Marques, sent thither to subdue it slain in Barbarie by the way; of Sāders the priest, the firebrand of sedition, dead there agree∣ably to his life; of the arcth-rebels, the Earle of Desinond, and his brother, ser∣ued both like 2. Sam. 20.22. Sheba; of the whole rable of their mates and souldiours, Italian, Spa∣nish, Irish, feeling by the vengeance of de∣serued miseries the follie and furie of their lewd attempts. What of the braine∣sicke youth, Summerfield? Whose inter∣prise in substance like vnto Achitophels, did purchase 2. Sam. 17.23. Achitophels euent and end vnto him. What of Parry, the proude mis∣creant?
who hauing opportunity to worke his diuelish vow, and being resolute to do it, The decla∣rat. of W. Parrys trea∣son. the Pope incensing him with allow∣ance of the fact and plenary pardon of his sinnes, the Cardinal of Como with com∣mendation and request, the Papists some with counsel, some with praier for him, some with remembrance at the altar, and Allens traiterous libell making it cleere in his conscience that it was lawfull and meritorious, euerie word therein a war∣rant to a minde prepared: there was but 1. Sam. 20.3. a step betweene her and death, had not God bewraied him by his Ionathan, and by the hand of iustice giuen him that meed which his vow did merie. An intēt as mis∣chteuous and more potent meanes had the next conspiracy, The disco∣uery of Fr. Throckmort. treasons, & of the Earle of Northum. which dealt in before by Francis Throckmorton, was after pro∣secuted by others. The Popes aide (as alwaies) ready, to gaine kingdomes; the Spanish Kinges assistance; the Scottish Queenes fauorers; the Duke of Guise with forces to inuade the realm; the plots of coastes and hauens for his fit arriuall; the names of recusants with hope of their furtherance; the heathens raging, and the people murmuring, kings banding them∣selues, and princes taking counsel against
the Lord & his anointed. Yet euen in that also, were their powers and policies ne∣uer so out-reaching, there shewed himself aboue them a mightier and wiser: Psa. 2.4. who sitteth in the heauens, & laugheth them to scorne, discouering and dispersing the smoaky puffes of their endeuours. Which of his accustomed goodnes and bounty he hath done in this too, the last, & I beseech God it be the last, that now he hath disclo∣sed. In the discomfiting whereof, and of the former, his out-stretched arme hath appeared the more glorious: because the vnderminers of her Maiesties state haue cloaked their attemptes with pretense of Religion, and saluation of soules, most suttle meanes & forcible to inueigle men: and, to steal away her subiectes heartes from hir, haue reconciled them to hir dead lie enimie as to their soueraine Pastor: & made them sure vnto him by badges and pledges of halowed graines, of medals, of beades, of Agnus-deis, of crusifixes, of pictures, with A Popish embleme fit for Atheists. See Prou. 23.26. Fili, da mihi cor tuum, & sufficit, Sonne, geue me thy heart, and it sufficeth, & other such spiritual sorceries. A practise more dāgerous thē any of Da∣uids aduersaries did vse, yea then 2 Sam. 15.1. Absa∣lom himself the cunningst of them al: who
had no High Priestes that would take vp∣on them to depose Dauid; nor meritorious∣nes to fee diuels incarnat with to murder him; nor The Popes Bul granted to D. Harding & others, an∣no Dom. 1567 autorities for Harding, & others, to assoile thē that would reuolt from him; nor The exec. of iustice in Eng. for treason. faculties for Persons and Campian, to instruct them to Ne Bulla Pij Quinti obli∣gei Catholi∣cos rebus sic stantibus: as they stood anno Dom. 1580. obey, or Tum de∣mum quando publica cius∣dem Bullae exequutio fie∣ri poterit. rebell, as thinges should fall out, nor Iesuites, and Seminarie-Priests, (like the Augustin. contr. epist. Parmen. l. 1. c. 9. &. l. 3. c. 6. Donatists) to spreade seditious doctrine, and beare the world in hande that Bristow Mo∣tiu. 15. Cōcer∣tat. eccl. cath. in Angl. ad∣uers. Calu & Purit. Eccle∣siae Anglicanę trophaea, Roma. when they were punished for it, they wer Martyrs. Wher∣fore all the woordes of the text, that I treat of, which doe lay before vs the most prouident care and fatherly loue of God in sauing and deliuering our most excellent Princesse out of the hād of her enimies, of Papists, of Atheists, of Malcōtents, base and noble; secret and open; externall and domestical; are fulfilled and verified in our eares this day. It remaineth that the rest which concerne our duty to God for this benefite, be likewise fulfilled and verified in our eares, or in our heartes rather, naie both in heartes and bodies also. The fore∣most degree and step whereunto is to ac∣knowledge that the Lorde, our blessed strength, our mightie God, is the autour of it: it is he that liueth, that saueth his a∣nointed,
that geueth her reuengements, that bringeth people vnder her, that de∣liuereth her from her enimies, from the cruel man, that exalteth her aboue them who rise vp against hir, that giueth great deliuerances, and sheweth mercy to her, yea to al his seruants, the children of God, the seed of Christ, for euer. And this haue our soueraine prouoked vs to doe by her owne example: The Queens letters to the L. Mayor of Lond. and his brethren. ascribing not onely the present detection and apprehension of traitors to the great and singular good∣nes of God, but also the infinite blessings laid vpon her, as many as euer Prince had, yea rather as euer creature had. The Lord hath endued her Maiesties per∣son with most rare prudence; her state with Counsailers very wise and faithfull; her Realme with many thousandes of du∣tiful louing subiectes, Nor is it to bee doubted but that sundry circumspect eies and loyal handes of these haue been occu∣pied in finding out and bringing to light the conspiracie. Yet because the Lorde is Iam. 1.17. the father of lights, & 1. Cor. 4.7. what hath any mā that he hath not receiued? neither can he effectuate ought with that he hath except the Lord blesse it, Psal. 127.1. except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build
it; except the Lorde keepe the citie, the keeper watcheth in vaine: therefore doth her Highens in the meanes themselues & aboue the meanes acknowledge the woor∣king of the principal agent, vnder whose protection her selfe resteth safe, and seeth vengeance powred on them that wish her euil. Which I would to God the dissoyall hartes, if there bee any more yet, of that broode of Cockatrices, did acknowledge also: and, as Psal. 4.4. the Prophet willeth, did weigh it with themselues, and think vp∣on their bedde of it. Then were it to bee hoped that in consideration thereof they would bee still: and after 1. Sam. 24.5. & 26.8. his example, whose aduise that is, detest the very breath of such as make mention of laying violent hande vpon the Lordes anointed. For though it were true, as The answ. to the execut. of iust. ca. 5. the traiterous li∣beller endeuoureth to perswade men, that the Popes sentence against her were as lawefull, as Samuels was against Saul; which yet is most false, and D. Bilson of Christian subiect. part. 3. proued so to be; but grant it were true: yet had they to remember that Dauid did refraine to lay hand on Saul after Samuels sentence; ne∣ther of humanitie onely, but of duty: 1 Sam. 26.9. for who can lay his hand on the Lordes a∣nointed (saith he) and be giltles? At least,
if they would not be still, as he was, for conscience sake, yet for Rom. 13.4. fear they might be: seing that Eccl. 10.20. a foule of the aire shall ca∣ry the voice, and a bird shall declare the matter, if they but speak euil of the king, yea in their thought, much more if they intend to doe him any euil. And sure, Psal. 7.12. if they turne not, if they whet their swords, bend their bows and make them ready, and getting themselues deadly weapons prepare their arrowes for persequutors: they haue traueiled with lewdnesse and conceiued mischiefe to bring forth a lie; into the pit, that they haue digged, they shal fal; their mischiefe shal returne vp∣on their owne heads, and on their owne pates shal their cruelty light. For God doth giue reuengements vnto his anoin∣ted, and sheweth mercie to his Queene, aduauncing her aboue them who rise vp against her. But whether they do vse this benefit of God to their good, or no: let vs, my deere brethren, let vs and our houses (as Ios. 24.15. Iosua said) serue the Lord. And that not by acknowledging onely Gods good∣nes in this & al his benefites, the foremost step to thankfulnes: but the next also, I meane, by confessing of him among the Gentiles, and singing to his name with
yeelding him al glorie for it. For the Hea∣thens themselues, in that smal knowledge of God which sinne left them, did acknow∣ledge him to be the worker and autour of the commodities that they had. In the Greeke Poets . the Gods are surnamed, by a common title, the giuers of good things. Plini. hist. natur. lib. 15. cap 30. The Captaines of the Romans hauing conquered their enemies, tooke part of the lawrel (which they did hear in signe thereof) and laid it in the lap of Iupi∣ter. The Caldean king subdued diuerse nations, tooke their holdes, spoiled their cities, seazed on their welth, Hab. 1.11. ascribing that his power & force to his God. But Rom. 1.21. they did not glorify God as they ought, neither were thankful. They robbed him of his honour & gaue it vnto 1 Cor. 8.5. many Gods, Dan. 5 4. their owne Idols, and Rom. 1.23. Images of mortal creatures. Yea part of the lawrel they kept to themselues: Hab. 1.16. sacrificing to their nets and burning incense to their yarns, because by them their portion was fat, and their meate plenteous. The time of this ignorance is ouerpast, brethren, and the daies are come whereof it was Esai. 11.9. pro∣phecied, that the earth should be full of the knowledge of the Lorde, as waters coouer the sea. How much the more ex∣cuseles
shal our fowle ingratitude and vn∣godlinesse be: if wee bee no thankfuller to him then the Heathens, then the Greeks, the Romans, the Caldeans were. Chiefly sith beside the temporall benefit of the pre∣seruation of our Prince and vs, wee haue receiued graces more excellent and preci∣ous to endure for euer: namely, the enioy∣ing of his Sonne Christ Iesus, 1. Cor. 1.30. our wise∣dome, our righteousnes, our sanctificati∣on, our redemption; the Spirit of adopti∣on Rom. 8.15. wherby we haue boldnes to crie Ab∣ba father, the peace of cōscience, tranquil∣litie of mind, contentednes of hart: the in∣heritaunce immortal, vndefiled, and that withereth not; the comfort, the protection, the assurance of his loue: in a word, so ma∣ny blessinges both of this life, & of the life to come, as neuer any nation vnder hea∣uen greater. Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies of God, who spared not his owne Sonne for our sakes, but gaue him to the death, the vile death of the crosse, that wee might liue through him: let vs confesse him sincerely and faithfully Tit. 1.16. not onely in wordes, but in deeds; and con∣fesse him amōg the Gentiles, euen those which are strangers and altens from the faith that wee may win them to the Lord.
Let 1. Pet. 2.12. our conuersation be honest among them that by our good woorkes, which they shal see, they may glorifie God in the day of the visitatiō. Let vs cast away profane songs of wantōnes, of lightnes, of vanity; & sing vnto his name: vsing both our voice & speech in al respects Eph. 5.3. as it be∣cōmeth Saints. To be short, let vs shewe, let vs striue to shew by al partes of duety a thankful acceptance of the great salua∣tions that hee hath wrought for vs, and zealous remembrance of the end wherto: Luk. 1.75. that we being deliuered out of the hād of our enemies, should serue him with∣out feare, in holines & righteousnes be∣fore him al the daies of our life. The god∣ly Prince & Prophet, whose vertuous ex∣ample as in al the rest, so in this speciallie should be a spur vnto vs, calling into mind how God hath deliuered his soule from death, his eies from teares, and his feete from falling, brake out into these words: Psal. 116.12. What shal I render to the lord for al his benefites towards me? I wil take the cup of saluations, and cal vppon the name of the Lord: I wil pay my vows to the lord euen now in the presence of al his peo∣ple. Neither said he more therein then hee perfourmed. For when 1. Chr. 16.2. he had offered
sacrifices of thanks-geuing, hee made a holy banket therewith vnto the people, in remembrance of the manifold safeties & deliuerāces that he had receiued. He prai∣sed the Lord, and called vpon his name: his Psalms do witnesse it to this day. Psal. 57.2. He promised that he would iudge righteous∣lie: 2. Sam. 8.15. he did it. Psal. 132.2. Hee vowed to bring the arke into a place of rest: 2. Sam. 6.16. hee brought it. How great cause we haue, fathers, & bre∣thren, to say as hee saide, What shall wee render to the Lord: your selues doe well know. How small care wee shew of doing as hee did, in praising God, and paying our vowes before his people: the worlde dooth see. Our slacknesse in frequenting of sermons, of praiers, of celebrating the Lordes Supper, and taking the cup of the saluation of saluations, I wishe it were amended rather then reprooued. Wee haue made vowes and promises to God, al, of perpetual holines in baptisme: some, of special duties, in their seueral cal∣lings. And is it to be hoped that euery one of vs, though not with Dauids zeale, yet with some measure of it, will paie them to the Lord? Sure the greater hope ther∣of is to be had, if that, which hath been mo∣ued of order to be taken for ordinarie ser∣mons
and preaching of the woorde on our Sabbath-daies in the afternoone, not the forenoon onely, may be effected by the godly forwardnes of them who should say, Heb. 6.3. And this wil we do if God permit. The father of mercies & God of al cōfort, who hath raised vnto vs a most glorious light, and placed a most gratious Princesse in the throne of gouernment among vs, san∣crify vs throughout we his holy spirit: that wee may offer vp the sacrifices of righte∣ousnes, the fruits of our lips, of our harts, of our hands, to the glory of his name for al his benefites powred on vs. And as hee hath hitherto giuen great deliueraunces and shewed mercy to his anointed: so be∣seech we him for his Sonne our Sauiors sake to doe it stil. Saue her, O Lord, saue her out of the hand of al her enemies. Let their roote bee as rottennesse, and their budde as dust, who rise vp against her. Blesse her with the zealous spirite of Io∣sias, with the peace of Salomon, with the yeares of Dauid: that she may long raign a godly, a happy, an auncient Mother in Israël. Finally continue thy Father∣ly loue and fauour towarde her for euer, and towards vs her subiects, the children
of thy couenant: that we both in this life & in the life to come may confesse thy good∣nesse and sing vnto thy name with thy blessed Seruauntes and elect Angels. Reu. 7.12. Praise, and glorie, and wisedome, and thankes, and honour, and power, and might, bee vnto our God for euer∣more. Amen. Psal. 21. 7 Because the king trusteth in the Lord and in the mercie of the most High, he shal not miscarie. 8 Thine hand shall find out all thine e∣nemies: and thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee. 9 Thou shalt make them like a fierie fornace in the time of thine anger: the Lorde shall destroy them in his wrath, & the fire shal deuoure them.
