23527 S118005 99853214 177818
ISRAELS REDEMPTION BY CHRIST. WHEREIN IS CONFVTED the Arminian Vniuersall Redemption. PSAL. 130. 8. He shall redeeme Israel from all his sinnes. CONTERIMVS. ALIIS SERVIEMVS, NOSMETIPSOS LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM IONES, dwelling in Redcrosse-street. 1622.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT SIDNEY Lord Viscount Lisle, and Earle of Leicester: Grace and peace from God the Father, through our mer∣cifull Redeemer Christ Iesus. My Lord, I First intended to haue dedicated this little Treatise of Israels re∣demption by Christ, to your truly noble Sister the late deceased Countesse of Pembrock, in token of my thankfulnesse for her conti∣nuall fauours shewed me euer since she and my Lord her husband pla∣ced me in Bewdly, where she first drew in her happie breath; which place of her birth is styled by an ancient Poet, Delitium rerum, bellus locus. To this your Hono∣rable Sister I may with the change of the last word apply the olde verse penned to the praise of the Empresse Matildis; Ortu magna, viro maior, ter maxima prole, Hic iacet Henrici, filia, sponsa, parens. She was the daughter of the truly noble, wise and religious Lord President of Wales Sir Henrie Sidney; Wise of the no∣bly spirited and religiously affected the late Lord Henry
Earle of Pembrock of happie memory, whose zeale and sincere loue to the truth, appeared in his life and death, as the Bishop of Sarum told vs at his funerall; She was the mother of two great Lords and Peeres of this Realme, the Earles of Pembrock and Mountgomery; lastly, she was Sister to that valorous learned Knight Sir Philip Sidney, Delitiae mundi, shedding his blood for the de∣fence of the Gospell, Hunc tantum terris ostendent fata, nec vltra esse sinent; and Sister to you (my Lord) who haue so well deserued by your seruices of warre and of peace, of your country and neighbour states abroad, imi∣tating your noble Vncle the late Lord Robert Dudley Earle of Leicester, and far excelling the two Simons de Monte forti, long since Earles of the same place. Your noble Sister (if we respect the rare endowments of na∣ture art, learning humane and diuine, accompanied with a most heroicall spirit) doth adde a true lustre to all your Honours. Now that the Lord hath taken her away, I thought good to dedicate to your Honour this litle Book, treating of the vertue and efficacie of Christs death, and confuting the Vniuersall Redemption of the Arminians; humbly beseeching your Lordship in your noble Sisters stead to patronize it; which shall cause the Author e∣uer to pray for your inward and outward happinesse in Christ. And thus humbly taking my leaue, I shall still rest at Your Lordships seruice and command, Walter Sweeper.
ISRAELS REDEMP∣TION BY CHRIST. The text, MATTHEW 1. 21. And she shall bring forth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name IESVS: for he shall saue his people from their sinnes. A Little before the conception of Christ, the Angell Gabriel was sent to the virgin Marie with this salu∣tation, Haile thou highly fauoured,  the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women, Luke 1. 26, 27, 28. And because she was troubled at this strange sight and newes, the Angel bids her not to feare, for that she had found fauour with God, should conceiue and beare a sonne, whom she should name IESVS, who should be great, and should be called the Son of the most High, and should sit on the throne of Dauid for euer. And when Marie desired further to be instructed in this mysterie, the Angell tels her of his most pure and wonderfull conception by the power of the holy Ghost, and should be called (as he was indeed) the Sonne of God, Luk. 1. 29. to the 36 verse. Now a little before Christs birth, when
Ioseph was minded secretly to put Marie away, an Angell likewise appeared to him in a dreame, and wils him not to feare to take Marie to his wife, for that which was conceiued in her was of the holy Ghost; and that Marie should beare a sonne, whom he must call Iesus, for he was to saue his people from their sinnes, Math, 1. 19. 20, 21. This my Text there∣fore containeth a second reason, wherewith the An∣gell strengtheneth Ioseph. And herein obserue with me these particulars: First, Marie shall bring forth a sonne. Secondly, Thou shalt call his name Iesus. Third∣ly, He shall saue his people from their sinnes. And in the third branch, which is the notation or reason of his name, obserue these three parts: First, who deliuers, Christ. Secondly, the deliuered, his people. Thirdly, from what they shall be deliuered, from the guilt, power and punishment of their sinnes. Out of the whole text in generall, and for that both in Saint Mathew and Saint Luke the concep∣tion, birth, natures and offices of Christ were so plainly deliuered, which the Prophets more darkly saw and taught; obserue with me, that Prophecies 1. Doctrine. (as one of the Ancients well noted) are most vsually darke before the time of their fulfilling comes; then he that runneth may reade them, then they speake clearely, Hab. 2. 3. These prophesies at the first are like the dayes dawning; when they come to be fulfilled, they are like the Sunne in it strength. In Gen. 3. 15. The seed of the woman that should breake the Serpents head, is promised In Abraham all nations shall be blessed, Gen. 12. 3. Shiloh the sonne of the secondine shall come, Gen. 49. 10. A virgin shall
conceiue and beare a sonne, Esa. 7. 14. which the ma∣licious Iewes would haue rendred, A yong woman shall conceiue, which can be no signe or wonder, as this was giuen to Achaz. The righteous branch of Dauid, is promised, who shall reigne and saue Iudah. The Lord our righteousnesse, Ier. 23. 5. 6. To these pla∣ces some adde that of Hag. 2. 7. The desire of all na∣tions shall come. All this while the Church is held in an expectation of Christ coming, vnder generall termes. Yet I confesse that Iacob in Gen. 49. 10. shewes the time when this should be, namely, when the distinction of the Tribes should cease, or rather, when the Scepter should depart from Iuda. And in Da∣niel 9. 24. Seuentie seuens (Heb. Neethuck) are prepa∣red out to the coming and killing of the Messias, yet the Church might then; as the godly learned still do something vary about the iust calculating of the times. I confesse also that in Micha 5. 2. Bethelem the birth-place is foretold: but Michah saith, Thou art little; and Mathew 2. ver. saith, Art not little. First, it was a little hamtlet in quantitie, great in quality, honored with the birth of the Messiah. Secondly, Augustine would haue Michah read with an interro∣gation, thus, Art thou little? No, Thou art not little. Thirdly, Iunius in his Parallels saith, that S. Mathew a true Historiographer, might record the words as they were in part miscited by the Priests & Scribes of the people to Herod; and yet by this their report the place Bethelem is cleerly designed. All these sweete and comfortable places of the Prophets came not neare the cleare manifestation of Christs birth and incarnation, deliuered to Marie, Luke 1.
26, 27. to Ioseph here, Math. 1. 19, 20, 21. to the shep∣heards, To you a Sauiour is borne in the citie of Dauid, Luk. 2. 11. Behold (here present) the Lambe that taketh away the sinnes of the world, Ioh. 1. 29. Old Simeon in Luk. 2. 30. saith, Now mine eyes haue seene  thy saluation. Now Hanna speaketh plainly of him to all that waited for saluation in Ierusalem, Luk. 2. 38. Will you know by what meanes these prophe∣sies do speake so plainly, when they are a fulfilling, or already fulfilled? It pleaseth God sometimes to raise vp men of propheticall spirits to point out these things as they are a doing, as in the former examples of Iohn, Simeon and Hanna it appeareth. At other times when these extraordinary meanes do cease, he giueth to his Church excellent instruments of his glorie, to make plaine the darke mysteries of the Prophets, being men mightie in the Scriptures, Acts 18. 24. or like that Angell standing in the Sunne, Reuel. 19. 17. signifying some worthy persons fitted to that worke. Now the cause and reason of this difference in the reuealing of Gods will to his Church, is to be fetcht from the most wise dispensation of almighty God, working all things according to the councell of his will, Ephe. 1. 11. and appointing fit times to euery pur∣pose vnder the Sunne, Eccles. 3. 1. The Lord appoin∣ted that in the fulnesse of time Christ should be made of a woman, Galat. 4. 4. and also decreed when the Gospel (an hidden mystery from the Gentiles some thousand yeares) should be made manifest, Rom. 16. 25. 26. euen then when Christ was exhibited, here∣by to bring greater glorie to God, to honour the
time of Christs birth, when the reader of the vision might be one running, Hab. 2. 2, 3. the Father then speaking most cleerly by his Sonne, Heb. 1. 2. Christs time must be honored with abundance of knowledge, as the waters do couer the sea, Esa. 11. 9. Now little and great are to know God, Ier. 31. 34. Againe, the in∣fancie of the Church was vnder tutors, and was held in bondage of the elements of the world, Galat. 4. 2. It must for a time be fed with milke, 1. Cor. 3. 2. must be taught as it is able to heare, Mark 4. 33. And therefore that prophesie of Antichrists fall, as some thinke; or the Turks ouerthrow, as others suppose, was shut vp and sealed till the end when it should be fulfilled, Dan. 12. 9. He that withheld the Popes ri∣fing, and was therefore to be remoued to Constan∣tinople, is now cleerly knowne to be the Romane Emperour, 1. Thessal. 2. 2. 6. This made Balaam (as some probably do imagine) to crie out, Who shal liue when God shall do this? when Assure, that is the Turke that afflicted. Eber the Iewes, shall be destroyed, Numb. 24. 23, 24. which Monsieur Taffin the French commenter on the Reuelation, supposeth to be these. The first, the Greekish Emperours and Chur∣ches vehement protestations against the Popes ido∣latrie and errors. The second, the Almain Emperors and Churches proceedings against the Popes. The third, the writings and preachings of the Petro∣bustions against the Popes. The fourth, the Wal∣denses doings against the Popes. The fift, the Wal∣denses and Albergeneses against Romish errors. The sixt, Wickliffe our countriman. The seuenth, Iohn Husse and Ierome of Prague. And we must not think
but that the Prophets did diue into the knowledge of these deepe things, and had most of them, if not all, especially those concerning Christ, reuealed to them, which the very Angels stoupe downe to prie into, as it appeareth 1. Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. First therefore here learne and obserue the cause 1. Vse. why the Gospell now speaketh more cleerly of Christ then before. The Prophets are compared to a light shining in a darke place; but Christ to the day and morning starre, 2. Pet 1. 18. 19. Reuel. 2. 28. Christ is called the Sunnerising, or Day-spring from on high, Luk. 1. 78. He is chiefly so styled, I confesse, as he is in himselfe, the true light that lightneth euery man that cometh into the world, Ioh. 1. 9. yet in part he is also so called, because in the time of the Messiah more cleare meanes of faith and knowledge should be offered to the Church then euer before. There∣fore the Sunne of righteousnesse is said then to arise, Mal. 4. 2. The night is past, and the day is come, Rom. 13. 12. And of this time it is specially spoken, They shall be all taught of God, Esa. 54. 13. Ioh. 6. 45. Secondly, vnderstand the cause also why many 2 Vse. hard prophecies, especially in Ezekiel, Daniel and Zacharie, and in the Reuelation, concerning the Iewes calling, the Popes falling, the quelling of Gog and Magog, that is, the Saracens and Turks, are more cleerly knowne now in the Reformed Churches then in the times of the ancient Fathers. The time of the defection of many visible Churches is past long since, 2. Thess. 2. 3, 4. and the Romish Anti∣christ hath bin openly proclaimed, as in a publicke Theater, 2. Thess. 2. 8. Bellarmine and all the Whores
bawds are not able to couer her filthinesse, whose destruction sleepeth not, 2. Pet. 2. 3. Let vs thankfully acknowledge our happinesse 3. Vse. in respect of the Iewes, who saw Christ through the grate, lattices, and shadowes of the law, Cant. 2. 9. Col. 2. 17. and let vs consider how happie our eyes and eares are, that heare and see those things clearely, that many Kings and righteous men could not at∣taine vnto, Luk. 10. 23. Let vs beleeue the Prophets, Acts 26. 27. Let vs not despise this great saluation that is come to vs by Christ and his Apostles preaching, Heb. 1. 2. 3. but let vs rather beleeue perfectly in the grace of Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 13. Lastly, Let this reproue the grosse ignorance, in∣fldelitie 4. Vse. and profanenesse of our times, notwithstan∣ding the gracious meanes. It may be said of vs as in Iohn 1. 5. The light hath shined in darknesse, but men loue darknesse better then light; yea they will not come to the light, lest their workes should be reproued, Ioh. 3. 19, 20. Many might haue bin teachers of others, but yet still haue need of milk, and must learne againe the prin∣ciples of religion, Heb. 5. 11. 12. Oh the corrupt ends of the world are fallen on vs, 1. Cor. 10. 11. Marie shall beare a sonne. What maner of sonne? A sonne conceiued by the holy Ghost, as in the former verse it is alledged; and in Luk. 1. 35. the Angell Ga∣brel telleth Marie, that the holy Ghost should come on high, and the power of the most High should ouershadow her; therefore that which should be borne of her, should be called the Sonne of God. Out of which places com∣pared together, this Doctrine ariseth: that Christ is the virgin Maries true son. A true man; and secondly 2. Doctr.
the true Sonne of God; and thirdly, both Maries son and Gods Sonne, in two natures, one Christ in per∣son, as soule and bodie make but one man. The first part is thus proued: the crusher of the Serpents head, the ouerthrower of Satans kingdome, our de∣liuerer, must be the seed of the woman, not of a man and a woman, Gen. 3. 15. must be Shiloh the sonne of the secondine, Gen. 49. 10. In the 2. Sam. 7. 14. he is Dauids sonne. In Ieremy 23. 5. the righte∣ous branch of Dauid. In the 7. of Daniel 10. 13. one like the Sonne of man is presented to God the Fa∣ther. In Dan. 92. 4. the Messiah must be killed. Zach. 7. 8. and Zach. 6. the man whose name is the Branch. Most expresly Esa. 7. 14. a virgin shall conceiue. And Esa. 9. 6. a childe is borne to vs, a sonne is giuen to vs. Which places do parallel that in Luk. 2. 7. she brought forth her first begotten Sonne: and Rom. 1. 2. made of the seed of Dauid touching the flesh. And to giue Iacob a taste hereof, he tooke vp the very body of a man and wrastled with him, Gen. 32. 24. here was a work of God, no personall vnion. The second part is thus proued: Thou art my Sonne, this day haue I be∣gotten thee, Psal. 2. 7. The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot∣stoole, Psal. 110. 1. Iehouah our righteousnes, Ier. 23. 6. Thou shalt call his name Emanuel, the strong God, with vs in our nature, Esa. 7. 14. He is the Fathers equall and fellow, Zach. 13. 7. In Hose. 3. 5. the conuerted Iew shal serue Iehouah their God, and Dauid their King. There are Christs natures and office, as also in E∣zek. 34. 23, 24. In the first of Ioh. vers. 18. he is the onely begotten Sonne of God; By his resurrection migh∣tily
declared to be the Sonne of God, Rom. 1. 4. God blessed for euer, Rom. 9. 5. For further proofe hereof reade 1. Ioh. from the first verse to the 13. and the first of Iohn, from vers. 17. to the end, and the first Chapter to the Hebrewes. The third part is thus proued: he is Emanuel, true God, true man, Esa. 7. 14. The Word became flesh, and , dwelt in our na∣tures, as in a tabernacle, Ioh. 1. 14. But most plainly in 1. Tim. 3. 16. Great is the mysterie of godlinesse, God manifested in the flesh. The reasons why he was true man: first, that be∣ing 1 Reason. our suretie, Heb. 7. 22. he might suffer in our nature that had offended, and so in our stead satis∣fie the iustice of God, whereby he might in him freely iustifie vs, and yet be iust, as we reade Rom. 3. 26. the true sence of which place cost Luther three dayes agonie. That being in the flesh our Kinsman, as he is cal∣led 2. Reason. in Iob 19. 25. goeth my redeeming Kinsman, he might haue right to redeeme, according to the law of buying a brothers land, and raising vp his seed, Le∣uit. 25. 24. Ruth. 4. 4. Ier. 32. 7. and therefore he tooke our seed, and not the seed of Angels, Heb. 2. 16. That he might sanctifie our nature. He that san∣ctifieth, 3. Reason. and they that are sanctified, are all of one, namely, humane nature, Heb. 2. 11. And therefore his circumcision, Col. 2. 11, 12. baptisme, Math. 3. 16. resurrection, 1. Pet. 1. 3. are not onely imputed to vs to our iustification, but powerfully applied to our sanctification. That in all our miseries he might comfort vs. He 4. Reason. must be like his brethren, that he might be a faithfull
High Priest; for in that he suffered when he was temp∣ted, he is also able to succour them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 17, 18. We haue not an high Priest which cannot be affected with the sence of our infirmities, but was tempted in all things like to vs, sin onely excepted, Heb. 4. 15. And so Christ sanctified through afflictions, became the first borne among many brethren, Rom. 8. 29. The reasons why he was true God: first, that he might be able to ouercome all our enemies. Thus 1. Reason. he comes as a puissant conquerour with his gar∣ment all spotted with the blood of his Churches e∣nemies, Esa. 63. 1. 2. Being almightie to saue, he de∣liuereth vs from the hands of all our enemies, Luke 1. 71. as namely, he condemneth sinne in the flesh, Rom. 8. 3. he cancelleth the law, Col. 2. 14. nailing it to his crosse; he triumpheth ouer Satan and all hellish principalities, Col. 2. 15. 1. Cor. 15. 24. de∣stroying him that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. Lastly, he destroyeth death for euer, Hose. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O Death, I will be thy death; O graue, I wil be thy destruction, Hos. 13. 14. Secondly, that he might fully satisfie the infinite 2. Reason. iustice and wrath of God in giuing  a valuable price for all our sinnes, 1. Tim. 2. 6. Thirdly, that he might infinitely merit for vs 3. Reason. by his obedience and death: thence it is that God is said to purge vs by his blood, Act. 20. 28. his death is as meritorious as if it had bin possible for the Godhead to haue suffered. Neither Adam in his in∣nocencie, nor Angels in their puritie are able to merit, owing all seruice to God by vertue of their
creation. And in the Lords most strict account, if the creatures be compared to the most perfect and infinite holinesse of God, he might find in his ser∣uants folly, Iob 14. 18. and in the heauens vncleannesse, Iob 15. 15. Fourthly, if he had bin a meere man, it had bin 4. Reason. an accursed sinne to haue trusted in him, Ier. 17. 5. But Christ willed the blind man to beleeue in him, Ioh. 9. 35. And in Ioh. 14. 1. Christ thus speaketh to his Disciples, You beleeue in God, beleeue also in me. Blessed are they that trust in Christ, Psal. 2. 12. And Saint Paul (Act. 16. 31.) willed the Iayler to beleeue in Christ to saluation. Lastly, otherwise we were accursed idolaters; 5. Reason. when God commandeth vs onely to worship him, Deut. 6. 13. Math. 4. 10: and in Psal. 97. 7. Heb. 1. 5. they are accursed that worship any but the true God. And all the Angels are willed to worship Christ, Heb. 1. 6. so also are we, Psal. 2. 11. Kisse the Sonne lest he be angrie. God commands vs to pray onely to him, Psal. 50. 15. but yet Saint Steuen said, Lord Iesus receiue my spirit, Acts 7. 59. The Father hath giuen all iudgement to the Sonne, that all should honour the Sonne as they honour the Father, Ioh. 5. 22, 23. And he that denieth the Son, hath not the Father, 1. Ioh. 2. 23. Now follow the reasons why Christ was to be God and man in one person. First, that he might be a fit and apt Mediator betweene God and man, 1. Tim. 2. 5. like Iacobs lad∣der, 1. Reason. ioyning heauen and earth together, Gen. 28. 12; that he that was to make of two one, might haue interest in the one and the other.
The Sauiour of the Church must be a fit and conuenient head, Col. 1. 18, He is the head of the body of the Church: first, in eminencie, farre aboue all prin∣cipalities and powers, might and dominion, and e∣uery name that is named in the world or that to come, Eph. 1. 21. Secondly, in vicinitie and neare coniunction; as the husband is the wiues head, and we bone of his bones, flesh of his flesh. First, here we haue an vse of instruction many 1. Vse. wayes: First, it teacheth vs to obserue the loue of the Father in sending his Sonne, Ioh. 3. 16. So God loued the world, that he sent his onely begotten Son, that all that beleeue in him should not perish, but haue euer∣lasting life. Herein is loue, not that we loued him first, but that he loued vs, and gaue his Sonne a propitiation for our sinnes, 1. Ioh. 4. 10. Secondly, it teacheth vs Christs obedience to his Father and loue to vs, He became obedient euen to the death of the crosse, Phil. 2. 6. 7. yea when we were his enemies he died for vs to re∣concile vs to his Father, Rom. 5. 8. Thirdly, it teach∣eth vs the dignitie of Christians, becoming Christs kinsman, he taking our nature, and not the Angels seed, Heb. 2. 16. Secondly, it confuteth and condemneth the wil∣full 2. Vse. Iew refusing Christ, saying, (Luk. 19. 14.) We will not haue this man to reigne ouer vs; and crying to Pilate, We haue no King but Caesar, Iohn 19. 15. They killed the Lord of life, and desired a murtherer to be giuen them, Acts 3. 14. 15. Therefore the Lord hath iustly destroyed their citie, and giuen his vine∣yard to other husbandmen, Math. 21. 41. And so Ierusalem lyeth troden downe of the Gentiles, till
the fulnesse of the Gentiles come in, Luke 21. 24. Rom. 11. 25; their houses are left desolate till they shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, Math. 23. 39. Then with the Gentiles cometh in the fulnesse of the Iew also, Rom. 11. 12. which will be as life from the dead, Rom. 11. 15. a kind of re∣surrection, Ezek. 37. 1, 2. when the veile of Moses law, ignorance and infidelitie, shall be taken away, 2. Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16; whose calling is prophesied in Zach. 12. 10, 11. by powring on them the Spirit of grace and deprecations, when by faith they shall looke on Christ-whom they haue pierced, and grie∣uously mourne for their former obstinacie. That the Iewes shall be called, besides Saint Pauls expresse words, Rom. 11. 25, 26. when the fulnesse of the Gen∣tiles shall come in, then the Iew shall come in, that all Israel may be saued, I proue by this argument, that many times in the Prophets the Iewes calling and the Gentiles conuersion, as two distinct mer∣cies, are ioyntly promised. In Ierem. 3. 17. They shall call the citie Ierusalem, the throne of the Lord, and the Gentiles shall flow to it. In Ier. 16. 19. the Iew shall ac∣knowledge God to be his strength, and the Gen∣tiles shall say, their fathers inherited lies. In the 21. Chapter of the Reuelation, verse 24. by the Gen∣tiles comming to Ierusalems light, and the Kings bringing their glorie thereto, is not meant that the Gentile beleeuing states shal be subiects to the Iews, but rather shall ioyne with them in the holy em∣bracing of Christ, and shall reioyce with them for their conuersion, if that Chapter be to be vnder∣stood of the Iewes calling, for there are but foure
Monarchies, Ashur, Pontia, Greece, Rome, Dan. 2. 31. Dan. 7. 31. My second argument, that Ephraim and the ten Tribes shall be called also, is taken out of Ezek. 37. 16. where two sticks of Iuda and Ephraim must be ioyned together, which yet is not fulfilled, for they haue not yet ioyntly acknowledged Dauid Christ their King. At that time I will be the God of all the families of Israel: and, I heard Ephraim lamenting thus, Ier. 31. 18. which plainly foretelleth the falling of the ten Tribes who might perchance from the cities of the Medes, 2. King. 2. 17. through the cliffes of the Caspian hils place themselues in Tartary and China. Secondly, it condemneth the Saracens and Turks, who pretending the honouring of the one  true God, dishonour the Sonne, which is to forsake God and all true religion: He that honoreth not the Sonne, honoreth not the Father, Iohn 5. 23. and he that denieth the Sonne, hath not the Father, 1. Ioh. 2. 13. Theodosius seeing his yong Caesars neglected, by a reuerend Bishop was taught thereby to maintaine Christs honour. Thirdly, it condemneth many sorts of hereticks, as first the Marcionites and Ma∣nichees,  who dreame that Christ had a fantasticall bodie onely in shew, because Philip. 2. 8. he was in shape like a man; so in the sixt verse of the same Chap∣ter, he was in the shape of God; and Heb. 1. 3. he was the ingrauen forme of his Fathers person, and yet true God as true man. Or that he had a body from hea∣uen, not from the Virgins wombe, because 1. Cor. 15. 47. the second man is the Lord from heauen, that is Christ, euen as God filling heauen, is said to descend from heauen, in taking our nature on him, Ioh. 3. 13.
Fourthly, it condemneth Apollinares, the father and  the Sonne, who confessing a bodie, denied a soule to Christ; and the Monothelites, condemned in the sixt generall Councell, with Honorius Romes Pope for auerring but one will in Christ, in Math. 26. 39. 40. My soule (saith Christ) is heauie to the death: and Thy will, not mine be fulfilled. Fiftly, it condemneth  Ebion and Cerinthus denying Christs Deitie, against whom Iohn wrote his Gospell, 1. Ioh. 1. 2. And the Arrians, who will haue Christ to be called God, ei∣ther in respect of his office, when that place Ioh. 10. 34, 35, 36. à minore ad maius proueth not this but the contrary. If Magistrates may be called Gods, much more Christ, sanctified by the Father and sent into the world. Or else reckoning Christ a made God before all other creatures; abusing that place Col. 1. 15. Christ the image of the inuisible God, the first begotten of all the creatures, by whom all things are made. And out of a false translation of the Septua∣gint, draw a corrupt glosse out of Prou. 8. 22. He crea∣ted me, , for he possessed me, Heb. qanani. yet  signifieth to possesse an Iland. Sixtly, it condemnes Nestorius Patriarch of Con∣stantinople,  who held that Christ as a pure man onely was borne of the Virgin, and did make one person of his humanitie, and another of his Deitie; he was condemned in the third Councell of Ephesus, where in the first Canon they confesse whole Christ to be , the Sonne of God, to be our true Emanuel, God and man in one person, and the Virgin truly to be styled , Dei gene∣trix,
the mother of God, because the humane na∣ture had no subsistance till the Godhead tooke it; like the Thistletoe incorpoarted into an apple tree. In this respect in Luke 3. the last verse, Christ may also be called the Sonne of God, as the Councell of Franckfort long since decreed. Lastly, it confu∣teth Eutiches an Abbot of Constantinople, liuing an hundred yeares before Benedict brought forth his new regular crew in Italy, who confounded the two natures of Christ, making them all one, and was for that condemned by the fourth Councell of Con∣stantinople, whose true scholler was the Germane Vbiquitarie Iohn Brentius, who would haue Christs humane nature to be euery where with his Deitie, because Eph. 4. 10. S. Paul saith, , not that he should fill all places with his bodily pre∣sence, but as the scope of the place sheweth, that he might fill all the Church with his graces; so Ioh. 12. 32. Christ will draw to him , all things, that is, all the elect. Thirdly, here we haue an vse of consolation: it is newes of great ioy, that to vs is borne a Sauiour so long expected, Luke 2. 10, 11. whom with Simeon we may embrace with the armes of faith, Luk. 2. 28. In the fulnesse of time God hath sent his Sonne made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. at the precise time pointed out by Daniel, Dan. 9. 24. the euident truth of this place hath wrung a confession from the blind Iewes, that Christ was then borne, but hid himselfe hitherto in a Paradise; abusing that place Cant. 7. 5. The King is held in the galleries. They keepe their doores open the Passeouer euen, hoping that he will come to
them that night; but this is their dotage, with their pickled Leuiathan, Psal. 74. 14. and playing Leuia∣than, Psal. 104, 26. with their great Behemoth, great Oxe, great Bird, with Paradiscs wine for their Mes∣siahs feast. As for the very instant time of Christs birth, the Scripture is silent; but the Papists make Zachariah Iohns father an high Priest, when he was of the eight order of Abiah, Luk. 1. 5. 1. Chron. 24. 10: they thinke also that the incese burning was on the seuenth moneth, on the feast of Reconciliation, Leuit. 16. 12. and therefore will haue Iohn to be borne at Midsommer, and Christ at mid Winter; for that Ioh. 3. 30, Iohn saith, He must increase, and I must decrease. You see Pope Gregorie the 13. had good reason to alter the yeares account, and to keepe his Christmas iust about the shortest day of the yeare. Others thinke the deepest of Winter an vnfit time for the people to trauell to be taxed at Au∣gustus his command; and that the shepheards watch not their flocks in Winter, Luke 2. 1, 2, 3, 8. Others finding Christ to be about thirtie yeares old when he began to preach, Luke 3. 23. and was to be killed about the midst of the weeke mentioned in Daniel 9. 27. and Christ kept but three Passeouers after his baptisme, besides that wherein he suffered; and therefore thinke the latter time of Summer: other the Spring to be the time of Christs birth. When∣soeuer it was, the memorie of it deserueth a Feast religiously to be kept, though the Apostles ordai∣ned it not, but the Lords day onely, 1. Cor. 16. 2. Re∣uel. 1. 10; and the resuriection of Christ might put vs in mind of the rest. Perkins in his Probleme affir∣meth,
that it began to be kept about 400 yeares af∣ter Christ; and that the Epiphanie and it at the first were all one. It must be confessed that the heathen kept their Bacchanalia & Saturnalia about this time, which caused some ancient Canons to forbid Christians the keeping of the Calenders of Ianuary after the Pagans maner. Let vs be exhorted to kisse the Sonne, Psal. 2. 12. 4. Vse. let vs beleeue in this Sonne of God, Iohn 9. 25, 26. for the remission of our sinnes, Acts 2. 37, 38. and our eternall saluation, Acts 16. 31. He that beleeueth not, is condemned already, Iohn 3. 1836. and he that beleeueth not, the wrath of God abideth on him. Let vs loue him also that loued vs first. Faith and loue are Christs chiefe commandement, 1. Iohn 3. 23. Christ my loue, saith Ignatius, going to his martrydome at Rome, said, Christ my loue is crucified. Faith must be working through loue, Gal. 5. 6. Herein is our loue perceiued in keeping Gods commandements, 1. Iohn 2. 5. The Gospel is preached to bring men to obedience of faith, Rom. 1. 5. Rom. 16. 26. As  is both infidelitie and contumacie, so true faith hath con∣fidence & obedience. Heb. 11. 8. Ier. 2. 21. 23. By faith Abraham offered his sonne. In Esa. 9. 6. His name shall be called Wonderfull. In Ier. 23. 6. This is his name which they shall call him. In 3. Doctrine. Esa. 7. 14. Thou shalt call his name, or, His name shall be called Emanuel. In which places the third person according to the Hebrew phrase is vsed imperso∣nally: the French translation cometh neare to the originall, On appellera. But to this 7. of Esay, the Iewes obiect thus: Your
Christ is not called Emanuel, and therefore is not the true Christ. We answer, that there is a difference betweene proper names and other additionall titles of honor. Our Noble men haue proper names and titles of honour too: and so we answer wrangling Onu∣phrius, that Pope Ioane might properly be called Io∣hannes Anglicus, Iohn English, and might by birth be of Ments. Iohn Scot by name may be by birth or nation a true Englishman. In Luke 1. 30. the An∣gell telleth Marie, , Thou shalt call him. In this my text so speaketh the Angell to Ioseph, Thou shalt call him.  Hence we may obserue, that The right of naming children lieth in the parents, which with their consent may be deriued to others, yet so, that good names be giuen. So Abraham called his sonne of the promise Isaac, laughter, ioy, Genes. 21. 3. So Iacobs wiues gaue holy significant names to their chil∣dren, Gen. 29. 31. So was Samson named, Iudg. 13. 14. So Hanna called her sonne Shemuel, I haue asked him of God. The first reason, God and nature hath inuested 1. Reason. parents with this right; therefore Gabriel Luk. 1. 13. bids Zacharie to name his child: and vers. 60. 62. the mother challengeth her right, and the father writes plainly, His name is Iohn. Secondly, children are their parents goods: so 2. Reason. that if Adam Gen. 2. 29. might name the creatures because they were his goods, so may parents. The Canon law anciently taught, that gossipping did contract spirituall affinitie, hindering mariage, and forbad parents to be Witnesses to their owne chil∣dren:
but let vs thinke that we haue borrowed our custome of Witnesses at the Font, from the ancient Christians, who in time of persecution if their pa∣rents were murthered, trained vp their children in Christian Religion. This condemneth the carelesnesse of some pa∣rents 1. Vse. and gossips, who giue heathen names, as He∣ctor, Hercules, Penelope, Ama, Rose. Let parents, consulting with their Witnesses, giue holy significant names, that their children may 2. Vse. walke in the steps of holy men and women. Iesus is an Hebrew name, signifying a Sauiour, of ioshang, whence that prayer Psal. 118. 24. is bor∣rowed, 4. Doctrine. Hoshannah, saue I pray; which the children in their acclamation gaue vnto Christ, Math. 21. 9. Our Lord is called Christ, that is, Anointed, in regard of his threefold office, King, Priest and Prophet: but his peculiar and proper name is Iesus. In the storie of the Euangelists, he is vsually called Iesus, Luke 24. 19. and in the entrance of all Pauls Epistles this name Iesus is prefixt. The first reason of this most proper name of our Lord, is, because according to his name he is a true 1. Reason. Sauiour, as in our text the Angell teacheth vs; and as Beza well obserueth against the Iesuits, this word Sauiour principally belongeth to Christ as God al∣mightie to saue, Esa. 63. 1. and therefore the belee∣uers were called at Antioch Christians, not Iesuites, Acts 11 26. Secondly, there is no Sauiour but Christ, Esay 2. Reason. 43. 11. I, euen I (saith Christ) am the Lord, and besides me there is no Sauiour: and Acts 4. 12. There is no other
name giuen vnder heauen whereby men must be saued, but the name of Iesus. The Papists are here reprouued for abusing this 1. Vse. name many wayes. They dedicate a Masse to the bare name Iesus, giuing diuine worship to it; for which Doctor Fulke reproueth them on Phil. 2. 10. They thought with the Iewes, as the word Iehouah did anciently worke miracles, so the word Iesus doth cast out diuels, like the Exorcists in Act. 19. 13. This word is much abused in their Ladies Rosarie, and other charming prayers, Iesu, Iesu, Iesu, mercie, to the number of nine: numero Deus impare gaudet. Secondly, the Iesuites are taxed for refusing the ancient name Christians, Acts 11. 26. who from their 2. Vse. Founder Ignatius Laiola the Spanish Iame souldier, haue learned the name Iesuites: he had his name, as Beza contra putidissimum Putidiani commentum, says, of ignis, fire, and , an hellish hag; and there sty∣leth them Iesuites, of à Iesu ite, go ye from Iesus: concluding thus, Tam procul à Iesu non ijt vlla cohors, none of the hellish Locusts went so far from Iesus. Thirdly, let vs beleeue in Iesus to saluation, Acts 3. Vse. 16. 31. In the notation or reason of his name, obserue first the person sauing, He: secondly the persons sa∣ued, his people: and thirdly from what, from their sins. Who are his people whom he doth saue? first the Iewes, whom he foreknew, Rom. 11. 2. secondly the Gentiles, I haue other sheepe which are not of this fold, Iohn. 10. 16. and Christ was not onely to die for the Iewes, but together in one all the disperst children of God, Iohn 11. 52. Out of these circumstances
put together, arise two Doctrines: the first, Christ saueth all his people from their sinnes. And, Christ 2. Doctr. onely saueth his owne people, and none else. That Christ deliuereth his people from their sinnes, it is strong∣ly proued by these Scriptures: By the blood of the co∣uenant he freeth the prisoners from the pit where there is no water, Zach. 9. 11. By him we haue redemption by faith in his blood, Rom. 3. 25. He was deliuered to death for our sinnes, and rose again for our iustification, Rom. 4. 25. He is our wisedome, righteousnes, sanctification, redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. And thus God through Christ for his owne Names sake blotteth out all our transgressions, Esa. 43. 25. Will you know how he deliuereth vs from the hands of all our enemies, Luke 1. 71. He is God almightie to saue, Esa. 63. . He hath the keyes of hell and of death, Reu. 1. 18. By the power and merit of his death he destroyed Satan that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 15. and so for vs triumphed o∣uer the hellish principalietes and powers, Coloss. 2. 15. Againe, he hath saued vs from his Fathers iustice, by giuing him , a valuable price for our sinnes, 1. Tim. 2. 6. By his blood we haue redemption, E∣phes. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. 20. In his owne bodie he hath borne our sinnes on the tree, 1. Pet. 2. 24. By his stripes we are healed; the chastisement of our peace was layed on him, Esa. 53. 5. He became a curse for vs, that we might be blessed, Gal. 3. 13. yea sinne for vs, that knew no sinne, that we by him might be made the righteousnes of God, 2. Cor. 5. 21. He fulfilled the law for vs, Phil. 2. 7. that we by him might be righteous, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Lastly, by the body of Christ we become dead to the law and sin, seruing the Lord in newnesse of spirit, Rom. 7. 4. 6.
Gal. 2. 19. He came to destroy the works of the diuell, 1. Ioh. 3. 8. So that though sin remaine, yet it doth not reigne in vs, Rom. 6. 12. Yea the time approch∣eth when we shall be fully freed from this body of death, Rom. 7. 23, 24. The reasons of this Doctrine are two. First, the Father giues vs to his Sonne, by him to 1. Reason. be saued, Iohn 10. 29. Secondly, Christ became our suretie, Heb. 7. 22. That which was impossible to vs, Christ hath done for vs, Rom. 8. 3. This Doctrine affoordeth to vs two arguments of 1. Vse. Christs Deitie. First, he saueth from sin, therefore is God, Math. 9. 34. Secondly, the Church is his people and his seed: When he shall make his soule an offering for sinne, he shall see his seed, Esa. 53. 10. Christ is the Churches Lord, and therefore she must wor∣ship him, Psal. 45. 11. Let this condemne the Papists that seeke for o∣ther 2. Vse. Sauiours besides Christ; when Christ hath not made men, Angels, or our selues our sauiours, but he alone in himselfe hath purged vs from all sin, Heb. 1. 3. The Iewes establishing their owne righteousnes, left Christs, Rom. 10. 3. 4. so do they that follow lying vanities, for sake their owne mercies, Ionah. 8. Let vs sing with the holy Martyr at Winsor of 3. Vse. the Virgin (as of other Saints) Non saluatrix, non mediatrix, she is no Sauiour or Redeemer. And with the holy Martyr in the fire, None but Christ, none but Christ. He is our sufficient Mediator and Sauiour, the propitiation for all our sinnes, 1. Iohn 2. 1. Let our soules magnifie the Lord, and let our spi∣rits
reioyce in God our Sauiour, Luke 1. 47. There is borne to vs an all-sufficient Sauiour, Luke 2. 10, 11. by him our sins are driuen away as the mists, yea cast into the bottome of the sea, Mica 7. 19. For his sake the sinne of Iudah being sought shall not be found, Ier. 50. 20. There is no purgatorie no hell to them that die in the Lord, they rest from their labours, Reuel. 14. 13. If with Simeon their eyes do see their saluation, they may sing, Now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, Luke 2. 29. 30. Christ saueth his owne people, none else, not one re∣probate. 6. Doctr. He saueth his owne people, whom he fore∣knew, Rom. 11. 2. the elected Iewes and all the dis∣persed children of God, Iohn 11. 52. Iohn 10. 16. Christ layeth downe his life for his owne sheepe. Iohn 10. 11. 27. 28. The reprobate are not his sheepe, Ioh. 10. 26. that beleeue not. For his elect he doth sanctifie himself, that is, prepare himselfe to death, Ioh. 17. 19. Christ gaue himselfe for his Church, Ephes. 5. 25. By his blood he hath purchased his Church, Acts 20. 28. He deliuereth his from this present euill world, Galat. 1. 4. He loued me (saith Paul) and gaue himselfe for me, Ga∣lat. 2. 20. Who gaue himselfe for vs, that he might redeem vs from all iniquitie, Titus 2. 14. Who hath washed vs from all our sinnes, Reuel. 1. 5. This is my blood, which is shed for you and for many, for the remission of sinnes, Math. 26. 28. He was once offered to take away the sins of many, Heb. 9. 28. The price is of infinite value to all for whom it was paid, 1. Tim. 2. 6. Secondly, the payer was Christ our suretie, Heb. 7. 22. Third∣ly, the Father could not but accept his sweet smel∣ling sauour, Ephes. 5. 21. as both a sufficient and effi∣cient
cause of saluation to all for whom he died. We conclude therefore this point with Zechariah, Luke 1. 70. He hath visited and redeemed his people; belee∣uing that Christ is the Sauiour onely of his owne body, Ephes. 5. 23. And this he hath performed, first as a Priest offering himselfe without spot to God his Fa∣ther, Heb. 9. 14. this he did but once, Heb. 7. 27. By one offering he hath perfected all those that are sancti∣fied, Heb. 10. 14. and so hath found for vs eternall redemption, Heb. 9. 11. Secondly, he was also the sa∣crifice, He offered himselfe, Heb. 9. 25. We are bought by the precious blood of Christ, a lambe without spot or wrinkle, 1. Pet. 1. 19. Thirdly, Christ is the Altar too: We haue an Altar, whereof they haue no right to eate, which serue the Tabernacle, that is, the vnbelee∣uing Iewes, Heb. 13. 10. But let vs weigh and exa∣mine some arguments further to proue this point. The first argument shall be drawne from the 1. Reason. proper notation of the Hebrew verbs, that signifie to redeeme. Though Padah and gaal ioyntly signifie to redeeme, yet padah more properly signifieth to redeeme by a price, or, to giue body for body, as  in Greeke doth. So did Christ giue his body and soule a price onely to his Father for his elect, Heb. 9. 14. We are bought with a price, not repro∣bates, 1. Cor. 6. 20. He gaue , a valuable price for his Church, 1. Tim. 2. 6. The elect haue in him the price of their redemption, Eph. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. 20. The French translateth it Rancon, which in time of warre is done by giuing body for body. Thus Dauid would haue died for his son Absolon, 2. Sam. 18. 33. and Iudah would haue bin a bondman in
Beniamins stead, Gen. 44. 33. In time of peace, and sometime in time of war, when things and persons are bought with mony. Thus the poore kinsmans land was redeemed, Leuit. 25. 25. Thus persons and beasts were redeemed, Leuit. 27. 2. to verse 33. Se∣condly, gaal more properly signifieth to deliuer by power out of enemies hands, as the valiant Iudges did deliuer the oppressed Israelites out of the hands of their oppressors; as Christ is said to deliuer vs from our enemies, Luke 1. 71. and Iob calleth Christ Gaeli, his redeeming Kinsman, Iob 19. 25. Now Christ neuer either by the blood of the couenant, Zach. 9. 11. nor by his power deliuered the vnbeleeuing repro∣bates from Satans bondage, nor from Gods iustice; they are still in the bands of iniquitie, Acts 8. 23. and Satans bondage, Ephes. 2. 2. My second argument is thus framed: The elect onely are redeemed; therefore no reprobate. The 2. Reason. strength of the argument appeareth by this, that election and iustification, which implieth redemp∣tion, with other sauing graces, are linkt together with a more then an adamantine band by Paul Rom. 8. 30. and our Lord Christ, Iohn 10. 11. 15. 29. sheweth that he dieth for his sheepe which his Father hath giuen him, that is, which are elected; and Ioh. 6. 30. he loseth none whom the Father giueth him. But Arminius boroweth from Damasen and the Schoole Theologie a will of God antecedent and conse∣quent; which antecedent will, some learned Papists call a velleitie, and say, because it is conditionated it is not formally a will in God. Now Arminius that had the wit to make bad things worse, spied that
the antecedent will of God went before any act of man, and the consequent will follow the act of well vsing and abusing his free will; and so according to this double imagined will in God, maketh a double election; affirming that by Gods antecedent will a man may be elected, and yet be damned. Now we out of the word acknowledge but one true vn∣changeable election, The foundation of God remai∣ning sure, hauing this seale, God knoweth who are his, 2. Tim. 2. 19. and dare affirme that election is the proued cause as of our saluation, so of our holinesse, Ephes. 1. 3, 4, We are elected to be holy. And Paul see∣ing the faith of the Thessalonians by the fruites and effects thereof, sayes, they were elected, 1. Thess. 1. 3, 4. And We are elected to the sanctification of the Spirit and faith of the truth, 2. Thess. 2. 13. The third argument is thus framed: Those whom Christ redeemed, he vehemently loued. What grea∣ter 3. Reason. loue then this, that a man should lay downe his life for his friends, Iohn 15. 13. Herein is Gods loue commen∣ded, in that Christ died for vs being his enemies, Rom. 5. 8. He loued me, and gaue himselfe for me, said Paul, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loued vs, and washed vs from our sins, Reuel. 1. 5. But what saith the Scripture, Mal. 1. 2, 3. Rom. 9. 11. Iacob haue I loued, and Esaw haue I ha∣ted. Fourthly, I reason thus: They which are redee∣med, are the adopted children of God. Behold me, 4. Reason. and the children which thou hast giuen me, Esa. 8. 18. They that are redeemed by Christ, Esa. 1. 5. they that waite for the benefite of their redemption, Rom. 8. 23. the Spirit of Adoption crying Abba, Father,
Rom. 8. 15. sealeth them vp to the day of their redemp∣tion, that is, the enioying of the fruite of it, Ephes. 3. 14. The fift reason is thus: If vnbeleeuing repro∣bates be sufficiently redeemed, then they are suffi∣ciently 5. Reason. iustified; for the blood and obedience of Christ the price of our redemption, is also the ma∣teriall cause of our iustification; and therefore re∣demption and iustification in some respects are all one; onely more properly Christ is said to redeem, and the Father to iustifie vs, that is, to acquit vs from our sinnes for Christs sake. Hence it is said, Rom. 3. 24. We are iuistified freely by his grace through faith in his blood, by the redemption of Christ Iesus. But I hasten to the sixt argument: For whom Christ died, their sinne, curse and punishment he 6. Reason. transferred on himselfe. He bare our sorrowes, was wounded for our transgression, Esa. 53. 4, 5. He became a curse for vs, Gal. 3. 13. He became sin for vs, 2. Cor: 5. 21. In his owne body he bare our sins, 1. Pet. 2. 24. be∣cause he was our suretie, Heb. 7. 22. If Christ had borne the sinne and punishment of Iudas and Cain, how would God in iustice lay it on them againe? If Christ died for euery particular man, he must 7. Reasons haue bin preached to all, that by the Gospell prea∣ched, the instrument of faith, Rom. 10. 14. they might haue bin inuited to faith; but before Christ it was not preached to the Gentiles. In times past he suffered all nations to walk in their owne wayes, Act. 14. 16. The time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now calleth all men to repentance, Acts 17. 30. Since Christ many heathen nations in the West and
East Indies, and in the North noua Zemble, neuer heard of Christ: and by the iudgement of the lear∣ned, the Gospell will not be preached to all nations till towards the end of the world; For then (saith Christ, Math. 24. 14.) shall the end be. The comman∣dement of preaching began in the Apostles time, not yet finished, Mark 16. 15. And the Gospel com∣ming to all the world, Col. 1. 6. is an hyperbole, as (Luke 2. 1.) Augustus edict was, that all the world should be taxed, that is, the greatest part then known being subiect to the Romane Empire. God and nature do nothing frustrate in vaine; but it were a vaine thing for Christ to die for the whole world, and not to acquaint them therewith. The eight reason followeth. They that by Christs death are freed from the guilt and punishment of 8. Reason. sinne to iustification; for whom Christs blood doth erie better things then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 14. By the same blood their consciences are freed from dead workes, Heb. 9. 14. And the one oblation of Christ doth consecrate for euer those that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 24. By Christ we are both wayes deliuered from this pre∣sent euill world, Gal. 1. 4. By his death we are iustified, so also deliuered from the vaine conuersation of the fa∣thers, 1. Pet. 1. 18. Thus repentance as well as remission of sinnes, Acts 5. 31. He died for all, that they that liue should not hence forth liue to themselues, but to him that died and rose againe for them, 2. Cor. 5. 15. We are bu∣ried with Christ, and with him raised vp to newnesse of life; being planted with him to the likenesse of his death and resurrection; we are aliue by Iesus Christ, and dead to sinne. Rom. 4. 5. 11. Yea we died both to the con∣demning
and prouoking force of the law, by the body of Christ, Rom. 7. 4. We are by the law dead to the law, Gal. 2. 19. when the law a whipping schoole∣master brings vs to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Thus we suffer with Christ, and begin to cease from sinne, 1. Pet. 4. 1. The Sonne making vs free, we are free indeed, Ioh. 8. 36. But the vnbeleeuing reprobates are the bondmen of corruption, 2. Pet. 2. 19. and lie in Satans snares, 2. Tim. 2. 26. and so are not redeemed. In a word let vs heare the ninth argument: If Christ died sufficiently for a reall and actuall impe∣tration 9. Reasons of the pardon of all and their full recon∣cilement, then he was giuen to all: but in Esa. 9. 6. To vs the elect onely a child is borne, and to vs a son is giuen; and to vs, not to the reprobates, he is made redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Tenthly, thus I reason: Christs sacrifice and in∣tercession (the two parts of his priesthood) cannot 10. Reason. be seuered; for whom he aduocates, for them he died; and so on the contrary. Christ the righteous is our Aduocate, who is a propitiatorie sacrifice to obtaine mercie for our sinnes, 1. Iohn 2. 1. Christ dying and in∣terceding at Gods right hand are put together, Rom. 8. 32, 33, 34. so Christ once offering and perpetuall in∣terceding for vs are ioyned together, Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26. Now Christ in Ioh. 17. 9. prayeth for his Church onely, not for the world. And whereas blind ignorance doth idly obiect, that Christ prayed for his enemies, Luke 23. 24. Father forgiue them, they know not what they do; Christ here expresly prayeth for them that knew not what they did, that did sin of ignorance, not of malice as the Scribes did, Acts
3. 17. who were after to beleeue on him, though they were then enemies, after they became friends. So that we see the fruite of this prayer in the con∣uersion of many thousands after by the Apostles, Acts 2. 41. and 4. 4. As Saint Steuens prayer (Act. 7. 60.) made way for Pauls conuersion, Act. 24. The eleuenth reason thus: They for whom 21. Reason. Christ died, are not onely in a sort crucified with Christ, when thereby the old man is killed and the bo∣die of sinne destroyed, Rom. 6. 6. but also in Gods e∣steeme and account, and in respect of the fruite are crucified with Christ, , we are nailed to the crosse with Christ, Gal. 1. 10. not that our suffe∣rings do adde to the merit of Christs sufferings, as the blind Papists do falsly collect out of Col. 1. 24. but we are as fully saued as if we had with Christ bin nailed to the crosse: but this cannot be spoken of any reprobate. The twelfth argument thus: They that Christ 12 Reason. died for, can neuer perish; but all vnbeleeuers pe∣rish. Rom. 8. 34. Christ died for vs, who shall condemne vs? Christ loseth none that the Father gaue him; and the Father is stronger then all, Ioh. 10. 27, 28, 29. Christ keepeth all that are giuen him, none lost but Iudas the lost child, Iohn 17. 12. The last argument. Christ cannot die without effect to any to whom his death was intended and 13. Reason. on whom it was bestowed, Gal. 2. 20. If he should die for some that shal not be saued, his death in part is not effectuall, but this is blasphemie. Why would not God saue all? O vaine man! why did he not make many worlds? because he would not, Psa. 115. 3.
Hee hath vessels of iustice, as of mercie, Rom. 9. 22, 23. Now let vs see the iudgement of the most iudi∣cious Diuines, but so as Augustine read Cyprians let∣ter, and would haue his owne receiued, not as Ca∣nonicall, but examined by the Canonicall Scrip∣tures. First let vs heare the Councell of Dort, assem∣bled against this and the like errors, thus speaking. 1. God both mercifull and iust, requireth for sinne not onely temporall punishments, but also eternall both of soule and body. Secondly, Seeing we could not make satisfaction, God of his infinite mercie hath giuen his onely begotten Sonne to become suretie for vs, who that he might satisfie for vs was made sinne and a curse on the crosse for vs or in our stead. [Note for vs often repeated, in our stead, not for reprobates.] Thirdly, this death of the Son of God is the onely most perfect sacrifice and satis∣faction for sinnes, of infinite price and value, abun∣dantly sufficient to expiate the sinnes of the world. [They say not, that it was giuen to expiate the sins of reprobates, but onely they shew the worth of it in it selfe considered.] Fourthly, they say truly, that the greatnesse of the value proceedeth from the worthinesse of the person suffering, both God and man; and from the sufferings of Gods wrath and curse. Fiftly, All are called by the Gospell out∣wardly (where it is preached) without distinction. Sixtly, That men beleeue not nor repent, proceeds from proper fault, not from any insufficiencie of Christs sacrifice. Seuenthly, They that beleeue and are freed by Christs death from sinne, obtaine this
benefit by grace alone, which he oweth to no man. Eightly, God willed Christ by the blood of the crosse, whereby he was to establish a new couenant effectually to redeeme of euery people all them, and them onely, who from eternitie were elected to saluation, and to bestow faith on them, which (as all other sauing graces) he purchased further by his death. Then they condemne the errors of them who teach, that God ordained his Son to the crosse without a certain & determinate councel of sauing particular persons: secondly, those that say, Christ did not merit as saluatiō so faith to apply the death of Christ: thirdly, they condemne the distinction of impetration and application; as if Christ had by his death sufficiently obtained pardon for all men, and did denie them faith to apply it. Secondly, the propositions disputed on before Beza and Faius at Geneua, pag. 184. of the worthi∣nesse and effectualnesse of the sacrifice of Christ, opposed to the weak, vnperfect & vnsound grounds of them that take on them the protection of the reprobates. After this title they thus begin: Christs sacrifice is the sufficient, effectuall, propitiatory ob∣lation of Christ, accomplished according to the e∣ternall counsell of God, for the sins of all the elect: secondly, hereof are two parts, prayer, Iohn 17. 12. Heb. 5. 7. and offering of the body, Heb. 10. 12. tied with a sure bond that cannot be seuered: thirdly & fourthly, first they proue this by consent of Scrip∣ture, that first Gods decree, secondly Christs exe∣cution thereof was onely for the elect. The good pleasure of God was to prosper in Christs hands; and
Christ making his soule an offering for sinne, was to see his seed, that is, his Church, Esa. 53. 10. 12. He bare the sinnes of many, and made intercession for the trans∣gressors. Christ was ordained a Mediator to die for his Church. 1. Pet. 1. 20. Fiftly, no man can sepa∣rate the purgation of sin from the reall and actuall blotting out of the same: Rom. 8. 3. He condemned sin in the flesh. Sixthly, Christ layed downe his life for his friends, Iohn 15. 13. The blood of Iesus maketh entrance into heauen for the elect only, Heb. 10. 19. Seuenthly, they cite Nicens Creed, Who came downe for vs. Atha∣nasius his Creed, And for our saluation. Eightly, no Councels consession saith, He died for all, elect and reprobates. Augustine saith, Christ taking soule and bo∣die, purgeth soule and body of all beleeuers. Ninthly, if Christ died for reprobates, these absurdities would follow: first, Gods decree had bin weake: secondly, Christ had not attained to his purposed ends: third∣ly, therefore (say they) we testifie before God and his whole Church, that that forged lie wanteth ground, that Christ should also die for the repro∣bates, and that men are condemned for infidelitie alone. In that phrase, Christ died for all sufficiently, as the Schoole-men speake, appeareth to be a hard forme of speech. For if thou either respect the coun∣sell of God, or the effect of his passion, or both, no wayes hath he died for the reprobate. Otherwise we confesse that the oblation of Christ is of great force, that it might haue bin sufficient to haue satis∣fied for infinite worlds (if so many had bin,) much more for euery singular man, if God would haue had compassion on all, or had sent his Sonne for all.
In the third place shall follow learned Dr. Abbot Bishop of Sarum, in his defence of Master Perkins, against Dr. Bishop a Secular Priest, pag. 436. 437. Now Mr. Bishop tels vs, that all Catholicks beleeue with Saint Paul, that as Christ died for all men in generall, so for euery man in particular, of his ex∣ceeding great loue towards mankind. But tell vs further M. Bishop, was that all that Saint Paul meant, that Christ loued him as all men, that he died for him as he died for all men; was this Pauls faith? Christ loued me as he loued Iudas the traitor, he died for me as he died for Simon Magus. It is writ∣ten of Esau, Esau haue I hated; and in a patterne of all reprobates it is set forth to vs: and might Esaw say as well as Paul, He loued me, and gaue himselfe for me? Augustine in the first of those articles that were falsly imposed on him, saith, In respect of the great∣nesse and power of the price, it is the redemption of the whole world, yet questionlesse the propertie of the redemption is onely theirs out of whom the Prince of the world is cast. Christ (saith D. Abbot) in his death intended a price of such extent and worth, as should be of power and abilitie to saue all, and therefore should be offered in differently to all; yet in loue he payed this price onely for them, to whom in loue he intended fruit and benefit there∣by. If he had loued all, he would haue paid it for all; but Ioh. 17. 9. I pray not for the world: and then out of Eusebius his history, he citeth the Church of Smyrna thus speaking, He suffered for the number of all that were to be saued. Lastly, thus properly therefore to speake of the intendment of Christs
death; he died not generally for all, but onely for them that were to be saued thereby. For the elect then, Christ hath died in a peculiar and speciall wise, to giue to them the benefit that should arise by his death; for them onely hath he giuen himselfe in loue, with a purpose to make them partake of his loue. Fourthly shall follow Doctor Reinolds, who was not onely a left-handed Ehud, Iudg. 5. 25. as Lactan∣tius was by Perionius his opinion, fitter to confute errors, then to strengthen the truth; our learned Doctor could do both. In his Apologie of his The∣ses against Stapleton, pag. 248. though hein some sort alloweth Aquinas his distinction on Titus, The price of Christ is sufficient to the saluation of all, but yet it hath not efficacie by reason of an impediment; yet he intends onely the dignitie and greatnesse of the va∣lue in it selfe considered, not that it was really giuen to redeeme all: and then he proueth that Christ did offer vp himselfe both sufficiently and effectu∣ally for his elect onely, out of 1. Iohn 2. 1. Christ was made a propitiation, not onely sufficient, but effectuall for his elect: For propitiation (saith he) is to make one that was angrie mercifull vnto vs; as Heb. 8. 12. , I will be mercifull to their sinnes. It would haue bin a cold comfort for Ioseph in Egypt to haue said to his brethren, There is corne enough in Egypt, and had not said, I will nourish you therewith, Gen. 45. 11. Lombard the Master of the Sentences and father of the Popish Schoole-men, lib. 3. dist. 18. teaching of the death of Christ, saith thus, Meruit nobis,
He hath merited for vs by his suffering of death and passion, and entrance vnto Paradise. Againe, Meruit membris, He hath merited for his members redemption from the Diuel, from sinne and the pu∣nishment, and the vnlocking of the Kingdome. Lastly shall follow my gathering hoast, Iudg. 9. Caluin. Instiut. lib. 2. sect. 15. Our Mediator by his holinesse doth recouer God to vs, by the sacrifice of his death he hath blotted out our guiltinesse and satisfied for our sinnes. Out of Esa. 53. 10. Asham, He gaue his soule a satisfactorie oblation for sin for vs. Out of Gal. 3. 13. made a curse for vs. To this end he citeth Deut. 21. 23. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. Numb. 21. 9. And in Sect. 7. there is a double benefit by Christs death propounded to vs; first, deliuerance frō death, and mortification of the flesh. Where we see that he with Lombard excluding the reprobate, appro∣priateth Christs death onely to the elect. Aman. Polanus Partitions, pag. 49. Christs merit is a full sa∣tisfaction for our sinnes. Kickerman 343. Christs death is a ransome to expiate all sins. Beza on 2. Cor. 5. 15. It is sufficient to saueall. Perkins Golden Chaine, It is a price sufficient for all; he saith not, a price giuen to God to satisfie for all mens sinnes. Zanchie on Ephes. 1. 7. hath the words of sufficiently and effectually, which must be vnderstood out of Augustine, onely of the greatnesse of the value, not that it was inten∣ded by the Father or Christ to be giuen as a ran∣some for any but the elect. Let Molines interprete all these: It is sufficient to saue all that beleeue; all men if they would beleeue, no insufficiencie in Christ, mans infidelitie the onely fault. The Sunne
is said to lightne all the world, yet blind men see it not; but as many of the world that do see, do see by the Sunne. Hippocrates taught all Greece and Italy physicke, that is, all that were taught physick were taught by him: so 1. Cor. 15. 22. all are said to be made aliue by Christ, because that all that are a∣liue, are aliue by him; so all are reedemed by Christ, because all that are redeemed, are by him alone and none other redeemed. M. Baynes on Ioh. 3. 16. saith, that Christ died not for all mankind but for his sheep, Ioh. 10. 15. I lay downe my life for my sheep. pag. 4. and pag. 33, 34. explaning the true sence of 1. Ioh. 2. 2. Heb. 2. 9. 1. Tim. 2. 6. 2. Cor. 5. 15. he affir∣meth that all mankind is not meant by the termes world and all: there shewing a threefold vniuersa∣litie; first, of good and bad, as a 2. Cor. 5. 10. All must appeare before Christs Tribunall. Secondly, of all euill persons in this world, Ioh. 17. 9. I pray not for the world. Thirdly, an vniuersalitie of all beleeuing ones, who are the elect; and this Ambrose calleth a speciall vniuersalitie. In this sence Christ died for all, namely, elect beleeuers. The first vse of this doctrine is to comfort all 1. Vse. that are ingrafted into Christ their Redeemer, in whose heart he dwelleth by faith, Ephes. 3. 17. To them there is no condemnation, Rom. 8. 1. their sinne he hath condemned, Rom. 8. 3. to them the law is cancelled, Col. 2. 14. for them all principalitie of hell is spoiled, Col. 2. 15. and he that had the power of death destroyed, Satan, Heb. 2. 14, 15. none can lay any thing to their charge, God in Christ iustifying them, no body can condemne them for whom Christ hath died, Rom. 8. 33, 34.
let the redeemed of the Lord, in the second places, 2 Vse. praise him, and confesse his goodnesse, Psal. 107. 2. Let vs with the 24 Elders in Reuelat. 5. 9. sing a song of praise to the Lambe who was slaine, and hath redeemed vs to God by his blood; and by himselfe hath made vs Kings and Priests to our God. He gaue himselfe for vs, that he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purifis vs to himselfe to be , a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. Segullah, a choise treasure, Exod. 19. 5. We are bought with a price; let vs therefore glorifie God in our soules and bodies, which are Gods, 1. Cor. 6. 20. This doctrine consuteth the old errorof vniuer∣sall 3. Vse. redemption, renewed and reuiued in our dayes: first Pelagius our British Bangor hereticke tooke a∣way originall sinne, raised the power of nature, a∣based grace, affirming that some men might be without sin, and so haue no need of Christ; against which the third Councell of Arles, as Caraza think∣eth, held vnder Leo the first and Martian the Em∣perour, decreed, that Christ died for all men, that is, for all that are saued; that none can saue themselues. Now the Semipelagians ioyning nature and grace together, like our Papists swarming in Aquitane of France, caused Prosper to write to Augustine about their errors, affirming, beside other things, that our Lord Iesus died for all mankind, and that no man at all is exempted from the redemption of his blood. The Papists tooke vp this error; the Luthe∣rans seconded them; the Dutch Arminians passe them. One absurditie being granted, many follow; so many errors do accompany this grand one, as
by the Arminians may appeare: First, they say, that God first decreed to send his Sonne to saue all man∣kind; and that by the antecedent will of God Si∣mon Magus and Simon Peter were equally deliuered vnder a condition of beleeuing. This is false; for if God had decreed to saue Simon Magus by Christ, he had bin verily saued: for what God decreeth before all times, that in due time he aceteth. Known to God are all his wayes from the beginning, Act. 15. 8. Gods counsell doth stand, he doth whatsoe∣uer he will, Esa. 46. 10. Gods foundation resteth sure, not standing on mens vncertainties, 2. Tim. 2. 19. The names of the elect are written in heauen, Luk. 10. 20. Heb. 12. 23. and election as also redemp∣tion is the cause of faith, 2. Thess. 2. 13. Secondly, they hold as the foundation of vniuersall redemp∣tion, a generall couenant betweene God and all mankind, not a speciall couenant betweene God & Christ & the elect: and to proue this, they do wrest Gen. 3. 15. where by the Seed they will vnderstand all mankind, and not Christ. Now the couenant there, is made with them that are onely bruised in the heele, which are the Church, not with them that are fully killed by the diuell. This couenant of grace and mercie in the promised seed, is renewed to Abraham, Gen. 17. 7. to Israel Iacob, Psal. 105. 9. 10. Luk. 1. 72, 73. ratified to Israel, Exod. 24. 7. all parti∣cularly belonging to the elect in Christ, all the pro∣mises of God are in Christ Yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. The promise is made firme to all the seed, not to that which is of the law, but to that which is of the faith of A∣braham, Rom. 4. 16. Not the children of the flesh, but
the children of the promise are counted for the seed. In Isaac shall thy seed be called, Rom. 9. 7, 8. Now to A∣braham and his seed were the promises made, he saith not, And to seeds, as to many, but as of one, To thy seed, which is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. The elect beleeuers are onely called the heires of promise, Heb. 6. 17. The Au∣thor to the Hebrewes, Heb. 8. citeth the words of Ieremy 31. chap. 33. verse, That is the couenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my lawes into their minds, and write they shall be to me a people. In these words the co∣uenant and the persons betweene whom it is made are laid downe; whence I thus argue: All with whom God maketh a couenant in Christ, are sancti∣fied with grace and holy knowledge; The vnbelee∣uing reprobates want these things; therefore there is no couenant made with them. To this their generall couenant they adde, first, that God giueth sufficient grace, though not effec∣tual to all men, yea to the heathen before Christ, because Act. 14. 17. he left not himselfe without wit∣nesse; which place proueth not this point, but that God did giue them a taste of his good prouidence, filling their hearts with food and gladnesse. Again, how can God be said to giue all men sufficient grace, when all the nations yet haue not heard nor shall heare the Gospell the meanes of grace, till towards the end of the world, Math. 24 4. when the Gospel shall be preached to all nations, then commeth the end; and when Moses in Deut. 29. 4. thus speaketh to the Iewes that long enioyed the meanes, Yet the
Lord hath not giuen you an heart to conceiue, eyes to see, or cares to heare to this day. Againe, they hold that God is bound to giue power to beleeue and to perform the condition of this couenant of grace. Arnoldus the Arminian thinketh it vnreasonable to bid a man beleeue, and not to giue him power to beleeue: As if a souldier (saith he) that hath lost his eyes, should be commanded to see, and punished for not seeing. The comparison holds not: for to be blind is not a sin, and blind men are not bound to see againe, Adam hauing in his creation power to beleeue, and wilfully losingit, might iustly be chalenged for this againe. A debter that hath wil∣fully wasted his estate, stands still liable to the debt. So was Adams case. They further obiect: Adam neuer had power to beleeue, therefore he lost it not. I answer with Molines: As Adam had power by physicke to cure diseases, though there were then none; so had he power to beleeue euery thing God should acquaint him with. And that learned man thinketh, that Moses law commanding a perfect loue of God, did require implicite and by a conse∣quence firme faith in euery promise of God. Thirdly, the Arminians hold, that Christ offering a sacrifice to God his Father, did sustaine the person of all mankind, and not of the elect onely. Which caused a brain-sicke fellow to say, that if Christ did not offer himselfe to his Father for all, then Christ did not so much as he would haue done. O blas∣phemie! Now if Christ did really offer himselfe to his Father for all men, and if all men by that his offering were reconciled to God, then all men must
be saued. Rom. 5. 10. If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, much more being reconciled we shall be saued by his life. Againe, they onely who ioy in God through Christ, haue recei∣ued reconciliation, Rom. 5. 11. this cannot happen to the vnbeleeuing reprobates. Lastly, if Christ were punished for reconciling Iudas and Pharao, then they are vniustly punished in bell. Oh what a do∣tage and giddinesse hath possessed these Armini∣ans, that affirme that reprobates do partake of the benefit of Christs death, but not of his resurrection! when (Rom. 4. 25.) He was deliuered to death for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustification. Christ died, yea rather rose againe, Rom. 8. 34. that they should liue to him that died for them, yea rather rose for them, 2. Cor. 5. 15. Thus haue we confuted, first the forged decree of sauing all men by Christ: secondly the v∣niuersall couenant, concerning which, some falsly say, That as Adam in his innocencie could performe the couenant of works, so all Adams posteritie by Christ are able to fulfil the condition of the second couenant. Augustine saith, that Adam abusing his free will, lost it and himselfe. Now mens thoughts are onely euill, Gen. 5. 6. Now God worketh the will and the deed, Philip. 2. 13. God giueth vs power to beleeue, Phil. 1. 19. Now let me more fully apart answer their ob∣iections, and take away the weapons wherein they trust. Math. 12. 29. First they obiect 1. Cor. 15. 22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made aliue. Rom. 5. 18. As by the offence of one, death came on all to condemnation; euen so by the righteousnesse of one, the
free gift came to all men to the iustification of life. Vpon occasion of these places an Arminian vttered these blasphemies in public. Lord, thou sayest, thou art iust; if thou sauest not all by Christ, as thou damnedst all by Adam, I say, thou art not iust. Lord, thou sayest, thou art loue; if thou sauest not all by the second Adam, as thou damnedst all by first, I say, thou art not loue, and shalt light short of my loue. O hellish blasphemie! the Lord rebuke thee, Zach. 3. 2. To the obiection, first, I answer, all is not always a note of vniuersalitie, 1. Cor. 8. 1. We know that we all haue knowledge, all well instructed Christians, not euery particular man. 1. Cor. 10. 33. I please all men in all things. Reuel. 18. 3. All nations are said to be drunke with the wine of the wrath of her fornications: and verse 23. All nations are deceiued, that is, many with her sorceries. Secondly, all is taken often for all the elect onely, Esa. 54. 13. Ioh: 6. 45. They all shall be taught of God. Ioh. 12. 32. Christ lift vp will draw  all the elect to him; as Ephes. 4. 10. de doth fill all the Church with his graces. Thirdly I say, that as all that do die, do die through Adam; so all that do liue, do liue by Christ. Secondly, they obiect out of 1. Ioh. 2. 3. Christ is the propitiation for the sinnes of all the world. I answer, that by the world, Iohn intends the Gentiles, the o∣ther part of Christs flock, Ioh. 10. 16. Christ dying not onely for that nation, but for all the disperst children of God through the world, Ioh. 11. 52. Thirdly, they say, the word world is taken for all mankind, not for the elect alone, Ioh. 3. 16. So God loued the world, &c. I answer, that there and in ma∣ny
other places the world doth signifie the elect on∣ly for their dwelling in the world, Ioh. 3. 17. God sent not his Sonne to condemne the world, but to saue it, namely, his elect. Ioh. 6. 33. Christ the true bread gi∣ueth life to the world: verse 51. giueth his flesh for the life of the world. Iohn 17. 21. Christ prayeth that the world might beleeue that God sent him: verse 23. he would haue the world know that his Father sent him. Rom. 11. 12. the fall of the Iewes is the riches of the world: verse 15. their reiection the reconciling of the word. 2. Cor. 5. 18. God was in Christ, reconciling the world. Heb. 2. 5. the Church triumphant is the world to come. Fourthly, they obiect, that the Scripture in ma∣ny places affirmeth, that Christ died for all, 2. Cor. 5. 15. Christ died for all, yea for all such as liue not to them∣selues, but to Christ; which no vnbeleeuing reprobate can doe. Secondly, 1. Tim. 2. 6. a ransome for all. Christ himselfe shall answer it, Math. 26. 28. where he restraines his blood to his beleeuing disciples and many others. Rom. 3. 25. Christ gaue himselfe , a propitatory sacrifice for remission of sinnes through faith in his blood. Rom. 11. 32. He hath shut all vnder sinne, that he might haue mercie on all, namely, his elect. Ioh. 17. 2. Christ as Mediator hath power ouer all flesh, that is, his Church. Againe, they say, Heb. 2. 9. he tasted death for euery man by the grace of God. In the two next verses he sheweth, that he meaneth those brethren whom he bringeth to God, and whom he sanctifieth. Againe, 1. Tim. 2. 4. God will haue all men to be saued. Yea, say we from the Schoole, genera singulorū, non singula generum, that
is, some of euery kinde and state, not euery particu∣lar man. 2. Pet. 3. 9. who will haue all men come to re∣pentance, and not perish. Yea, by his outward reuealed will; or rather, he will haue all vs, that is, Gods chil∣dren. 1. Tim. 4. 10. God is the Sauiour of all men; that is, the preseruer, as Psal. 36. 6. he saueth man and beast. Againe they obiect, that remission of sins is made voide to some beleeuers, Math. 18. 24. 34. and there∣fore some are sufficiently redeemed, but not effec∣tually. This is a parable, in which all sound reaso∣ning is scand: the drift and scope onely teaching vs that we must forgiue our brethrē, for feare of Gods displeasure. But that there is no recalling of sin for∣giuen, it appeareth by Esa. 1. 18. where scarlet sinnes are made as white as snow. The sinnes of the faithfull are cast into the bottome of the sea, Mica 7. 19. And the sinnes of Iudah being sought, should not be found, Ier. 56. 20. That in Heb. 6. 6. is spoken of a generall il∣lumination, and Heb. 10. 19. of a sanctification in shew, which may happen to hypocrites and apo∣statates, from whom shall be taken that which they seeme to haue, Luke 8. 18. They obiect Rom. 14. 15. 1. Cor. 8. 11. Destroy not him by thy meat, for whom Christ died. Through thy knowledge shall thy weake brother pe∣rish, for whom Christ died. In these places the godly are disswaded from the scandals which may (as much as in them lieth) tend to the destruction of their brethren. But the faith of Gods elect cannot be ouerthrowne, Math. 24. 24. and in Luke 22. 32, Christ prayeth for his, that their faith faile not. They obiect also out of 2. Pet. 2. 1. some denie the Lord that bought them. I answer, they deny
the Lord God, not  Christ. Secondly, as some seeme to beleeue, which indeed beleeue not; so Ma∣gus, Act. 8. 13. the Iewes, Ioh. 2. 23, 24 Ioh. 12. 42. For there are some that held the faith, and some onely that outwardly professe the faith; so there are some that seeme to beleeue, that are none of vs, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. There is an election in the iudgement of charitie before men, 1. Thess. 1. 3, 4. there is a sure election be∣fore God, 2. Tim. 2. 19, 20. There is a iustification be∣fore men; first, false, Luke 16. 15. secondly true, Iam. 2. 21. another before God, Rom. 3. 20. There is a sanctification in shew of them that count the blood of the couenant an vnholy thing, Heb 10. 29. and a reall sanctification before God, Ephes. 4. 22, 23. So this redemption in Peter, is in shew onely; another true before God, Heb. 9. 14. Thirdly, to redeeme, in a large sence is to deliuer out of any trouble, Psal. 107. 2. so in Peter, to deliuer out of ignorance, not out of hell. So there is a redemption of the body, that is, freedome, Rom. 8. 22. and the day of redemption, Eph. 1. 14. freedome from all misery. Againe they obiect, all are called and inuited to beleeue, they that beleeue not shall be condemned, Mark 16. 16. yea, are condemned already, Iohn 3. 18. The holy Ghost conuinceth many of sinne, because they beleeue not on Christ, Iohn 16. 9. They that beleeue not, make God a lyer, 1. Iohn 5. 9, 10, 11. These Arminians hold, that all men are bound to beleeue, that Christ died for them, and therefore he died for them. Indeed Mo∣lines doth deny this, pag. 47. 195. 209. 251. saying three times, that all are not bound to beleeue: first, for that all neuer heard the Gospell; and secondly,
faith is required with condition of repentance, Mark 1. 15. first repent, and then beleeue the Gospell. That many neuer heard the Gospell, it is plaine: He hath not dealt so with euery nation, neither haue the hea∣then knowledge of his law, Psal. 147. 19, 20. they were caried away to dumbe idols, 1. Cor. 12. 2. they knew not God, Gal. 4. 8. Reade Purchas, and you shall see how many nations yet neuer heard of the true God and Christ. That of 1. Ioh. 5. 9, 10. must thus be read, , He that beleeueth on the Sonne of God, which is indeed true faith, hath his witnesse in himselfe: , He that doth not giue cre∣dit to Gods testimony, hath made him a lyer; which testi∣monie is not that he hath redeemed them, but as it followeth, that he hath giuen his Sonne to vs, namely his elect, and in him lif eternall. Now to the milder sort of our neighbour Armi∣nians, who being deceiued with the termes of suf∣ficiencie and efficacie, erroniously hold that Christ intended the sufficiencie of his death indifferently to all mankind: and secondly, that his death was a propitiatory sacrifice sufficiently redeeming the re∣probate as the elect. To these I say with Aristotle, , Plato is a friend, and so is Socrates; but the truth is my dearest friend. O why do you suffer your selues to be seduced by these seducers, deceiuing others and being deceiued themselues, 2. Tim. 3. 13. these men are subuerted and condemned in them∣selues, Tit. 3. 11. Grosse error, as the fish Loligo, hath benummed their hands and hearts. As a master fin∣ding his seruants playing at dice, may put out the
candle, saith Moline; so might God iustly put out the light of these mens iudgements when they tur∣ned wantons with their wit. Againe, why do you strengthen the hands of the profane Atheists, who vnder a false perswasion of an vniuersall redemp∣tion, thinke their estate good: like some wilde Irish, of whom Camden writeth, who in the midst of their murders and thefts, will say, God is mercifull, and he will not suffer the price of his blood to be vaine in me, though they neuer thinke of faith and re∣pentance. I know that the Fathers, Schoole-men, Caluin, Beza, vsing this distinction of sufficiencie and efficacie after another sence then you do, doth much strengthen you in your error. But marke what the Ciuill law tels vs, that the sence of the law, and not the words of the law, is the law. They onely meant hereby to extoll the infinite value of Christs death; and yet they intended that Christ bestowed his death only on his Church. That Christ should die sufficiently for all mankind, the Geneuian Theses calls it a hard phrase; and learned Ames cals it an improper phrase. Iustin Martyr and other Fathers before Pelagius a∣rose, spake lesse warily of free will: afterwards Au∣gustine and the rest more cautelously. The Councel of Tolido, to auoide consent with the Trithites, or∣dained once dipping in baptisme. So I would wish that this distinction had bin kept within the Schools, where the true sence thereof was known: First, God who is truly , most freely wor∣king all things according to the counsell of his will, E∣phes. 1. 11. cannot be charged with iniustice, in cau∣sing his Sonne to die for a few: for by his law he
might haue saued none, Gen. 2. 17. yea he had shewed mercie if by his Sonne he had saued onely Mary. Neither do thou say: Why shold Adā sinning in act in his own proper person be saued, and many others of his own proper person be saued, and many others of his posteritie through his fall be damned? Rom. 5. 15. O man, who art thou that disputest with God? Rom. 9. 20. Lastly, I would not haue thee think that the limiting of Christs death to his Church onely, doth diminish his merits; the greatnesse whereof consisteth in satisfying the infinite wrath of God, rather then in the number he satisfied for: as the omnipotencie of God appeareth in raising one dead man as in raising many. Now that Christ died of purpose sufficiently to redeem all, these men reason, first, as a King offereth pardon to all Rebels that will lay downe their weapons; so God by the preaching of the Gospell offereth Christ to all; and therefore he must needs die for all. To this I answer with Moline, the greatest part of the reprobates ne∣uer had the Gospell preached to them. Secondly, I say, that in the visible Church though the word be scattered on diuers sorts of grounds, Mat. 13. 3, 4, 5, 6. yet of many called outwardly by the word, few are chosen, Math. 20. 16. and so consequently few are redeemed. The vnworthy house may be saluted; but if the Sonne of peace be not there, the saluation returnes voide, Math. 10. 12, 13. Luke 10. 5, 6. The reason hereof is, because the Minister knoweth not who are elected and redeemed, and who not. In Tit. 2. 11. the grace of God bringing saluation, is said to appeare to all men. For the elects sake the word is offered to whole nations, God in the meane time
knowing who are his, and who will beleeue, Ioh. 6. 64. Lastly, the inward working spirit and grace is not giuen but to the elect onely, whose heart God doth open, as he did Lydiaes, Acts 16. 14. and thus God daily addeth to the Church such as shall be saued, Acts 2. 47. and as many as are ordained to life do be∣leeue, Acts 13. 48. To these alone the Spirit of God is powerfull as fire, Acts 2. 1, 2. Christ knocking leaueth grace in the key hole, and opens the hearts of his, Cantic. 5. 1, 2, 3. Reuel. 3. 20. He taketh away the stonie hearts of his elect, Ezek. 11. 19. by the power of his might, Ephes. 1. 19. Gods grace doth not work by the outward allicium, alluremēt, of the Arminians, but is sufficient for al Gods chosē, 2 Cor 12. 8. Gods word may be resisted, Act. 7. 51. but grace in the elect cannot by reason be ouercome. He that calleth his is faithfull, and will also do it, 1. Thess. 5. 24. Secondly, they obiect, that Christ in the Sacra∣ments is offered to all promiscuously, as a table fur∣nished, or else they are no Sacraments, Mat. 22. 1, 2, 3. To this I answer, that the benefits of the Gospell in the word and Sacraments belong to the repro∣bates onely by inuitation, not by fruition. Vnbelee∣uers are strangers from Gods promise. The Sacraments may be true sacraments though Christ be not there; the word and elements making a Sacrament, as Au∣gustine truly obserueht, though the fruite and the effect of the Sacrament (which is another thing) be wanting. Iohn who giueth not the Spirit, yet giueth a true Sacrament, Math. 3. 11. Iudas (saith Augu∣stine) did eate the bread of the Lord, not bread the Lord. As the word not mixed with faith, profiteth not,
Heb. 4. 2; so neither baptisme without the stipulation of a good conscience 1. Pet. 3. 21. They further obiect: The Sunne shineth on all, so Christ is offered to all. I answer, this simile of the Sunnes shining to all, and pardon offered to all, re∣sembleth the manifestation of the Gospel preached to all, and not the death of Christ suffered for all: and yet the Sunne shining on one Hemisphere or part of the world, doth not shine to the other: for we may not with some of the Fathers (against daily experience) denie the Antipodes. I denie that the Sunne of righteousnesse shineth on all, but onely on those that feare his name, that is, the elect belee∣uers, Mal. 4. 2. Secondly, though by the outward word he shineth on many a reprobate, yet doth not open their eyes to make them see, as he doth his childrens eyes, 1. Iohn 4. 9. Dauids eyes, Psal. 119. 18. and the faithfuls cares, Iob 33. 16. Lastly, they say, that all mankind are like close barrels in the Sea, there is water enough if they would open themselues. True, there is an infinite sea of mercy with God, Psal. 36. 9. but the elect of God do onely draw vp these waters, Esa. 12. 3. The Lord by his free grace and Spirit bores a hole in our close casks: he found the reprobate blind by that wilful fall in Adam, and close shut vp; he is not bound to make them see, nor bound to make a vent in them for the entrance of his mercies. But why then (wil you say) are infidels damned? I answer, that the prime cause of damnation in man, especially to them that neuer heard the word, is the breach of Gods law, Gen. 2. 17. In that day thou eatest, thou shalt
die the death; yet I confesse that infidelitie in Adam was the chiefe cause of his fall, Gen. 3. 1, 2, 3. The breach of Gods law bringeth men to the curse, Deu. 27. 26. Men are damned positiuely for breaking Gods law, Math. 25. 41, 42. priuatiely for vnbeliefe simply considered alone, He that hath not the Sonne, hath not life, 1. Iohn 5. 11. both positiuely and pri∣uatiuely, for a scornfull reiecting of Christ, Ioh. 3. 18. and therefore the wrath of God abideth on them, Iohn 3. 16. The positiue condemnation is like theft, murder, treason obiected to a malefactor; the priuatiue the not able to reade the Psalme of mer∣cie: both positiue and priuatiue, when mercie offe∣red in contemptuously refused, Now that Christ in no true proper sence died for the vnbeleeuing reprobates, I thus reason: first, God the Father who appointed Christ to this kind of death, Acts 2. 23. and 4. 29. by no reuealed decree appointed his Sonne to die for the reprobate: He formed Christ from the wombe to bring Iacob againe, and to restore the preserued of Israel, Esa. 49. 5, 6. Secondly, when Christ was borne, he was only giuen to the Church, Esa. 9. 6. Thirdly, Christ sanctified himselfe onely to die for his Church, Ioh. 17. 19. Fourthly, in the very act of sufferings he made his soule an offering onely for his seed the Church, Esa. 53. 10. Lastly, his Fa∣ther accepted it oneyl as a sweet smelling sauour for his Church, Eph. 5. 2. Reu. 8. 3. And the Church onely is sanctified by faith in Christs death, a sufficient propitiatory sacrifice and satisfying ransome for all the worlds sinnes. How can it be a sufficient sacri∣fice to procure mercy to the whole world, to which
it was neuer intended by the Father, and for which it was neuer acted by Christ, but onely for his cho∣sen out of the world. The world in 1. Ioh. 2. 2. signi∣fying the beleeuing Gentiles, the other part of Christs flock, for which he properly died, Ioh. 10. 16. If we shall once grant, that Christ died truly and properly for all mankind, it must needs follow, that his death is both sufficient and effectuall to them all; for sufficiencie and efficacie cannot be seuered from Christs death to them for whom he died. They erre therefore that say, that Christ gaue , 1. Tim. 2. 6. a redemptory price and satis∣factory sacrifice for all mankind, quoa substantiam, non quoad effectum, in regard of the substance, but not in regard of the effect; seeing the effect doth necessarily follow the substance of Christs death, as heate cannot be seuered from the fire. And what I pray you doth this distinction differ from that of the Arminians, saying, A sufficient impetration was obtained for all, but not an application. Againe, in the fourth verse immediatly aforegoing this text, 1. Tim. 2. 4, Saint Paul sayeth, that God would haue all men to be saued, intended onely all the elect, of all nations, times and conditions: and so according to a true Theologicall rule, the circumstances of this place interprete truly the text, not for, but against the Arminians. And whereas in the fourth verse be∣fore going, the Apostle addes to  all,  men; yet this sentence is onely to be restrained to the elect: why should we not in this verse follow∣ing, where  for all, is onely expressed
without a substantiue, vnderstand onely  elect, or  Saints, and not all mankind? Obiection. Resurrection is common to all the sonnes of Adam, and that as a fruite of the death and resurrection of Christ the Mediator. Answ. The difference of the resurrection giues a sufficient answer to this: for this resurrection vn∣to life is proper onely to the elect; it is the generall resurrection that is common vnto all. The elect shall be raised by Christ as a common head, giuing life vnto all his member; but the wicked shall be rai∣sed by him as he is God and Iudge of all, so to bring them to iudgement. Obiect. If Christ had not died, the wicked should not haue bin raised. Answ. There is no proofe of this in Scripture; but it is plaine, 1. Cor. 15. that resurrection to life is proper to the elect as a fruite of Christs resurrec∣tion: for ver. 18. such as rise thus, are such as sleepe in Christ; and ver. 40. they haue heauenly bodies, and ver. 43. they rise to glorie, and they triumph ouer death and the graue. Christ sustaines the person of a head to raise his body, and of a Iudge. The wicked are not raised by the power of Christs resurrection, but ra∣ther as he is God and Iudge of all: for it was an e∣ternall death and torment which was threatned to Adams sinne, Gen. 2. 17. which sentence how can it be executed by the great Iudge, vnlesse as a Iudge by his diuine power he shall raise the bodie and ioyne it to the soule, and so make them fit to re∣ceiue torment ioyntly, as they sinned toge∣ther.
Obiect. 1. Cor. 15. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made aliue; in both places they say, all the sonnes of Adam are meant. Answ. The Apostle in that Chapter plainly com∣pares Adam and Christ together, as two common rootes; and so his meaning must needs be: That as all receiue death frō Adam as a common root to all his posteritie; so Christ being a common roote also, conueyes life to all, to wit, to all that are his spiri∣tuall ofspring, and ingrafted into him by faith. It is absurd and against common sence and reason, that a branch can receiue life from a tree, vnlesse it be in∣grafted and growing vpon it; or that member can receiue life from the head, that is not ioyned to the bodie. Obiect. Ioh. 6. 29. This is the worke of God, that ye beleeue in his Sonne. Answ. By the outward dispensation of the word, Christ speaketh to men vnder the outward coue∣nant, as in the iudgement of charitie included in the inward couenant of grace, and members of the inuisible Church of the elect. Obiect. 1. Ioh. 3. 23. This is the commandement of God, that we beleeue in his Sonne: all are commanded to beleeue in Christ, therefore he died indifferent∣ly for all. Answ. We in the 19. 20. 21. 22. verses aforegoing, is restrained to them onely that are of the truth, and assure their hearts before God; whose hearts may ac∣cuse them of slips and slidings, but not of flat insi∣delitie, grosse hypocrise or profanenesse, who haue boldnesse towards God, who by prayer receiue
from God whatsoeuer they aske. These things be∣long to the elect beleeuers onely: so in the strict sence doth this commandement properly belong to the elect members of Christ. Secondly, by the outward preaching of the Gospell, the Minister not knowing the elect from the reprobate, indiffe∣rently inuiteth all to beleeue; which if they could do, Christ would be their sufficient and effectuall Redeemer. But indeed faith is one true effect of e∣lection and redemption, 2. Thess. 2. 13. and the re∣probate cannot fulfill the law of God, nor beleeue, wanting Gods Spirit; 1. Cor. 12. 3. No man can say, that Christ is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. God gi∣ueth powre to his elect to beleeue, Phil. 2. 29. All men haue not faith, 2. Thess. 3. 2. Faith is onely in Gods elect, Tit. 1. 1. And yet they may be outwardly commanded to beleeue, as to fulfill the law, though in Adam they haue lost the power of the one and the other; and wanting the Spirit, cannot obey nor beleeue, 2. Cor. 3. 7. 8. To conclude, touching the sufficiencie of Christs death, thus I answer, that if we consider the power intrinsecal, included in his most meritorious passion, it is absolutely sufficient for all; but if we consider the extrinsecall operation, it is sufficient onely to and for the elect, as 2. Cor. 12. 9. , My grace is sufficient for thee, namely, my grace issu∣ing from me, and working sufficiently in thee. So Christ perceiued that vertue was gone out from him, Mark. 5. 30. Luke 8. 44, 45. Dorts Synod truly acknowledgeth the infinite value of Christs death simply considered in it self,
but doth not say, that it was giuen a sufficient pro∣pitatory sacrifice for the reprobate. And the Ge∣neuian Theses tels vs, that Christs death might haue redeemed infinite worlds, if God would haue had compassion on all. The death of Christ consi∣dered in it selfe, quoad potentiam, potentially, is suf∣ficient simply alone to saue all; but considered with some respects, is not actually, really and in true effect sufficient to saue any reprobate. First, the vnbeliefe of the reprobate maketh Christs death not really and actually sufficient to saue him. Christ could not do many wonders in his owne country, for their vnbe∣liefe, Mark 6. 5, 6. so the infidelitie of the reprobate doth make Christs death fruitlesse. If thou canst be∣leeue, all things are possible to the beleeuer, and so on the contrary, Mark 9. 23. Now faith is onely of Gods elect. Tit. 1. 1. and many Iewes could not beleeue, Ioh. 12. 39, 40. When we say, Christ can saue all if they would beleeue, this is spoken by a supposition: but the reprobates not beleeuing, cannot be saued. Secondly, Gods decree hath exempted all the vn∣beleeuing reprobates out of this pardon purchased by Christs death; as a Kings pardon, though neuer so great and large, excepting murderes, may be said not to be able to saue them. Againe; a King gi∣ueth to some Courtier gold enough to enrich a whole parish; but yet limiting bountie to one pro∣perly, the receiuer is enriched, not an exempted parish. Thirdly, the person of Christ and the per∣sons of the reprobates considered in some sort, Christs death may be said to be no sufficient propi∣tiatory sacrifice for them; because that is truly suffi∣cient,
that is apt and fit. 2. Cor. 2. 16. Who is , apt and fit, that is, sufficient for these things. Now as Kimidontius reasoneth, Christ cannot saue the di∣uels, in regard of that vnfitnesse in their per∣sons; Christ not taking their nature on him, Heb. 2. 16. So Christ being our redeeming Kinsman onely, Iob 19. 25. and bone of our bone, and flesh of the Chur∣ches flesh onely, Eph. 5. 30. he is fit to saue vs, not the reprobate. Therefore though there be but one sin∣full cause in man to debar him of Christ, yet we see some iust cause in the Father and Sonne to exclude him from hauing any interest in Christs death. though Gods counsell must stand, and he will do whatsoeuer he will, Esa. 46. 10. yet I haue proclai∣med to all men, that God excludeth none byout∣ward dispensation and manifestation of his mercie: in regard of Gods secret counsell, I call not into doubt any mans state here present, I am perswaded better things of you, and such as accompanie sal∣uation, though thus I speake against Arminia∣nisme. I do interate you all to be reconciled to God, 2. Cor. 5. 18. Make your vocation and election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10. Be not like the heretiks called Praedestinati, who (out of Augustines true discourse of Predestina∣tion and grace (saith this person) do contemne the vse of faith and good works. The Lord increase all our faith in his gracious promises made to vs in Christ. Amen. FINIS.
