B2172 [ocm]15237446 200533
A Scheme of Prophecy Now to be Fulfilled; Beginning this present Year, 1691; And so to be car∣ried on to the Succssion of the Kingdom of Christ, 1697. Assuring the Success of the KING's Pre∣sent EXPEDITION. With a most Humble Appeal upon it to HIM, who Frustrateth the Tokens of Lyars, and maketh Diviners Mad; That turneth Wise Men Backward, and maketh their Knowledge Foolishness; But Confirmeth the Word of His Servants, and Performeth the Counsel of His Messengers; Isaiah xliv. 26. AS I have made an Appeal to All, who will set Themselves to Consider Scri∣pture, Concerning the Spirits speaking Expresly, or word for word, of the Thousand Years Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, by a Compare of Plain Do∣ctrinal and Prophetical Scripture; So it hath Pleased God to put it into my Thoughts to Give a Scheme of Prophecy, concerning the Things to Come to Pass, these Six next ensuing Years, until 1697. When I Affirm, This Kingdom of Christ will be in its Succession, to prepare in 75, for its Thousand Years Glory. But because Prophetical Arguments are so little Heeded, and so hardly Understood; I herein make an Appeal concerning its Truth unto Him, who by his Almighty Disposes, is A∣ble to Give the Undeniable Assurance of Matter of Fact, and to Justifie my Prophe∣tical Grounds by Event. The Prophetical Assertion, or Prediction, I Declare, is, That God will Bless the Ex∣pedition and Conduct of the King this Summer, with this Great and Happy Event; That the Vaudois and French-Suffering Protestants who have so long Lain, as in a State of being Kill'd, shall see the Dawn of the Morning-Star, and Begin to use the Rod of Iron upon the Antichristian Tyranny over Them. The Grounds I have for this in Prophecy, are, The Church of Thyatyra is the Great Symbol of these Suffering Witnesses, whose High Opposition to the Kingdom of Anti∣christ,
and Appearance for the Kingdom of Christ, is made Remarkable, by not only Christ knowing its Works, as in the other Churches, but by a Secret Remark of Their Works: Besides, and Distinct from Their Faith, Love, and Patience; And Their Last Works are Observed by Christ to be Greater, Larger, Richer, More Worthy than Their First. Now to Those of this Church, who shall not only Overcome, but Keep the Works of Christ to the End▪ He Promises the Morning-Star, and in a Peculiar manner the Use of the Iron Rod. The Time of the End then being so near, and They having by so long a Succes∣sion, Signified by the Word, [The Rest of Thyatyra] Held the Works of Christ so near that End, and so near the Morning, I with Humble Confidence Foretel; The Morn∣ing-Star is near to Dawn on Them, and the Iron Rod Ready to be Put into Their Hand. that They may Use it upon their Persecutors. For these Works of Christ in Owning and Appearing for his Kingdom, are most Illustriously joyn'd with Their Overcoming; Disserent from any other of these Seven Churches; and They shall be Their Last, Greater, Nobler, than Their First. Herein I Know and Understand my own Prophetical Grounds; But They lying Deep in Prophecy, and so not easie to be Drawn out unto Publick View, I humbly make Appeal to Almighty Providence this Summer, Concerning Their Truth, and shall Present this Short and more Easie Scheme in these Three Heads. 1. There are some Things so Clear in Prophecy, That I call Them Postulates. Post. 1. That we are now under the Last Apocalyptical Scaling; viz. The Sealing of the Thunders; For when the Seven Seals were Opened, then the 144000 Witnesses were Sealed, The Time and Times of their Sealing, and the Last Half-Time of it being En∣ter'd, the Book was Held Open; on which Seven Thunders Ʋttered their Voices, and so All had been Opened, if those Thunders had not been Seal'd. This being then at the Last Half-Time, beyond which there should be by the Oath of the Angel, No more such Time, must needs be the Last 180 of the 1260. And being at the Reformation, which could not have been with such a Diminution of the Beastian Kingdom sooner than Half-Time Began; And that being at 1517, we must be now within Six Years of the End of the 1260 Days of the Seventh Trumpet, and of the Proclaiming the Kingdom of Christ in Succession, and so within Six of the Last 75, of the 2300 Eves Morns Reserved for the Kingdom of Christ's preparation for it self before the Thousand Years Glory. 2ly. The Ten Kings must be Ten Kings to the Last; And as in so many Distinct Monarchies, and not Engross'd into the Empire or Universal Monarchy of One; As Ten They gave Their Kingdom to the Beast; As Ten They shall Hate the Whore: Therefore no One shall Comprehend the Other in an Empire over the Rest. 3ly. The Greatness of the Roman Church and its Papacy, shall Fall before the Turk Fulls, For the Tenth of the Great City shall Fall before the Second Woe, which was of the Turkish Tyranny, shall pass away. 4ly. The Churches, and Nations Rescued from Papal Tyranny, by Christ, and by the Thunders uttering their Voices, shall not be Repriz'd back by Papal Power: For then that Glorious Appearance of Christ making his Claim, and the Thunders uttering their Voices, had been in vain, and the whole Work to Do Anew; Which would not Become the Glory of Christ so Celebrating Half-Time Beginning. 5ly. The Protestant Churches lying in the Bowels of Popish Territories and Laws, or even Natives, as in Ireland, though they were subject to the Breaking out of such Tyranny upon Them, until near the End, Yet it is to the Glory of Christ, that near that End, They should be Restor'd to any of the Freest Times, and Higher than They
have Enjoyed since the Reformation; And the End being now so near, it is to be Ex∣pected, there should be an Appearance of their Standing, as the Witnesses on their Feet, by a Dawning of the Morning-Star upon Them, and a Putting the Iron Rod into their Hand. For all this, as it is most Agreeable to the Prophecy of the Revelation; so to the Prophecy of Zechary, That Foretels, That One Day of Two Half-Days, Known to the Lord, contrary to other Times of Deliverance, Its Half-Time, or Evening, shall in that After-part, or Evening, be Light; For the other Part of that Half-Time, or Half-Day, shall be the Kingdom of Christ in Succession; Proportionably towards the very End of the Half-Time, it shall be Light. Sixthly, There being a They of the Synagogue of Satan, Rising out of the Splen∣did Pompous, though Protestant-Church, of Sardis, first severe upon Those, who shall after Constitute the Philadelphian-Church, and endeavouring to Shut the Door, Christ both Set, and will keep Open for Them: There shall be a Preparation even of such to Come Bending to Philadelphia, and to Worship at its Feet, and to Know, Christ loves it: Which is Daily to be more and more Expected, together with the Morning-Star Dawning on the Suffering French and Vaudois, and the Iron Rod put into their Hand. Let Us now Observe on the Second Head, the Balance of Providence of Late Time, according to this Judgment upon Prophecy, and in Confirmation of Its giving Hopes, that what is now spoken, shall be Fulfilled, Even as already It hath been, in these Observations following. Observ. 1. Because Half-Time, as hath been Observ'd often, is not yet Run out; There are so many of the Ten Kings, who continue to Give Their Kingdom to the Beast; and the Conclave is at this Time engag'd in a Papal Election, and so many Princes Endeavouring to Concert the Choice with their Interests. Observat. 2. Because the Half-Time also is not yet Run out: We Observe a Pom∣pous Sardian Church with its Hierarchick Feet of Clay, and Elections to that very pur∣pose Remarkably at the same Time with the Instant Conclave in its Election. All which Derives from that Primitive Synagogue of Satan, as hath been also Largely heretofore even as now Declard, and a Ceremonial Formal-worship suited to it. Observat. 3 Because the Turkish Fall is to Attend the Papal and Roman, as hath been often heretofore observ'd; Therefore when its Fall seem'd so in View, the French Power (so Order'd by Supream Providence working as by a Wheel within a Wheel,) In∣terpos'd for its Respite by such Attacks on the Empire. Observat. 4. Because the Kings are to be Ten, till in that Configuraion, They hate the Whore; even the Princes, yet Giving their Kingdom to the Beast, yea the Papal See its self is Confederated against the Freuch Aspirings to Imperial Power. This hath also been before Remarkt. Observ. 5. Because none of the Kingdoms Rescu'd from the Papacy are to be Re∣priz'd to it: Therefore by so Immediate a Hand of Providence was a Papal Prince, See K. James's Letter to the Pope, in L. Preston's Tryal at the end. Acknowledging his Intention to have Ren∣der'd back These Nations under that Supremacy, Remov'd, and a Protestant Prince brought in, as on the very Wings of Prophecy; Therefore was there so Wonderful a Victory last Summer at the BOYN, Settling a Protestant Supream in Ireland; And yet because Ireland is a Country of Popish Natives, it stopp'd there: All which was Predicted ac∣cording to Prophecy, even before that Victory. Observ. 6. Because the Suffering-Witnesses of the French and Vaudois are to See the Morning-Star, and to be Entrusted with the Rod of Iron; Therefore even Popish Prin∣ces
are made Helpful to Them, and especially so Great a Protestant PRINCE is Commanded by God to be at the Head of a Confederate Army; And it is to be Hop'd, This shall at Least prepare for that which is to Bee; Even The Hating the Whore by Those Confederate Princes; who have not yet Abdicated that Antichristian Church. Observ. 7. Because the They of the Synagogue of Satan, are to Worship at the Feet of Philadelphia so soon; Therefore in Preparation hath there been so Great an Episcopal Revolution as we now see even in this Nation; The most Eminent of which are, It is to be Hoped, in their own Persons of the Ʋndefiled Names of Sardis: Although that cannot Attone for the Constitution; But it must and shall Fall in the Approaching. Grand Re-Reformation. Yet I doubt not, it makes way to a far Greater Union of all Churches and Judgments, then can, at the Persent be seen; And It Runs to that Greatest Ʋnion that shall Contemporate with the Two Sticks of Judah and Joseph United; even the Israelitish and Gentile Churches, the whole Isaerl of God made one. In all these Things, I have found hitherto a Wonderful Concert betwixt my Prophetical Models and the Late Governments of Providence; But with an Highest Ar∣dency of Affection and Prayer, I wait for the Gracious Answer of this Appeal, in some Illustrious Success of this present ROYAL EXPEDITION. And though so Great a Formality, Security, Worldliness, such Feuds and Ani∣mosities found in the Best Churches, and Persons; such a Deluge of Profaneness and Debauchery found in the Generality; Seem most certain Presages of Ruine; And so many French Vanities and Sins, more Dreadful than French Pensionaries, and secret Partisans; (Though They Humanely speaking, are Dreadful enough;) Look as a Surer Prophecy of a French Victoriousness and Servitude under it, than what I here offer; Yet because the Kingdom of Christ is Principally Concern'd, and Prophecy Rests upon that, I doubt not still to make the Appeal with Humble Boldness, and Assurance; And to say, God will work for his Names Sake, and will either Reform, or by some other Method of Judgment, then that of French or Papal Tyranny, Punish the Out∣ward Court-Protestancy of these Nations, and of other Protesta t States and Churches; His Servants Keeping no Silence, nor Giving Him Rest Day or Night, Till He make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth. For when I find God hath so laid Things together, according to the whole Pro∣phetick Idea before us; That He hath stirr'd up the Spirit of a Protestant Prince, whose Grand Motions, (however he may Discover the Frailty of a Man in his smaller Administrations) Look up as of Divine Erection and Inspiration; and that God hath put Life in those Suffering-Witnesses, under so Great a Minister of His Gospel, and Com∣mander together; M. Arnold; That he hath Congregated the other Ten Kings, and even the Papal Head to keep France to the Tenour of Prophecy, as but a Tenth Horn; and to Repress his Exorbitancy; That the Turk Survives, and yet shall not Exceed the Bounds set Him, but rather Verge to his Fall; That the Protestant Churches Abroad and at Home, and particularly the Church of England hold, each their State, according to the very Model given; That Ireland is upon its Reduction, though more slowly; I fear not God will give Judgment for Me in this Appeal, as He hath hitherto done; Although the Churches abroad ought much to awaken to a Higher Re-Reformation, Al∣though the Nation, and Church, and even Churches of England need much of the Refining Fire, and Fullers-Soap; And although the Appellant be most Unworthy of All, whom God should Hear; yet because All is for the Kingdom, and through the Death and Intercession of Christ for Transgressors, who is so near to have Portion divided Him with the Great, and to divide the Spoil with the Strong; I shall not sear, that God so near the very Time, will Disannul so Great Appearances; I Stand therefore on my Watch-Tower Day and Night, and Watch to See what He will say to me, and what I shall Answer on any of His Counter, Arguments: For He will Enable Me to Answer Them.
