B4893b C.112.f.9[21] R231232 99888600 195826
A Brief Account, of the Nature, Vertues, Use, and Excellency of INDIAN CATTEE. CAttee is the only true Composition of Catechu, whereof there are two sorts: The Right is treated of by John Huighen Van Linscholen, in his History of his Voyages into the East-Indies, Printed Anno 1598. Page 107. They use says he, to wit, the Indians, a mixture made of a certain Wood or Tree, into little Rolls called Cattee, which is very good for the Maw, and against a Stinking Breath; a Soveraign Medicin for the Teeth, and fastening the Gums; very good against the Scurvey: And it is most true, that in India, very few are troubled with Stinking Breath, or Toothach, Scurvey, or any such Diseases: And Page 108. The King says he, and Lords of India, use Rolls made of Cattee, Aracca Camphir, Lignum Aloes, and Amber Greese, &c. Which they continually eat mixt together. Next Schorder, and thence Salmon in his New London Dispensatory, terms it a Japonick Earth of a Purple Colour, with white Specks as if Mouldy; very sharp in Tast, melts in Chewing, leaveing a Sweetness behind it; is drying, and held in the Mouth, it dryes up all Catarrhs, and strengthens the Head. The other Common Sort, called Cashew, is of a concret hard Substance, like Old Spanish Juice of Liquorish, the which made up with Musk, into little Grains, like Mice-turds, is vended by the Name of Cashew, which (though for goodness nothing like it) many sup∣posing it to be the same as Cattee; hath obliged me to give this account of both, that Cashew may not be mistaken for Cattee, which is only there recommended as it is made up with its speciphick admixtures, after the true Indian manner (which is only known to my self) into little Rolls or Confects; whereof one or two being held in the mouth, and as it melts, swallowing down the moisture, it so strengthens and comforts the Stomach, Head, Heart, Breast, and Lungs; drys up all Rheums, helps Digestion, expels Wind, allays all Va∣pours, sweetens the Breath, and preserves the Teeth and Gums; that neither Scurvey, Tooth∣ach, Stinking Breath, Cough, Tissick, or such like Infirmities as are found among the Indians: whereof I have seen the Experience, as having lived more then ten Years there; and there∣fore recommend the like use of it here, where such Infirmities rage so much amongst us; especially the Remedy being so delightful, pleasant, and diverting. Also, if three or four Confects be put into half a Pint of scalding hot Water, with the like Quantity of fine Sugar, as is put into so much Tea, it makes as Excellent a Drink in two or three minutes space, having all the Vertues and Properties both of Tea and Coffee. And one or two Confects put into a Pipe of Tobacca, it yields a Curious Fra∣grant Smell. Wherewith all Persons may be furnished at most Principal Coffee-Houses, and Places sell∣ing such things for One Shilling the BOX; from the Author, living in Holborn, at the Phisitians Arms over the Door, in the New-Red-Lyon-Street, against Great Turn-stile, where is his private new way of Sweating and Bathing both at once, by an Artificial Dew-Bath, without entering into Water, or Heat of Fire, or Breathing the Air, wherein the Body sweats; whereby all the prejudices happening by all other ways of Sweatings and Bathings are prevented. This being only performed by the Heat and moysture of a continued Warm Vaporous Dew, or Steem, raised from various Decoctions of all sorts of Drugs; as Herbs, Flower, Seeds, Woods, Waters, Wines, &c. according to each ones Occasion; which continually Flows and Distills on the Body, dureing all the time of Sweating and Bathing; and is always Prepared anew, peculiarly for every one that uses it. P. Brook. M. C.
Advertisement. AT the Physitians Arms over the Door; in the New Red-Lyon street in Holborn, against great Turn-stile, is the China Hummum, or the private new way of Sweating and Bathing both at once, after the China manner, by a Dew-bath, without entering into Water or Heat of Fire, or Breathing the Air, wherein the Body sweats; whereby all the prejudices happening by all other ways of Sweatings and Bathings are prevented; this only being performed by the Heat and Moisture of a continued Warm Vaporous Dew or Steam; arising from Decoctions of all sorts of Drugs; as Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, Woods, Waters, Wines, &c. Of various properties and Qualities according to each ones occasion, which continually Flowing and Distilling on the Body, dureing all the time: It Sweats and Baths the Body both at once, being always prepared particularly for each one that uses it. P. Brook. M. C. Advertisement. AT the Physitians Arms over the Door, in the New Red-Lyon-street in Holborn, against great Turn-stile is the China Hummum, or the private new way of Sweating and Bathing both at once, after the China manner, by a Dew-bath, without entering into Water, or Heat of Fire, or Breathing the Air, wherein the Body sweats; whereby all the prejudices happening by all other ways of Sweatings and Bathings are prevented; this only being performed by the Heat and Moisture of a continued warm Vaporous Dew or Steam; arising from Decoctions of all sorts of Drugs; as Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, Woods Waters, Wines, &c. Of various Properties and Qualities according to each ones occasion, which continually Flowing and Distilling on the Body, dureing all the time. It Sweats and Baths the Body both at once, being always prepared particularly for each one that uses it. P. Brook. M. C. Advertisement. AT the Physitians Arms over the Door; in the New Red-Lyon-street in Holborn, against great Turn-stile; is the China Hummum, or the private new way of Sweating and Bathing both at once, after the China manner, by a Dew-bath, without entering into Water, or Heat of Fire, or Breathing the Air, wherein the Body sweats; whereby all the prejudices happening by all other ways of Sweatings and Bathings are prevented; this only being performed by the Heat and Moisture of a continual warm Vaporous Dew or Steam; arising from Decoctions of all sorts of Drugs; as Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, Woods, Waters, Wines, &c. Of various Properties and Qualities, according to each ones occasion, which continually Flowing and Distilling on the Body, dureing all the time. It Sweats and Baths the Body both at once, being always prepared particularly for each one that uses it. P. Brook. M. C.
