L1844 [ocm]23986836 205659
A Model for a School for the better Education of YOUTH. REason differences a man from a Beast, Learning makes one man differ from another; therefore timely care ought to be taken in the Education of Gentlemen, that they may have some general Improvement in all kind of Knowledge before they begin to tast of Pleasure and will not bear the Yoak. Learning may be divided into two parts, First, the toylsome part, consisting in Reading, Writing, getting the Grammer, and the Copia Verborum; Secondly, the pleasant part, which may be divided into two Branches; First the Solid part, by which I mean the Knowledge of things, especially such things as are obvious to sense, as Herbs, Druggs, Seeds, Mineral-Juices, Metals, Pretious Stones, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Anatomy, Astronomy, Geography, Geome∣try, Arithmetick, Gardning, Planting, &c. Secondly the Mechanick or Complemental part, As Dancing, Singing, Instrumental Musick, Fencing, Wrestling, Vaulting, Riding the manag'd Hose, Military Discipline, Painting, Turning, &c. My Intention is to Demonstrate how Gentlemen may attain at least some general Knowledge in most of these things in the time they spend at School, were Schools order'd as they might be. To this end, First Grammer must be made Short and Plain, e∣specially the Rudiments of it. Secondly, the way to gain the Co∣pia Verborum, must be made Easie; Thirdly, things obvious to Sense, must be learn't with words. Fourthly, one Master must not be charged with too many Schollars, suppose ten, or at most fifteen, and they must be all in one form. Fiftly, Professors must be always upon the place to teach the delightful part of Learning in the times of Intermission. I have perused all Models which have come to my hands, and have made the best Observation I could upon them, and I find none that offers fairer than M. Lewis of Tottenham High-cross: I have carefully examined his Notions, upon which he builds his whole Grammatical Hypothesis; They are mainly two. First, that the Rules of Grammer ought to be plain, that they ay be easi∣ly Understood; especially because they are to be learn't by Chil∣dren, to the meaness of whose capacities we ought to condescend; Now plainness in regard of the thing signifying, therefore the Rules ought not to be in Latine, much less in Verse: and plain∣ness
is in respect of the thing signified, Therefore it is not reason∣able to use Logical Definitions in the Etymologia, nor second Notions in the Syntax of the introductory Grammar. He shews how most things in Grammer may be brought down to the sense of Seeing, in regard of the thing signified: For the better effect∣ing of which, he proposes a Technical Author, in which the se∣veral parts of Speech shall be Printed in a different Character, so that what he cannot describe by Rule, may be made sensible by Example. 2. Secondly, he saith the Rules of the Latine ought to be ac∣commodated particularly to the English Tongue, and the Rules of the Greek to the Latine; because all improvement of Know∣ledg is by comparing what we are to learn, with something we know already, we tack on the New Notion to some old Idea we have before in our minds; It is a Law of Nature to proceed, a no∣to ad ignotum; by this means the Rules of Grammar become more short and easie to Understand, get, and keep. These things are more largly discussed in his Essay and Preface to his Grammar for the English, Latine and Greek Tongues, con∣sisting of about three sheets, Founded upon these two principles; From which principles he makes these Deductions. 1. The Grammer of the Latine may be accommodated to the English in the Etymologia, to know the parts of Speech thus. Substantives have a plural number, as Song, Songs No other part of Speech is distinguished in number in the English, besides Sub∣stantives, Adjectives have the same termination in both Numbers, as Good Song, Good songs, &c So likewise the Rules for Govern∣ment in the Syntax ought to be by the English signs, which are, a, the, of, to, for, in, with, from, by. 2. The Declensions of Nouns and Conjugations of Verbs, are better known by the Theme, then by the Genitive Case, or Insini∣tive Mood, as Musa is of the fist Dclension because it ends in A. Amo is of the first Conjugation because it ends in O. impure &c. the Old way is a Circle. 3 He saith the G nders of Nouns ought to be concluded from the Declension, which may be done by five Rule, and not by the increasing of the Genitive case; As all Nouns of the first and fifth Declension are of the Feminine Gender, &c. 4. Three Rules state the whole, As in praesenti, if we add the Supine to the preter perfect tense: The Exceptions are the same with Lilly, and ought to be Learn' at the fist Vocabulary. 5. The Syntax may be comprehended in three Rules according to the number of words declined, which are Substantives, Adjectives, and Verbs. (1) a Verb hath Number and Person by the Substantive be∣fore it, of which it is the Motion; as, I did love, we did love. (2) The Adjective hath Number, Case, and Gnder, by the Substantive
after it, of which it is the manner; as, a good man, a good woman. (3) Every Substantive (which is not the Nominative case to the Verb) shall be governed of the word before it, on which it de∣pends according to the sign. As, I do give the garment of my Fa∣ther, to thee for a pldg with my hand from my Brother. All these Sub∣stantives have Case by the sign. Three Exceptions from ths last Rule, do make the Syntax Tolerable for a beginner. Which are, (1) Apposition. (2) The Ablative case absolute, (3) a few Verbs put acquisitively where To is understood, all the other Excep∣tions concern but a few particular Words, which may be observed as they occur. 6 He shews how the Greek Tongue may be accommodated to the Latine in the Etymolgia, by comparing the Greek Nouns to the Latine, and the Greek Verbe to the Latine; only there is but one Conjugation in the Greek, the Contracted Verbs out of Contra∣ction, are of the sixth Conjugation, and the Verbs in mi, may be reduced to the Aoristus secundus passive: also in the Syntax most of the Irregularities of the Latine, where there is not an Elypsis are Grecisms. These things are discussed more la gely in his Grammar. 7. He shews the great Design ought to be to teach Children things, especially such as are obvious to Sense. 8 That Words my be learnt together with things, he believs, Co∣menius hic Janua Linguarum to be the most compendious way, where the whole Copia of wods in their propriety are contained in a lit∣tle compass, and may be quickly learnt. Further, that Book is a System of Things as well as a repository of Words, it is digest∣ed into eight Comedies by the Author, and turned into Greek by D Litleton, and was it dressed in French, Italian, and Spanish, the advantage would be very great. When it is learnt in Latine, the learning in Greek would confi m the Latine, both these would dis∣pose to learn French, Italian, or Spanish, in a few months; whn it is thus learnt, it would be like opicks in the At o Memory. it concerns the assertors of the old Method, to answer his Alle∣gations, or not to reproach a Man behind his back, they are wil∣ling to look in the face. The Method he proposes is so Natural that I cannot but own it. From hence Education may be improved thus, 1. A convenient house must be provided, where all the Schol∣lars may be kept within bounds, to prevent Debauchery. 2. Secondly, Children should learn to Write betimes; this will dispose them to all things to be learnt afterward. 3. Thirdly, That they should be instructed early in Geometry: for they will as soon handle a pair of Compasses, as use a Pen, and draw a perpendicular or paralel Line, as make a Letter. 4. Fourthly, Arithmetick is not to be neglected, seeing they
will as easily understand the nine Figures, as so many Letters, and may learn Arithmetick as soon as Spelling. 5. Fifthly, That they be shewn something of Astronomy and Geography by Globs and Maps, which will be as much a Recreati∣on to them, as to know the streets in London. 6. Sixthly, If Repositories for Visibles were prepared for them, they would take content to see Hearbs, Plants, Druggs, mineral Jui∣ces, Metals and pretious stones, the pictures of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes; and by beholding the things would be better enabled to remember the names. 7. Seventhly, It would lay a foundation for future Knowledge in Children, if they were shewd the outward and inward parts of the Body, viz. the Muscles, Veins, Bones, Arteries and Intrals. 8. Eightly, It would be convenient, Children in the season of the year, should be shewd something of Gardening, Planting, Ino∣culating, &c. They are capable of undestanding all these things, and would be delighted in them, because in the practise of them, they are obvious to Sense. 9. Ninthly, As they are growing up, it would much improve them to Travel under some prudent Guide, and to see the most remarkable things in their own Country, before they travel a∣broad: and to make Observations of Improvement of all Hus∣bandry. 10. Tenthly, To this solid Learning may be added, Dancing, Sing∣ing, Instrumental Musick, &c. 11. Eleventhly, and Last of all, frequent acting of Interludes would much improve Children in Audacity and Carriage, Particularly Comenius his Praxis Comica, containing the whole Ja∣nua Linguarum in eight Comedies, which are very innocent, and they may be performed without much trouble for P operties; be∣side these would improve the Children in their Janua when they have once learnt it. Obj. If G ammar be made so short, and Words gt thus easily, that a Child of middle parts may be a Competent Master of five or six Languages, in three or four years, what shall he do after∣wards, before he is old enough to be sent to the University. An. The Child may further habituate himself in the things be∣fore mentined, and if he had seven years to spare, he may im∣ploy all his gained time in History. Obj. Here are so many things to be done, that one thing will hinder another, and so nothing be effectually Performed at all. An. To this I answer, Store is no sore; And every Parent shall be left to his liberty to choose what his Child shall learn, as best suiting his Quality and natural Inclination; It is not to be sup∣posed that all these things shall be taught at one time; Perhaps all of them shall never be taught to many at any time, they may,
learn two things at a time, in regard they shall be instructed in these things four times in one day, and may easily keep what they have gotten; Doubtless in seven or eight years (the time usually spent at School, from eight till fifteen) all that are not natural∣ly Fools, may get some tolerable insight into many of the things before mentioned; or at least every one may light upon some one thing suiting his Genius, in which he may prove Excellent. Sure∣ly this is better, then to spend so many years meerly in learning Words and a little History, it is better to be a general Schollar, then to understand more profoundly, one or some few particular things. For the better carrying on of this, it is Requisite, 1. First, That two or three persons should be concerned, as Partners or principal Undertakers, who will have imployment en∣ough to see that every thing be carried on orderly. 2. Secondly, Professors must be always on the place to teach the Complemental qualities in Play-times. 3. Thirdly, To this end, Children shall never be at their Book above an hour and a half at a time, but have frequent In∣termissions of an hour and half, or two hours; For instance, they may be at School an hour and half before Break-fast, half an hour may be allowed for Break-ast, then one hour may be spent in these delightful Exercises, the Children shall be at School again one hour and a half befor Dinner then one hour may be allowed for Dinner and Play, and then one hour may b ordered for delightful Learning, &c. I suppose all Men can re∣member how tedious it was to them when they were Boys, to si four or five hours at one time, in a bitter cold School in the Winter or a sultery hot School in the Summer, under a Tyranical Maste and an unintelligeble Grammar: So there would be allowed se¦ven hours for the troublesome Learning, four for delightful Lea¦ning, and the rest thirteen for Eating and Drinking, Sleepin and Play. Ob. If any think Children by this means are kept in too gre Slavery, at other Schools, they have commonly Tuesdays, Thu¦days and Saturdays in the Afternoons, only for Play, either Course, or else upon the request of Friends, which shall be whol denied here; besides they have two hours at Dinner, and four five hours after they break up School at night, to spend as th please. An. Children in intermissions, either have exercise imposed troublesome to do, as if they were at School, for the neglect which they are frequently corrected, or they go to learn Writi and Ciphering, or else are troublesome to their Relations and themselves whilst they mispend their time. Obj. Another Objection is this? How shall the charges of t Pofessors be born?
An. I Answer, The chief Undertakers may entertain so many Servants as they please, to be Apprentices for certain years; which shall each of them be Prae-instructed in one or two of these Qua∣lities; in the School time they shall be as Ushers at the elbows of the chief Masters, and at Play time shall exercise the Children in the Complemental Qualities before mentioned, one of the Un∣dertakers standing by, and once a week the principal Masters of the Qualities these Young-men teach, shall supervise them un∣til they shall be of years and Experience to manage their Business alone. All persons in London take this course in their Trades, as difficult to be discharged, as this thing is, and so learn one Appren∣tice under another. To be sure a Young-man thus bred for seven years, will be in as probable a way to support himself, as any way I can think of. By this plentiful supply of Ushers, a particular care may be taken of the Children; And if the Method was but ordinary, they would be more improved, than where one Master tea∣ches a hundred in two Forms, or thirty or forty in three or four Forms, as is usual in most great Schools of England. For these Ap∣prentices shall be as Ushers at the elbow of a principal Master in School-time, if a principal Master hath twenty Children to teach, he may have one of these Servants his assistant to be at his appoint∣ment. Ob. This delightful Learning, because imposed, will be as toil∣some as other Studies. An. The variety of Imployment, will take off much of the Te∣dium when Childrn are once accustomed to this Method. I do not see why these bodily Exercises (though Imposed) may not as well cause the Blood to circulate, and thse delightful Stu∣dies chear the Spirits, as any their usual childish Recreations; to be sure i will do them more good, than running in the Dirt, ly∣ng upon the Ground, or scorching in the Sun: Especially if Se∣verity may be avoided, which I think, may be done by a Prudent se of School-money; that Children shall never be in danger, or fear of Stripes, unless in case of Contempt, which rock they ay avoid if they please. Ob. But what shall those Children do in the times of intermission, hose Parents do not desire, they should learn any of those Complemen∣al Qualities before mentioned? An. All Parents will desire their Children should learn Writing, ipbering, drawing with a Pen, G ometry, the use of Maps and Globs, e name and natures of all Simples, their Children shall be ex∣cised in these things, and so get a greater Knowledge in them,  they have yet time to spare, to be sure there is delightful Hi∣ory enough for them to read, so long as they shall be continued t School.
At Tottenham High-cross four miles from London in the Road to Cambridge, this Model is carrying on where so many of these things shall be performed as can be expected from a Schoo l newly Erected for this purpose. Namely, 1. First, The Grammar for the English, Latine, Greek and He∣brew, shall be taught: 2. Secondly, There shall be at present, an apartment for French, and hereafter for Italian and Spanish: 3. Thirdly, Provision is made of Maps and Globs, with Instru∣ments and Books for Astronomy, Geography and Geometry: 4. Fourthly, There is a Master for Writing and Arithmetick: 5. Fifthly, Masters are also provided for teaching Musick, Dan∣cing, Singing, Painting, Fencing and Military Discipline: 6. Sixthly, Repositories for Visibles shall be immediately provid∣ed, out of which may be produced, Herbs, Drugs, Seeds, Mineral Juices, Metals, precious Stones, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, that can∣not be produced in Specie, shall be shewed in their Pictures: 7. Seventhly, Comenius his Interludes, shall be Acted at least four times a Year:— Riding the Managed Horse, is a business of that Charge, that it cannot be Attempted till there be such a number of Gentlemen upon the Place as will bear the charge of it. Ordinary Persons shall be entertained at 20 l. per annum, or un∣der, to learn what they please; Gentlemen at 25 l. per annum; and persons of greater Quality at 30 l. Doubtless by this means much Time will be saved, and persons thus Bred, will be disposed to raise themselves higher in all kind of Learning, when they shall be advanced to the University; and be much sitter to serve their King and Country in any publick Im∣ployment: At the worst, in any private Condition, they will have much advantage by Conversation, and be incouraged to divert themselves in their private Studies when so good a Foundation is laid. If no more be done in the Tongues by this short Method of Grammar, and this particular attendance of Masters (which can∣not well be supposed) the probability of Understanding things, and attaining some of those Complemental Qualities, may justi∣fie any prudent Man, in making a Tryal where the charge will not be greater then at other Schools.
To the Right Honorable, Arthur, Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy-Seal. Your Honor hath been Pleased to peruse this Mo∣del, and so far to approve of it, as to send your Grand-Children, My Lord Dacey, and Sir James Pore to be Educated by it; which doth incourage Me to lay it at Your Honors Feet, and humbly begg Your Patronage. A. B. AT the Anchor Coffee-house in Fleet-street near White Fryers-gate, some Person will be every Thursday in the Afternoon from Four till Six of the Clock, who will give an Account of these things to any, that shall desire it. M. Lewis his Books are sold by Thomas Parkhurst in Cheapside at the Bible and three Crowns. ANy persons that are grown, may be instructed in this Me∣thod of Grammar by Mr. Stacy, at Mr. Banisters at the Aca∣demy in Chancery lane near the Pump. Such as have any thing of the Copia of Words, may in a few hours be made Masters of the Necessary part of the Latine and Greek Grammar; though they have discontinued the thought of them many years, and forgot them never so much. Also there is taught Rhetorick, Astronomy, Geography, Geometry, Arithmetick, Writing, Painting, French, Singing, Musick, Dancing, Wrestling, Fencing, Riding the Managed Horse. Any Person that desire it, may be Accommodated in Mr. Bani∣ster's House with Diet and Lodging at reasonable Rates, and may learn all, or as many of these things as they please; or they may come thither at set times and be Instructed in the things before mentioned. FINIS.
