L3024 [ocm]12075588 196877
A Looking-Glasse FOR REBELLS. Or the true grounds of SOVERAIGNTY, PROVING The KINGS Authority to be from GOD only: And the Subjects Obedience from Gods Speciall Command. ROM. 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers: for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. OXFORD, Printed for William Web. 1643.
A Looking-glasse for Rebells. CHAP. I. There are two grounds of true Soveraignty in our gracious Lord King CHARLES, 1. He receiving His Authority from GOD, hath no Superi∣our to punish him, but GOD alone. 2. The Bond of his Subjects in Obedience to His Majestie, is inviolable, and not to be dissolved. GOD denouncing his judgements against wicked Kings, as Saul and Rehoboam, threatens with Renting their King∣doms from them, and making their houses desolate. The deposing of a King, and the disposing of his Dominions, belong only to God. Obedience, Or the duty God enjoyneth all men is, To eschew evill, and doe good, which is diffused into the particular duties of 1. A Servant to his Master. 2. A Son to his Father. 3. A Subject to his Prince. In the Allegiance of a Subject to his Soveraign, the evill he is to escew, is evill in action, For he is not to touch him with any hurtfull touch, or stretch out his hand against his Sacred Person, Psal. 105. 1 Sam. 15. Or any way to affright or disgrace him, by cutting off the lap of his garment. Evill in words, For he is not to curse his Ruler, Exod. 22. Evill in cogitations, For he is not to curse the King in his thought. Eccles. 10. The good which he is to doe out o Obedience to his Majestie, is in deed, by Paying Tribute. Rom. 13 By fighting his batells with Joab, adventuring his life with David, to vanquish his enemies. In speech, By re∣vealing with Religious Mordecai, the treasonable designments of Bgan and Teresh, Host. 2. By pouring out Prayers for his wel∣fare. 1 Tim. 2. In thought By esteeming and douing him from the Heart, out of conscience, as the Anointed of the Lord, Gods
holy Ordinance, and Minister, and as a God upon earth; for this is to obey him for the Lords sake, to fear God, and honor the King; When we fear God, by whom the King reigneth, and his throne is established. 1. Pet. 2. Prov. 8. By this we plainly discern how impious and irreligious the practises of those are, who have not only actually offerd violence to his Sacred Majestie (witnesse Edge-hill) but have been favourers of those who have any ways vilified, nay, belch'd out most horrid treasons against Gods Anoin∣ted, as one Pym, who said, He would wash his hands in the Kings blood, and many more in the like nature, too tedious, or odious for me to recite. CHAP. II. How these two Pillars, (viz. Soveraignty, and the Bond of Obedi∣ence) are supported, and upon what foundations they are built. 1 I Shall discover unto you the foundation of the first prop or Pillar, Our Soveraign Lord King CHARLES receiv ng his Authority only from God, hath no Superior to chastise and punish him, but God alone. The Ancient practise of this Kingdom is cleer for this truth. Bracton, Chief Justice under Hen. 3. in his Customes of England 1 cent. rubrica. 35. saith, There are under the King Freemen and Servants, and both subject unto his Power, as also whatsoever is under him and he himself is subject unto no man, but God only. Et ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo. And again, If there be any offence committed by him, forasmuch as there is no Breeve to en∣force, or constrain him, There may be supplication made, that he would correct and amend his fault, which if he shall not doe, it is a∣bundantly sufficient punishment, that he is to expect God a reven∣ger, for no man may presume (disquirere) judicially to examine his doings, much lesse to oppose them by force or violence. And this is no other Kingly Soveraignty then God himself hath given unto Majestie. I couns ll thee (saith God by the mouth of Solomon) to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the Oah of God b not hasty to goe out of his sight, stand not in an evill thing, for e doth whatsoever pleaseth him. Where the word of a King is, tere is Power, and who may say unto him, Wha doest thou? Eccles. 8. An evident testimony. That Kings are subject unto
God, and have no mortall man their Superiour, who may require of them an account of their doings, and punish them by any ju∣diciall sentence. This Divine truth is taught both by David and his Son Solomon, Against thee, gainst thee only have I sinned. Against thee only, for he was a King (saith Ambrose) not bound unto Law, because Kings are free from the bond of crimes, and are not called unto punishment by any Law, being safe by the Po∣wer of Command: therefore David sinned not against man, unto whom he was not obnoxious, in regard of punishment, but of admonition only, and reproof uttered in the Name, and by the Authority of God himself. Hereupon the Pophet Nathan, having used this Preface, Thus saith the Lord, admonisheth King David, that he should expiate his sin by Rpentance, but he gave no Sentence against him, whereby according to the Law, he should be adjudged unto death; for if Nathan had given any such sentence against David, he should have had power to deprive him of his life, and so of the which he enjoyed by his life, his Regall Authoritie, which God only can take away from Princes, because he alone bestoweth it upon him. From whence have they received their Soveraignty, to be here upon earth as gods over men? God himself answe∣reth, Psal. 82. I have said, Ye are Gods, and by my Word the world was made; so are ye appointed by the same word to Rule the world. Who hath given unto them their Kingdomes? The Most High, he ruleth in the Kingdoms of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4. What power hath seated them in their Thrones? The Power of the Almighty. Job 3. Reges (as the vulgar Tran∣slation renders it) colcat in solio▪ He plaeth Kings in the throne. And by whom doe they sway their Scepters, and govern their Kingdoms, By Gods speciall Authority, By me doe Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice. Prov. 8. by his immediate Power, who is both Lord nd King of all the earth. Psal. 47. Doth not God by the mouth of the Prophet Nthan, tell David, I anoin∣ted the King over Israel. 2. Sam. 12. Doth not Solomon acknow∣ledge, That the Lord hath established him, and set him on the Throne of his father David. And the Prophet Ahija in the Per∣son of God, unto Jeroboam, I wll give the Kingdom unto thee. Neither the Kingdom only, and the Power of Princes, but all
things else proper unto them are after a peculiar manner Gods. Their Crown, their Anointing, their Scepter, and Throne are Gods, and their Persons adorned with all these, are so divine and Sacred, That they themselves are the Angels of God, and the sons of the Most High. 2. Sam. 14. Psal. 82. Object. Are not Kings made by the people, and receive their Regall power by them and their election? Is is not said of Saul, That all the people went to Gilgal, and there made him King before the Lord? Of David, The men of Judah anoynted Da∣vid King of Judah: The Elders of Israel anoynted David King over Israel. Answ. Zadok the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet anoynted Salomon King, and the Lord also anoynted him, otherwise hee had not been the Lords Anointed, but the Anoynted of Za∣dk and Nathan. The Lord anoynted Salomon as Master of the substance, and gave unto him regall power; Zadok and Nathan anoynted Salomon as Master of the Ceremonies, and declared that God had given unto him this power: for outward unction doth not confer upon Kings their authoritie (when without it Cyrus, Esay 45. and before the use thereof, some of the Patriarks over their families, were the anoynted of the Lord) but it is a signe only of Soveraigntie; because if wee powre oyle into the same vessell with any other liquour, it will still be uppermost. The Elders of Judah & Israel anoynting David King, 2 Sam. 2. did manifest him to be their King; but did not give unto him the right unto his Kingdome, this was only from the Lords ap∣pointing. So the people then made Saul King, not by giving him the right of his Kingdome▪ but by putting him in possession of his Kingdome, to reigne over them: for the Jewes by Gods speciall commandement, being to make such an one King, whom their Lord God had chosen, unto whom their Lord God had gi∣ven regall authority; from their Lord God, and not from them∣selves, from Heaven, and not from Earth, was the Soveraignty of their Princes. For as in spirituall graces, which God mercifully bestoweth upon the faithfull, neither the outward ministery of Paul in plan∣ting, nor of Apollos in watering, is any thing; but God giveth the encrease, 1 Cor. 3. So in the civill power, which God vouch∣safeth
to Princes, the people are not any thing in giving this au∣thority, but God only is the free Donor thereof. CHAP. III. The bond of his Subjects in obedience to his Majestie is inviolable, and cannot be disslved. THe principall meanes whereby the seditious sons of Belial doe pretend, that this sacred band may be dissolved, are ei∣ther supposed crimes in the Persons of Princes, as Tyranny in go∣verning, Infidelity, Heresie, Apostasie. First for Tyranny, Was not Saul a Tyrant in hunting after the soule, and seeking after the life of David, who was most faithfull unto him amongst all his servants, whom he himselfe confessed to have rendered good for evill? Was hee not a bloudy oppressour in commanding Doeg, without any just cause of offence, violently to run upon the Priests, and slay foure-score and five persons that did weare a linnen Ephod, 2 Sam. 22.18, 19. To smite Nob, the citie of the Priests, both man and woman, both child and suckling, both Oxe and Asse, and sheep, with the edge of the sword? The bloud of many Innocents did cry unto God for venge∣ance, and by his speciall commandement, Gen. 9.6. Whso shed∣deth mans bloud, by man his bloud shall be shed) deserved death: yet David, not an ordinary or private man, but by Gods owne appointment designed unto the Kingdome, a chiefe Captain and Leader in the Kings battels, the Kings son in law, when he had Saul delivered into his hand, and was encouraged by his ser∣vants to destroy him, said unto them, 1 Sam. 24 6. The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master, the Lords anoynted, to lay my hand upon him; for he is the Lords anoynted. And after un∣to Saul himselfe, vers. 14. Wickednesse proceedeth from the wicked, but mine hand be not upon thee. And againe unto Abishai, when the Lord another time had closed Saul into his hands, (1 Sam. 26.9.) Destroy him not; for who can lay hands upon the Lords an∣oynted, and be guiltlesse? Which pious and religious acts of Da∣vid towards Saul, amongst the Israelites, Optatus hath elegantly described, the more effectually to commnd them unto Chri∣stians: David (saith Optatus) had the occasion of victory in his
hands, he might have cut the throat of his unwary and secure ad∣versary, without any labour; hee might without shedding of bloud, without any conflict, have changed a publike war into a private slaughter, and his men the victory, occasion and oppor∣tunity encouraged him: he began to draw his sword, his armed hand was moved towards the throat of his enemy; but the per∣fect remembrance of Gods Commandements stayed him: hee withstanding his men, and the occasions enciting him, in effect thus speaketh unto them: O victory, thou doest in vaine pro∣voke, and invite me with thy triumphs, I would willingly con∣quer mine enemy, but I must rather keep Gods Commande∣ments, I will not (saith he) lay mine hands upon the Lords an∣oynted. And so he repressed his hand together with his sword; and whiles he feared the oyle, saved his enemy. Tertullian tea∣cheth, to wish evill, to doe evill, to think evill, is indifferently forbidden us towards all men; thence inferreth, if wee are not to offer the least of these injuries to any man, much lesse to him that is so highly advanced by our God, speaking of the Emperour Severus, who was an unbeleeving Tyrant, an Infidell, that did grievously persecute the Christians, whom he did afflict with the fifth famous persecution. St. Peter writ his first Epistle in the time of Claudius the Em∣perour, and did direct it to his Countrey men the Jewes, tho∣rowout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bythima, regi∣ons then subject unto the Roman Emperour. And because some seducers (with whom this latter age is much burdened) had perswaded the Jewes, under a pretext of maintaining their li∣berty, that tribute was not to be payd to Caesar, neither any mor∣tall man was to be accounted as a Prince or Lord over them, but God only: St. Peter exhorteth them to be free, as not using their liberty for a cloke of maliciousesse, but as the servants of God, (1 Pet. 2.16, and 18.) and to feare God, but yet to honour the King also. And although Magistrates be men, and so their Or∣dinance, in regard of their persons in whom it doth reside, but humane; yet to submit themselves unto them, for the Lords sake, from whom they received their authority. And if we are commanded to submit our selves, and to be subje  to a profane Infidell and mercilesse Tyrant, as Claudius was, who would have
tortures in examinations, punishments for Patricides execd in his owne presence: hee had most cruell Searchers of all t came but to salute him, sparing not y sex or age; he delighted to see the faces of Fencers (whose throats hee had caused to be cut for stumbling by chance in their sword fights) as they lay gasping, and yeelding up their breath: and being excessively gi∣ven to the wanton love of women, hee was so enthralled to his wives and free-men, that as it was commodious unto them, or stood with their affection, he granted honourable dignities, con∣ferred the conducts of Armies, and decreed impunities or pu∣nishments; yet unto such an unbeleeving and bloudy Oppressor, St. Peter earnestly exhorteth the beleeving Jewes to yeeld obe∣dience. If Subjects are obliged in duty, and out of conscience cheer∣fully to obey tyrannous, unbeleeving, hereticall, Apostaticall Princes, as Powers ordained of God: with what alacry th should we be in all things obsequious unto our gracious and tru∣ly religious Soveraigne? Gracious, as being like unto God, whose Vice-Gerent he is in this, that his clemencie and mercie is over all his works: Religious, in that he is a zealous Propug∣ner of the ancient and Catholike Faith, not only by his Kingly power and authority, but hath confirmed the same by many sa∣cred vowes and protestations, to the glory of God, to the rejoy∣cing of Angels, and to the great comfort of all his true-hearted Subjects, so to the terrour and confusion of all his seditiou e∣nemies. FINIS.
