M1918 99828047 206901
March 21th. 1641. A Continuation of the good NEWES from IRELAND. MANIFESTED By two severall Letters sent from Mr. Metcalfe to Mr. Nowell Bassano of the Custome-house in London. The one dated at Dublin, March 14. 1641. The other at Tredarth, March 15. 1641. BEING A true Relation of the good and Pros∣perous successe and Proceedings of the English Forces, under the Command of Sir Symon Har∣court, Sir Charles Coote, Sir Richard Green∣vill and others, against the bloody Rebels in Ireland. From the last of February, to this present. LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.
Dublin, 10. March, 1641. THis weeke wee had intelli∣gence from Munster & Con∣nough, that the English doe behave themselves excee∣ding well, & that they have made the Lord Mountgar∣ret to flye away, and the rest of the Rebels from e∣very place where they came, The Lord President of Connough hath been re∣lieved by the meanes of Sir Iames Dillon, who came to my Lord, and told him that he could not hold out, and he advised him to yeeld up the Ca∣stle to him, and he would send him safe to Dublin, my Lord at the present tooke it very kindly, and said he would consider of it, as he did presently, and so sent to Sir Iames Dillon, and thanked him for his Councell, and wished him to bring in his provision that night▪ and he would leave his Castle to him, but wished him to be as good as his word to have him safely conducted to Dublin, so Sir James brought in all his provi∣sion thinking that night to enjoy the Castle, but my Lord thanked him for his love, and wished him to be gone, else he would make him to goe, and so my Lord keepes the Castle yet in despight of them. Gallwyes Port is kept by Sir Francis Willoughby his Sonne, and holds out stoutly, and for Munster the Lord President playes his part there amongst the Rogues.
We have 10. myles compassed cleere about the Towne, save VVicklow side, 6. Troopes came from Andauge, 50. myles, and were ressisted by none. VVicklow is relieved this Weeke, Captaine Bartlet is gone from thence to the Fort of Duncannon, there is 5. ships of ours come to Kinsaile, and more passed by this Harbour for Baregvargus, one laden with Ammunition, and the other to keepe the Coast cleere. Vpon Saturday last Sir Henry Titchburne sallyed out of Drogheda and killed at least 400 Rebels, tooke 40. prisoners and one of their chiefe Captaines Arteoge Marmaughan, who hath the Lady Blany prisoner, Sir Philomy Oneale was there but run away, and Sir Henry followed him 7. myles, but could not overtake him, he siege from thence is all gone, Sir Hen∣ry sets Garrisons in some Townes thereabouts, and proclai∣med that if any Irish would bring in their Corne or any thing else they should have money for it, if not, they should have nothing, and he would destroy them all, so upon that they brought in their corne with other Victuals, and there was a pretty Market, Wheate at 16. s. a Barrell; This Newes was brought by Captain Byron, Sir John Buriasie, and Capt. Roper, who came from thence this morning, 4000 of our Army went with 9. Field-peeces, the Lord of Ormond, Generall Colonell Lambert, Colonell Harcourt, and Colonell Monke the first night they quartered at Fields Towne and Dunslougham Ca∣stle. where they found not any Rebels, being all fled before they came. The next night they went to Ratroe in the County of Meath, where were of the Rebels about 8000 in a full body, our Army being 3. myles from them thought to have a bar∣rell with them, being in a champion ground, and so marched towards them, but they fled without any shot at all, in their flight our Army tooke 3. of their Commanders, Lievtenant Col. Iohn Read Scotchman, one of their best Commanders, and one Barefoote, these two are brought to the Castle that night, the other my Lord Generall keepes with him still, his name is Barnewll of Kbrew.
This night our Army is at our Lord Dunsany and igaul▪ to morrow I hope they will be at the Lord Ntterfields, and so from thence they will turne to Trim, we doe not looke for their comming home these 6. dayes. All the Lords of the Pale are now fled to the County of Cavan. This day the Lord Dunsany sent his man to the Lords Justices to desire to come in so the Lords left the bu∣sinesse to Sir Charles Coote. The Fort of Dngava is relieved by Bristoll ships with Ammunition and Men they say for a yeare. The Rebels in the County of Downe have assaulted downe Patricke, where they received a great overthrow by Sir James Monuccondy, and so keepes the Towne still, and hold out stoutly. The Report is 3000 Scots is landed in the North Tredarth, 10. March, 1641. BEfore now, J writ nothing but of want, but now (God be thanked) J can write not any thing, but of plenty, good successe, and happy victory over our Enemies, the next day after our Shipping went away we sent out two Troopes of Horse and 3. Companies of Foote to a Village close to the way to Dublin, called great Buberish, to fetch some Corne, there was some Rebels in it who imme∣diately fled, so our men brought away what was there, and set it on fire, whereupon there appeared 3. Colours at Smith∣ton making towards us, whereupon my Colonell commanded to advance, and in the same place where the 60. left them∣selues, we met them, they stood a little, and then betooke them to their heeles, our men followed the chase, tooke two Colours, one Ensigne▪ killed two Livetenants and some hun∣dreds of the Rebels, we entered the Towne, brought what we could away, and layd it in the ashes, these were Colonell Prestons Regiment, who scaped narrowly himselfe by the
goodnesse of his Horse, and in our comming home we burnt two small Villages, this was that dayes worke. 27. Feb. Wee went forth 7. Companies of Foote, and two Troopes of Horse to take a house called Stammin, which had a brave haggerd of Corne, five Companies of Foote in it, but the day proved so ill and wet, that we could not keepe our matches lighted, made on an attempt but did not carry it for want of a peice of Ordnance to Batter the gate. 1. Mar. Wee went out againe to a Village behind Stammin where we got good forrage for our horse, and when we had done we set it on fire, then we went to a Castle neere Stam∣min, where we found 12. Rebels keeping some corne, wee forc't the gate, entered it and kild them, the cry of this was heard in the house of Stammin where the 5. companies were, whereupon they conceiving our body of Foote and Horse, to be still pillaging in the Village distant from them a Mile, and that these were but a small partie of our men come thi∣ther to pillage, sallyed out, two companies, and made great haste towaads the Castle, wee perceiving them comming, by our Scouts comming in, stood in Battaile ray, in a Valley close by the Castle where we were not seene by them till they were within musket shot of us, but when they saw they were mistaken in our numbers, immediately they fled towards the house againe, but we prevented them and came betwixt them and home, as well as the ground would give us leave, and tooke one of their Captaines Neile-Oneale nere kinsman to Sr. Philomy Oneale, kild a Livetenant and ome 60. of the Rebels, the rest got away, some into the house, and some o∣ther wayes; this done we returned home, and burnt some strag∣ling houses. 4. Mar. We went out 5. companies to Mornington, by the Sea▪side, where there were but few left, and burnt every house in it, this was Philomy-Oneales quarter the weeke before, and finding none to oppose us, we returned home. 5. Mar. There went out the Lord Moore with two Troopes of horse, and 7. companies of Foote to Tolle Halla∣glin a place on the North-west side of this towne where
Colonell Mac Byron, and Mac Mahome had taken up their new Quarter, having left Dublin side the weeke before; this place is distant from this Towne 3. myles, he could not lye nearer, for we had formerly burnt on that side of the water all the Villages within that distance, we were upon their quarter by 7. of the clocke in the morning, by that time we came neere them, they had drawne up into a body some 400. with∣in an old Pinfold, which they had prepared with good sad worke, brest high, from which their Musketiers playd upon us, but we made still forward towards them, they seeing us come on so resolutely, left the worke, and betooke them to running; All this while they stood wide on the left hand of them. some two Musket shot distant upon the top of Hill, a body of some 800 more of them to see how the rest sped; which they seeing marched away; we orderly followed the chase of the rest, and tooke Prisoners Art-Oge-Macmahonne, the pretended Lord of Moneghane and one other; Macma∣hoome killed 5. Captaines; of which was one old Capt. Prius that was a Rebell in the last Rebellion, many orher Gentle∣men of quality not yet knowne of which we brought in 3. Heads; and there was 200 killed at least, this was as great a blow as ever we gave them, when we had done we burnt their quarters, the foote this day was commanded by Liev∣tenant Colonell Byron. The night after this, there came intelligence that the house of Stanmin was left empty, and then Bewly the Towne on the Sea-side that plagued our shipping as they came in, the Rebels had also left, upon our Newes of the defeate, where∣upon we sent 200 Musketiers to Bewly 2. houres before day, who found no ressistance but entred the house and Town, and we keep a company in it, here we found good store of corn, likewise there was sent an Ensigne and 40. Musketiers to the house of Stammin, where they had no ressistance but entred it. There is also a haggard of corne; Thus it hath pleased
God to banish our Enemies, and to give us a great deale of liberty▪ and store of all provision, after a long and tedious blocking up, so that now we doubt not but that a small num∣ber of men▪ may march from Dublin hither, for those that had the greatest number of men, were Philomy Oneale, Phil∣lip O-Reyley, Col. Mack-Brian-Macke-Mahoome, and Colonel Plunker, who have all left us and have marcht North∣wards, with the best pillage of the Country, so that now what forces there is betwixt Grmanston and Dublin, for there is none of this side of it, all our wants now are Clothes, shooes, and Stockins for our men, and some money would not be unwelcomed. FINIS.
