M2834 778.k.15.[11] R231660 99888713 203942
THE Nature, Quality, and Most Excellent Vertues OF COFFEE. IT is a Berry that groweth upon little Trees or Shrubs onely in the Desarts of Arabia, and is carried from thence throughout all the Grand Seigniors Dominions, which they make in∣to a Drinke with water (after it is dried and powdred) of which they drink at all times, as well at meals as at other times, as hot as possible it can be indured, &c. The Nature and Quality of the Drink called Coffee, though it be commonly reported to be of a cold and dry quality, and by those who pretend to have much know∣ledge thereof: yet I question not, when you have well considered what I have here presented you withall, but that you will see their knowledge to be ignorance; for I shall prove it to be moderately hot and dry; yet sup∣pose I should grant, that the Berries when they are raw, or before they are dried or parched, to be cold; yet when it is dried or parched, that cold moisture is vanished away. As for example: our Barley, which is the coldest of all our Grains, yet when it is maulted it becometh hot; and Chalk, when it is burned and made into Lime, be∣ exceeding hot; (and many more of the like exam∣ples I could acquaint you with, but this is sufficient.) The same may be said of Coffee: the reason is, because the mercurial substance, which is the moist and airy parts (as the Chymists so term it) to be evaporated away. Again, they say Coffee doth help Digestion, and the Gout, Scurvy, and Hypocondriack Winds; which are very true: but if it were cold, it would be so far from curing those Di∣seases, that it were even enough to breed them: for the Diseases are cold, and experience teacheth us that cold things hinder digestion: likewise cold things causeth sleep (as you may witness in Feavers) but this hinders sleep; liewise I affirm it to be hot and dry, because O∣pium, which is cold and moist, is taken when they have drank plentifully of Coffee, for they are contrary or oppo∣site one to the other, for cold things dulls the brain, hot things quickeneth it; cold things hurt the Stomack and Liver, moderate hot and dry things strenghthens them &c. Its VERTuES. IT being drank at any time, drieth up moist and wa∣terish humours, and expelleth wind; that's the reason why those people that are troubled with those humours in their bowels, are by it provoked to stool; it very much strengthneth the Liver, and is as true an Hepatical Medi∣cine as any is, it being moderately binding and cleansing; it helpeth those that have the Dropsie by its drying qual∣lity; it helpeth the Jaundice, Scirrh of the Liver, and ob∣structions of the same, by its cleansing quality; its also good against the Itch, Scabs, and corruption of blood; it mightily refresheth the Heart and Vitals; it is a true Cor∣dial; it helpeth swooning, palpitation, and weakness of the heart. In the stomack, it helpeth want of Appetite, Concoction, Pains in the Stomack, called Dolor ventriculis, and the Disease called Cholera. In fine, it exceedingly strengthneth the Stomack in the Brain, it helpeth all cold, moist, and drowsie distempers, as the Coma, Lethar¦gii, C, and Appoplexy, Catalepsis, Palsie, Convulsion, ¦ling-Sickness, Trembling, Melanchioly, Catarrhe, or Defluxi∣on and pains in the head: The Steem is good for Rheumes in the Eyes, and for Pains and Noise in the Ears, and for dulness of Hearing; it is good for the falling down of the Pallat, and for the Squinzie, if from a cold Rheume; it is good for difficulty of breathing, the Consumption, Ptisick, and all Rheumes falling upon the Lungs. Note, if the Matter or Phlegme be thick, then sweeten it with Sugar-Candy to humect it. Its good against all Hypocondriack Winds; for the Scurvy; and for pains of the Spleen. It gently purgeth by Urine; a good Drink for those that are troubled with the Stone in the Reins or Bladder; also for stoppage of Urine, and the Strangury, and for the Chlorosis, White Feaver, White Jaundice, commonly called the Green-sickness. Its excellent good to prevent Miscar∣riage; it is good against the Gout, Sciatica, and for all Rheumes and Rheumatick Pains in the whole body; it is good against the Cholick, Iliack Passion, and for Fluxes; good against the Worms; art thou surfeited with Glutton∣ny or Drunkenness, then let this be thy common Drink; do you eat much Fruit, then drink much of this. In the Spring when Humours do increase, then make good use of this. In Summer, when thy Appetite is small, and thy Digestion weak, then of Coffee mayest thou partake. This Drink may best agree with our Constitutions onely in the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; and as to the time of the day, at any time till within two or three hours of your going to bed, for its operation will not last above two or three hours. You may not fear any hurt by the due and moderate use of it. THEE, or TEA. IT is an Herb that groweth in China and Japonia it is moderately hot and binding; this wholsome Herb preserveth in perfect health till very old age; it maketh the Body active and lusty; it helpeth Head-ach and hea∣viness thereof, Lippitude, Distillations, and difficulty of breathing, weakness of the Ventricle, Pains of the Bow∣els, Lassitude; it is also good for the Stone, and for any sharp Rheumes whatsoever, &c. To raise our Coffee in a Verse or two, Is more then all the peopled World can do; Whose rare transcendent Vertues so extend, It cannot be within a Poem penn'd. Let this suffice (though many it displeases) Our wholsome Liquor helpeth most Diseases. By Robert Morton.
