P1666 816.m.17[48] R225231 99885959 188587
The Personal Sufferings in the Siege of London-Derry, being but generally touch'd in the Petition and Case, it may not be unfit to take some further View thereof in the Heads that here follow. I. THERE was, in the First place, in that City, a huge multitude of all sorts, Men, Women, and Children, many of them driven or fled in thither, from all parts, for fear of the Enemy, who having Lost or Abandon'd, or been Robb'd of all they had, though they formerly lived well, had nothing left to Subsist on, nor any where to Lodge, but were forc'd to seek to others (in Distress also themselves) and to depend on their Benevolence and Charity. II. WHEN the Irish Army drew near to Invest the City, all the chief Officers, and Men of Experience in Martial Affairs, went away, and forsook them, and many more with them for England, or else-where; and all the Forces sent over at that time with Collonel Cunningham and Richards for their Relief, return'd suddenly from thence without Landing, back again to England, all looking on the Case of that poor City, and the People therein, as altogether Desperate and Hopeless. III. WHEN so many Thousands of People, who lived before in great Plenty, (being there crowded and pent up together within those Walls) were in a little time Re∣duc'd to that Miserable Want as to Eat the Vilest of Food, Dogs, Cats, Rats, Horses, Tal∣low, Tann'd Hides, Starch, and the like, and many Perished for lack even of that Mise∣rable Sustenance, that could no wise obtain it. IV. WHEN at the same time they were Torne asunder, and Destroyed in every part of the City by the Enemies Bombs and Cannon, Death met them at every Corner, and in their Closets and Bed-Chambers, they could be no where Secure: Even Water it self could not be had to many without Hazard of Life. V. WHEN at the same time they were swept away daily, in great Numbers, by a malignant Feaver, that then Raged among them, occasion'd from the Base Food, and Ill Lodging, want of Rest, the Noisome Stench and Dismal Sights, Noise of Cannon and Cries of the Sick and Wounded, continual fear of Death or of Famine, or falling into their Enemies hands, the daily Loss of their nearest Relations and Friends before their eyes, whom they were not able to help, nor women to support their poor infants; and other Miseries they were under that cannot be express'd, that they Died so fast, at length, as there could scarce be found room to Interr them, even the Back-sides and Gardens were fill'd up with Graves, and some thrown in Cellars; some whole Families were in∣tirely Extinct, and others from many, brought to a very few, and those in a very Misera∣ble Condition. VI. WHEN at the same time, to the great Grief and Astonishment of those poor People, they beheld the Supplies and Forces sent over from England under, the Command of Major-General Kirke, for their Relief, lye looking on in their Ships for about Six Weeks together, without ever attempting in the least to Relieve them, though they made all the Signals they could of their being Reduc'd to the very last Extremity, as they truly were at that time, which was greatly Discouraging, and try'd their Patience extreamly. VII. WHEN at the same time they were daily offered, by the late King or his Chief Officers there, such Terms and Conditions to Surrender the City, as it could not be thought they would ever have Refus'd; which, notwithstanding all the Miseries they endur'd, and great Danger they were in, and no appearance of Aid, they Rejected to the last; the Cause they Suffer'd for, and great Encouragements they receiv'd from the Proceedings of the Parliament in England, and the Fatal Consequences like to ensue to these Kingdoms, if they gave up the Place, prevailing with them above all Temptations whatever. When after near Four Months Sufferings in that Miserable Condition, it pleased GOD at length to Deliver them, when the Enemy broke up their Siege. But the Besieged had then nothing left to Return to, or Subsist on. And have, many of them, had but a Sorrowful Time ever since, and if not now Reliev'd, must Despair thereof till they Die.
