R862 [ocm]12288807 197548
A RELATION OF THE RARE exployts of the London Soul∣diers, and Gentlemen Prentizes, lately gone out of the Citie for the Designes of the KING AND PARLIAMENT. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. woodcut of tent with table Printed for William Smith. 1642.
A RELATION OF The rare exploits of the London Souldiers, and Gentlemen Prentizes lately gone out of the City for the designes of the King, and Parliament. THe miseries and Calamities which of late have happened in this con∣fused place of England are so ma∣ny, that they furnish the discourse both of this and of other nations, who notwithstanding are not able to expresse them all; I shall now relate you onely two, be∣falling within these few dayes, and to this end that by the true report of these which by men of sundry passions may be prevented) others of the like natare, if it please God may be prevented, of the one I have certaine information, of the o∣ther I my selfe was an eye witnesse. The first
happened at Acton, some six miles distant from London, where lived a Gentleman; reported and beleeved to be different in Religion (as too many now a dayes are which we know to be the cause of all our evills) from the Church of Eng∣land; but in the voice of most of his neighbours a sober moderate and charitable minded man. This Gentleman having in his house no more but one ancient Gentlewoman his kinswoman, whom he intrusted as his house keeper, with one serving man and maide. Had his house besett with divers Companies of Souldiers, who had listed themselves for the service of the King and Parliament and were in pay, and command, un∣der Officers, where after they had forced him to open the gates by threatning words they en∣tred the house, and so strangly despoyled him, that they left him not a bed, bedsted, table, doore, or glassewindow, chest, trunke, or the smallest utensill, but sold all for very small pri∣zes before his servants faces, some of them ha∣ving forced him before on foote to London, and for his bills, bonds, letters, and other writings, the most part they tore in peeces, and strewed them about the house, others some they sent up to London, he hath with much industry, and long time rarley furnished a plot of Ground with the choicest flowers and outlandish trees which he could procure, which they plucked up by the roots as many as they could, and the rest left so
desolate that whereas it was thought the finest and most curious gardens in all those part, there is now left nothing but the ruines of art and nature. The other outrage which with griefe I saw was committed in Radcliffe highway, upon Tuseday last being the 23 of this instant August, where lived an aged Gentleman in good fashi∣on, love and credit amongst his neighbours for many yeares space. I was enformed and might likewise guesse by his aspect that hee was above fourescore, and his wife not much distant from his time. This poore man was like manner as∣saulted by another company of Souldiers, who are billated thereabouts, untill the Drum com∣mands them to doe service: where having ap∣proached his doore, they drew out a paper which they read, whether a pretence of Autho∣rity or what else I cannot easily conjecture. And thereupon they rusht into the House, rifled him of all that was in the House, breaking and bat∣tering many of the goods, and having brought them out, sold them to such persons as would buy them at any rates, and this at nooneday and in the sight of 1000 people; one Featherbed I saw sold for foure shillings, and one Flockbed for one shilling, & many other things at I know not what prises, leaving him nothing but naked wales and one stoole which the old man sate up∣on, he being lame and decrepit with old age.
she Headborough of that place endeavored to escue some of the goods, which were af∣terwards violently taken againe out of his house After the riot was thus ended, they marched a∣way with a drum; and then I made bold to goe into this distressed mans house, where I found him sitting upon his only stoole, and with the teares falling downe his hoary beard; from whence having administred the best comfort that I could I departed. I will now leave the Reader to Iudge of these strange inhumanities they being in this respect the more monstrous in that they are practised amongst Christians against Christians, and a∣mongst men that pretend and indeede should maintaine and defend Religion, the Lawes of the Land, and Priviledges of the Subiect; to the scandall of the true sincere Protastant Religion, destruction of the Lawes of the Kingdome, and the utter violation of all Priviledge. If it be heer obiected unto me that they were Papists, I demand if there be not many wholsom Lawes, made against them, and desired both by the Kings Majesty by the Parliament to be put in execution, nay, were they Iewes or Aethists, it is a staine to the Government of the Kingdom amongst many other distempers, and may teach Forraigne Princes to use the same rigour towards Protestants beyond the Seas; whose Religion in puritie, truth, and decency let us
pray God for ever to maintain and defend. The Lords and Commons in Parliament declares, that all such persons as shall, upon any pretence whatsoever, assist his Majestie in this Warre, with Horse, Armes, Plate or money, are Tray∣tors to His Maiestie, the Parliament, and King∣dome, and shall be brought to condigne pun∣nishment for so high an offence. Ordered to be forthwith Printed and published. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
