R1100 99833322 207874
The Representation of Colonell Inglesby's Re∣giment in the Garrison of Oxford, in the be∣halfe of our selves and all the Nation, Sept. 7. 1649 directed to all the Souldiers of the Army, and to the whole Nation. WE having for these severall years since by sad experience, seen how the land of our nativity hath lyen in misery, and almost wasted, doth move us now out of compassion to speak in behalfe of ourselves and the rest of our Na∣tion, which we hope all honest men will adhere to; For they are not new things that we desire, they are of two years standing, expressed in the Ingagement of the Army at New-mark-heath the 5. of Iune 1647 and by Agreement of the People, offered to the consideration of our foure friends in the Tower of London, as an unparallel'd expe∣dient for the settlement of the Nation. There∣fore we doe declare, that we will endeavour to attain the choyce of two Officers & two Souldiers out of every Regiment, according to our fore-said engagement, to be at the Head-quarters of the Army, to act in our
own and the Nations behalfe, to accomplish the expectation of the Nation, who wait for freedome but behold bondage, for case but behold oppression as at this time. We doe declare that we will endeavour to obtaine such sure security to our selves & to the Nation, according to the nature of our fore-said engagement, that we might not be left to the willes of men, to exercise their pleasure on us for things done in rela∣tion to the service of the Nation. We Declare, that we will endeavour to our uttermost to free the Nation from that intollerable burthen of Excise, which eats into the very bones of the Poore people of this Nation, and also that insufferable cut-throat Tythe, which is the fift part of the Na∣tions wealth. We Declare against the new accustomed way of trying Causes by these corrupt Law∣yers, who make a trade of the Peoples ig∣norance: But that the Law be translated into our own native tongue, that so the Law may be understood: That there may be li∣berty granted to those to plead their own Cause (who can) or to imploy any other
friend, who will not for gaine destroy the Nati∣on as many have been by long dependence, it may be two three or foure years, that they having not mony to fee those greedy Catterpillers, they must loose their right. We doe Declare that we will with our lives and fortunes, stand fast, and joyne with each o∣ther for these just and reasonable things now in our thoughts to procure for the Nation, For we doe desire not in the least to set up any particular party or interest, but to obtain good for the whole, that all may injoy benefit. We hope this will not seem strange to you, that we thus present our resolution to you, it is not persons but principles of righteousnesse, that God willing we will set up: we doe it out of a tender regard that we have to the Nation, and to each other of our fellow Souldiers, that we might not plunder and destroy one another, as we have lately had example, and it is now endeavoured by our Of∣ficers, which will not in the least grant our just desires, which is, that two Officers and two Soul∣diers, of every Regiment be admitted to be cho∣sen, to be at the Head-quarters of the Army, to prosecute those things that are not perfected, in our own and the Nations behalfe, but they will
not be acquainted with us in such a choyce, which denyall to so just a demand, doth mani∣fest how we are endeavoured to be robd of our open and publike declard rights, as Souldiers & Commoners of the Nation, by particular men, which all men in our condition, can ex∣pect no better, it may be worse, (if possi∣ble) if not in time prevented, by an unanimous consent of all our fellow Souldiers, this is one of the highest acts of slavery that men live under, especially to those who have been faithfull to the death, for our officers to come into our quarters and rifle and take away what they please, which some of us can by experience speak, out of a deep sence of this our miserable condition, we are constrained to trouble you with these few lines, hoping the sence of them will take upon your spirits, so that you will afford us all the help and assistance you can, and not to be imployed as a hired mercenary Army, to cut the throats of your fellow Souldiers. Signed in the behalfe of our selves, and by consent of our fellow Souldiers. Iohn Radman. Iam. Allen. Geo. Middleton. Iam. Fort. Peter Iseake. Walter Pottinger. Tho. Collings. Dan Ren. Tho. Derry. Ioh. Coats.
