R1605A 99829660 207144
Sir Walter Roberts HIS ANSVVER TO Mr. Fords Book, ENTITVLED, A DESIGNE For bringing A Navigable River, from Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire to St. Giles in the Fields. London, Printed by R. H. 1641.
Sir Walter Roberts HIS ANSVVER TO Mr. FORDS Book Entituled A De∣signe for bringing a Navigable River from Rickmansworth in Hartford∣shire, to S. Giles in the Fields. THe Kings most excellent Majesty, Mr. Ford. taking in∣to his princely consideration, the great in∣coveniences that his loving Subjects about London, and Westminster, did suffer for want of water, put a Bill in Parliament for the bringing of water from Rickmansworth. His Majesty beares the name of this Bill, but Master Ford the charge, as he confessed to a Gentleman of quality, to whom he said not long since, that this busi∣nesse had cost him an hundred pounds, and the very Bill twenty four pounds, which is more (I beleeve) than ever he will get by it: and in the Bill there are some things affirmed, which his Majesty disavowes, and knowes to be otherwise; and certainly Master Ford was not well advised to prefer a Bill in his Majesties name, and to alledge any thing in it, which his Majesty did not know, or beleeve to be true, and which he himselfe could not prove, nor make good; and if some man
had done this, it would have been accounted a great of∣fence, and taken for no lesse than crimen laesae Majestatis. For to make the King publikely in Parliament speak any thing in a Bill, which is not true, is an high disho∣nour to his Majesty, and such as deserves an high cen∣sure. And this Master Ford hath done who in that Bill hath made his Majesty contradict himselfe and the Great Seal of England, and deny many things concer∣ning the Springs at Linch-mill, and the feacibility and benefit of the close Aqueduct, which he had before af∣firmed in severall Patents and Grants concerning the same, and to affirme some other which were to Master Fords knowledge disproved by depositions of witnesses, and Records of Courts which he had seen. Another great errour Master Ford hath committed, in his little book. In the first and second pages where∣of, he makes his Majesty the authour of the lesse de∣signe, (to bring water to the City) and himselfe of the greater, to make a Navigable River) but this slip may in some measure be excused, That his Majesties designe is feacible, and Master Fords is not. I could charge him with another over-sight as great as any of these, That he did not foresee the great bene∣fit that this new Navigation would be to the City and Countrey before this Bill was preferred, and advise his Majesty to prefer his Bill for this worke, rather than that, since he (as appeares by his book) was to be the undertaker of both, and now preferres this as the better worke: but I will not overcharge him, nor stay longer upon the Preface (the porch of his book,) but will now enter and survey the building; (The reasons which he brings to shew the benefit of his Navigable
River) which are eleven in number; and I might an∣swer them all in one word; by saying (as I may ve∣ry truly,) that out of them all, there cannot be col∣lected one good argument to prove, that this worke if it were done, would be any benefit to City or Coun∣trey, but for his and others satisfaction, I will make a particular answer to them all. And first, to the first, I answer: That to set great multitudes of labourers on worke, is not simply good in it selfe, but quite contrary, unlesse the worke which they are imployed in be good for the Common-wealth, which this is not, as appeares by the complaint of the Countrey against it, and not of ordinary men onely, but of the principall Lords and Gentlemen of the County. To the second I answer,  That Hartfordshire, Bucking∣hamshire, and Middlesex, want not vent for their Corne, Meale, or other commodities, but do buy and sell them as cheape as other Counties do, and therefore they need no navigable River for this purpose. His argument doth onely concerne that part of Hartfordshire, which would border upon his new River, if it should be made, and they do most of all oppose his worke, and therefore certainly they conceive it will be noxious, not commodious to them. And if it be not good for them, it cannot be good for any, since other places may have chalke, manure, and other com∣modities as well and as cheape from other Counties, as from Hartfordshire, and then what benefit will this na∣vigable River be to them? To the fourth I answer, That the River of Thames is
bigge enough to carry away all the soil that is made in or near London or Westminster, and lies farmore conve∣niently for it, than his new River will do, and there is land enough bordering upon this River to receive it all, if it were ten times as much, without making a new River, to carry it into Hartfordshire. 5.  To the fifth I answer, That fewell and other com∣modities, are as cheape in Hartfordshire as in other Counties, neither could this new River, if it were made, make them cheaper. To the sixth I answer, That Hartfordshire is not so hot a Clymate, or the Cattell there of so calid a con∣stitution, but that lesse water than a Navigable River may satisfie their thirst. To the seventh I answer, That Master Ford is much mistaken in thinking that carriage doth spoil high∣wayes, for we finde by experience, that the greatest Roades are alwayes the best, and blinde lanes the worst wayes: The Reason whereof is, because much car∣riage and travelling upon them, makes them even and smoothe, and the want of this makes the other uneven and rugged, neither doth carriage ever hurt high-wayes, but in ill weather, carriage being the onely meanes we have to mend them, by bringing gravell and other a∣mendment for them. To the eighth I answer, That the Cities of London and Westminster may perhaps (if his worke be done) have the Ornament of a great new Ditch, but not of a Navigable River, it being impossible to make a Navi∣gable River to S. Giles in the Fields, with any reasona∣ble charge. There being so many great hils and valleys between Rickmansworth and it, and the ground of Saint
Giles being above 60. foot higher than the natural course of that River at Westminster. 9. To the ninth I answer, that certainly other Coun∣ties which border upon the River of Thames and the Ri∣ver of Lee, may serve and supply London and Westminster, and other places adjoyning, with Corne and other com∣modities as cheape as hartfordshire, if this new River were made, and therefore the making of it can no way advantage them. To the tenth I make the same answer, which I did to the fourth, it being the same in substance contracted in∣to fewer words. That the River of Thames will carry away the doung and soil of this City better and cheaper than his new River, for it will go all the way downe hill to Thames, but must go up hill to S. Giles. Besides some parts of the City lie above two miles from S. Giles in the Field, whereas no part of it lies above halfe a mile from the Thomes. To the eleventh I answer, That those places in or near London, which want water, shall be better supplied, by the Aqueduct undertaken by Sir Walter Roberts and o∣thers, than they can be by his worke; who may perhaps bring more water than Middleton hath done, but cannot bring better in an open River; but by the close Aque∣duct from Hodsdon all those places in or about London and Westminster which want water, shall be plentifully sup∣plied with pure and clear spring-water fit for any use, which Master Fords being brought open cannot be. And whereas he affirmeth, that the water of his Na∣vigable River shall be such as shall be alwayes clear, and fit for all uses; I wonder at his confidence, and cannot imagine that any understanding man can beleeve it, that
is not a Catholique, and led by an implicite faith; there being no Navigable River in the world that is alwayes clear, but will be foul and muddy in floods and great rain; when land waters and washings of streets and high∣wayes fall into it; neither can any art or artificiall con∣veyance keep these out, unlesse M. Ford can make such a case for his new River, that no water at all shall come into it in flouds, which he may do by making it onely in Paper, as he hath done, and that in my opinion will be his best way, for this Navigation (I mean his book) will hurt no body but the Printer; the other will hurt many, and be good for none. And thus having answered the reasons which he hath brought to shew the benefit of his new Navigation, I come now to answer those allegations, which he offers to remove the objections made against it by the Coun∣trey, which as he saith in his book, are these five. 1. The depriving them of their fish. 2. The hindering their winter land-flouds, which en∣rich their meadowes, and bring downe a fat soil called Moor-earth, of which they make great advantage. 3. The taking away their fences made by the River. 4. The spoiling of their corne-mils, and consequent∣ly their Markets, which consist much of Meale. 5. And of their Paper-mils. To all which he answers. First, in generall, that all these objections arise from a mistake, as if the purpose were to take all their Water, whereas it is intended, and shall be suffi∣ciently secured, that no more water shall be turned from the ordinary course than what shall run between an hatch of four foot wide. Which answer is so far from removing, or satisfying any one of those objections, that it is a con∣vincing
argument to prove them all; for a hatch of foure foot wide upon a good fall, will carry away more water, then runs in that River; and if he take away so much as such a hatch will receive, he will leave them none, or very little; which may be made demonstra∣tive, by drawing a gate of foure foot wide at any of those Mils, which stand upon the maine River, which I dare undertake shall carry away the water faster then the whole River can bring it down, and in short time shrink it so as it shall be visible: and therefore Master Ford hath either exprest himselfe ill, or else he doth not well understand workes of this nature, it being a vaste deale of water, that a hatch of foure foote wide upon a good fall will carry away. 1. I have done with his generall answer, and come now to the particulars of it. Where he saith: first, That none of their fish shall be diminished, but shall all bee shut out of his River by a great set made at the head of it; which I confesse may be done: but if he take away the water from the fish, he were as good take away the fish too. Secondly, he saith that their winter floods may and must be wholly kept out of this Trench, which shall re∣ceive no muddy water into any part of it, nor more wa∣ter in winter than in summer, which is impossible, un∣lesse as I said before, he meane only to make a Paper ri∣ver; and then he may let into it, and into his owne ima∣gination, though not into other mens, what water hee pleaseth and when he pleaseth; but otherwise to say that his River shall receive no muddy water, when there is none but muddy water in the River from which he re∣ceives it (as in floods) nor more water in winter than in
summer, when the very raine from heaven, which hee cannot shut out of his River, is more in winter than in summer, is a strange assertion. To the third he saith, that it is presumed that an inch of water taken away from the depth of the River, will make no considerable difference to their fences, which is confest, if that were the case as it is not, for a hatch of foure foot wide will not take away an inch only from the depth of their River, but an ell if it be so deep in all, and the hatch laid low enough. To the fourth I answer, that M. Ford cannot now with any reason say, that he will take but a little water out of the River of Colne, since in the bill which he hath preferred in his Majesties name, he saith, that he will by his new River bring a far greater quantity of better water to London, then can be brought from Lynch-mill springs, which are now found to be so great, that it is feared by many, that the taking of them away, may hin∣der Navigation upon the River of Lee, which is 80. foot wide, and eight foot deep: and if M. Ford take away more water out of the River of Colne, which is far lesse then Lee, it must needs exceedingly prejudice, if not ut∣terly destroy all the Mills standing upon it, below his new River. And though some of them have as he af∣firmes, the water of six Rivers to serve them now, yet if he take away all this water before it come at them, as he may doe by a hatch of foure foot wide, they will be lit∣tle the better for it. And I doe confidently beleeve, that there are none, or very few of those mills but at some time or other want water; and then if Master Fords new River take away any from them at those times, they must needs want so much more as he takes away, neither
is this any thing which he alledges that a great deale of this water doth runne wast, which cannot be avoyded in lesse streames then this is, though the Millars want wa∣ter never so much, because where the streame wants ei∣ther height or quantity to maintaine the Mils without being pent, there it must needs run over as often as the Mill stands still, after the Pent is full, though the Mil∣lar at another time may want that weter, which thus runs waste. And the reason why Millars pend up their water in ponds and river is, because the water without being pent, wants either height or quantity to supply their Mils, for if it had both these, and would serve their turne as well without being pent, they would not trou∣ble themselves to make and maintaine pends. To the fifth and last I answer, that the case of the Pa∣per-mills and Corne-mills, being the same, the same an∣swer may serve for both, which is briefly this: That if so much water, as a hatch of foure foot wide will receive, be taken out of the River of Colne, it will utterly destroy all the Mills below it, because it will take away all the water of that River if it were bigger then it is. It therefore plainly appeares by that which hath been said, that this proposition of making a Navigable Ri∣ver from Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire to S. Giles in the fields, is not fit to be prosecuted any further, being a worke of great difficulty, of excessive charge, and of more prejudice then benefit, both to the Countrey and City. So shallow and unfit this Ford is to make a Navigable River. But if the Inhabitants of Hartfordshire conceive that Navigation from Richmansworth to London will bee a worke of any great benefit to them, I can shew them a
better way to make a Navigable River from thence to London (though not to S. Giles) then that which M. Ford proposeth, and that is by widening and deepning the Ri∣ver in his naturall course, where it is either too narrow or too fleet, and by making lockes in some convenient places. All which may be done with a quarter of the charge which M. Fords worke will cost, and without any pre∣judice either to the Mills or Lands, nay with some be∣nefit to them both, because they shall have the same wa∣ter, which they now have, and so much more as the Ri∣ver will containe more, being made wider and deeper, and pent higher. And this worke I conceive may bee done with a reasonable charge, though I can only affirm it probably, not knowingly, because I have not yet sur∣veyed it throughly, and being done, it will be far more usefull and profitable to the Countrey in respect of Na∣vigation, then M. Fords designe. And for supplying the City and other places with water, that may be done also by the Aqueduct from Hoddesdon far better than by his new River, whether he make it Navigable or not, and both these workes may be finished with halfe the charge that his Navigable River will cost. And if the Countrey may be accommodated with better Naviga∣tion, and the City supplyed with better water, for halfe the charge that M. Fords worke will cost, I presume the Lords before whom the cause is now depending, will not suffer his proposition to be prosecuted any farther. I have done with the worke which he proposeth, and now come to the security which he offers for the perfor∣mance of it, eight thousand pounds a yeare Lands, which is at the least six thousand pounds a yeare more
then he hath, or is likely to have of his owne. And if there be any such men to be found in the world, as will engage six thousand pound a yeare Land upon another mans project, grounded upon no more probability of reason then this is, They shall have my voice to be re∣corded for more then kinde friends, and perhaps their posterity will have cause enough to thinke them kinde fooles, but I cannot beleeve that there are any such, and and if there be, Master Ford hath done well to conceale their names: But if he can give such great security, why doth he not rather take up so much money at interest as will doe the worke, and take the whole benefit of it to himselfe, and his partners, then to receive twenty five thousand pounds of his Majestie, upon condition to pay unto him and his heires for ever foure thousand pounds a yeare out of the rents and profits of the worke, since foure thousand pounds a yeare would in lesse then ten yeares pay twenty five thousand pounds with the inte∣rest, and this would be lesse dangerous, and more com∣modious for M. Ford, and for his sureties, who by this meanes should in fifteene yeares, if the work succeeded, be absolutely freed of their security, and M. Ford and his partners should enjoy the whole benefit of the work afterward, whereas now their Lands must stand engaged for ever, if the worke goe on; and M. Ford and his asso∣ciates must for ever pay foure thousand pounds a yeare to his Majesty, and his heires, if the whole rents and pro∣fits of the worke shall amount to so much. And there∣fore M. Ford cannot perswade me, that he can any where take up twenty five thousand pounds upon this security, for if he could, why should he take it of his Majesty up∣on such hard conditions, as to pay foure thousand pound
a yeare for ever for it? And if no other will lend him twenty five thousand pounds upon this security, why should his Majesty? Who cannot hope that this Navi∣gable River (if it could be made with any reasonable charge, as it cannot) would yeeld halfe foure thousand pounds per annum. And his Majesty can have no more rent or profit out of the worke then it will yeeld: where∣as the close Aqueduct, if it be well and artificially done (as it shall be if Sir Walter Roberts and his partners have the doing of it) is in probability like to be worth tenne thousand pounds a yeare, and so his Majesty and his heires shall be sure to have their rent of foure thousand pounds a yeare, well and duly paid them for ever. Be∣sides, this close Aqueduct will be a great benefit to the City, and no prejudice at all to the Countrey. And I know the honour and justice of the Parliament is such, as they will prefer that work which they shall conceive to be most for his Majesties profit, and the publique good. I have now done with the security, and with this de∣signe of M. Fords, and so I hope hath he; which I wish for his good, and the good of all whom it concernes. FINIS.
A PROPOSITION FOR the serving and supplying of London, Westmin∣ster, and other places adjoyning; with a sufficient quantity of good and cleare spring∣water, to be brought from Hoddesdon in Hart∣fordshire in a close Aqueduct of Bricke, Stone, Lead, or Timber. THE Cities of London and Westminster being growne very populous; and there being of late many faire houses and o∣ther large and spacious buildings ere∣cted in them, and in the Coven garden, S. Martins, S. Iames, S. Giles, Drewry∣lane, Lincolnes-Inne-fields, Holborne, and other places ad∣jacent: and there being also a great want of good water in all the said places, especially in the new buildings; the works already done being not sufficient to supply them, and Middletons water by reason of the foulenesse and muddinesse of it (comming in an open trench) being found by experience not to be fit for many uses, and to faile many times for a whole week or fortnight together. His Majesty out of his Princely care and zeale of the publique good, considering the many and great mis∣chiefes that his loving subjects inhabiting within these Cities and places, must needs suffer by the want of so ne∣cessary a commodity; And knowing the great benefit
that will accrew unto them by having plenty and abun∣dance of good and pure water, being informed, that there were certain springs of excellent water at Hoddesdon in Hartfordshire, that might conveniently be brought in an Aqueduct of Brick or Stone, to a conserve at Islington, and from thence disperst to serve and supply all the said places, did for his better satisfaction grant a commission to Sir Charles Herbert and others; to examine whether these springs were sufficient for height, quantity and quality, to serve and supply all the said places, and what the charge of the worke would be. In March 1636. these Commissioners did certifie his Majestie that these springs did lie 33. foot and 6. inches higher than the pavement at the Crosse in Cheapside (which is 22. foot higher then the Pyach in the Coven garden.) That they did yeeld for quantity above 12000. Tun of water in 24. houres, and that they were naturall and constant springs which did neither increase much in winter with landwaters, nor decrease in summer, but had continued so time out of minde. That they were for quality very good and well con∣ditioned waters, fit for dressing of meate, for Baking, Brewing, or Washing. And that they had caused di∣vers tryals to be made of them in their presence for their better satisfaction. That there were divers other springs hard by them which might conveniently (if need were) be raised and brought with them. And that these springs might bee brought in an Aqueduct of Bricke, to a conserve at Islington for 25000. pounds, and the Mill and Lands purchased for 750. pound more.
Upon this Certificate, and upon hearing the cause him∣selfe at the Councel-table, his Majesty was pleased to grant his Letters Patents to Michael Parker and Everard Manwaring for the raising of 25000. l. for this worke. And about the same time, he also granted other Let∣ters Patents to Sir Edward Stradling, and Iohn Lyde for the doing thereof: In which his Majesty did covenant to allow them 25000. l. for the doing of the worke, and to assist them and their associates by the best wayes and meanes he could, either by making them a Corporati∣on, or by giving his Royall assent to an Act of Parlia∣ment for the better effecting thereof. And they did co∣venant with his Majesty to finish the said Aqueduct in five yeares; and to raise out of the rents and profits thereof 4000. pounds a year to his Majesty and his heires for ever; Or else to pay backe the 25000. pounds or so much thereof as they should receive. Sir Edward Stradling did afterwards associate to him Sir Walter Roberts, M. Gage, and M. Newce: and there∣upon the contract was renewed. Upon the death of M. Gage, M. Ralegh was brought in his room, and the contract with his Majesty was renew∣ed again, under the great Seal of England; and the other undertakers did make choice of Sir Walter Roberts to have the oversight and ordering of this worke; who with their consent and allowance caused the levels to be again exactly taken, and a plot made of the grounds, through which the Aqueduct was to be carried; which was done by M. de Boyes a German, an expert Artist. After this, Sir Edward Stradling, M. Ralegh, and M. Newce, deserting the worke, and desiring to be freed of the security which they had given to his Majesty for the
Performance of it, Sir Walter Roberts did in December last by petition acquaint the Lords of the Parliament with it; and did withall desire that he might have li∣berty to go on with the worke, according to the con∣tract with his Majesty, giving security to performe it. Upon this petition of his, the Lords of the Commit∣tee for petitions did make an Order the 24. of December, by which they did declare, that they did well approve of the worke, and thought fit the petitioner Sir Walter Ro∣berts should undertake the same. And their Lordships did likewise order, that all the parties therein named should attend them in the Painted-Chamber upon the 14. of Ianuary following, t two of the clocke in the af∣ternoon, to give an account of the monies which they had received and had in their hands for that worke. The parties did attend accordingly, and M. Ford did then prefer a petition to their Lordships, in which he did pretend and alledge, that this worke which Sir Walter Roberts and others had undertaken was not feacible, the waters of those springs wanting height, quantity and quality, to supply the said Cities and places with wa∣ter, or to raise the rent reserved to his Majesty. And he did likewise informe their Lordships, that the worke was deserted; though he knew the contrary, and had seen the Order above mentioned. The Lords rejecting his petition, and one of them saying, that it was not fit to overthrow a contract under the great Seal of England, upon a petition; He not long after preferred a Bill in his Majesties name; in which he suggested the very same things which he had done before in his petition. After this Bill had been read the first time in the Lords House, Sir Walter Ro∣berts
and Master Ford meeting often in the Commitee Chamber, and discoursing together about this businesse, In the end fell to this agreement, That they should joyne together and undertake that worke which should be most for the common good. This agreement was set downe in writing, approved of by them both, new writ∣ten by consent, and a time and place appointed for the signing of it. But M. Ford sending his man to excuse his not comming to signe it, got his Bill that morning to be read the second time and committed, which was not fair dealing. When the cause came to be heard before the Lords, M. Ford was not able to prove any one of his objections against this worke. But on the contrary Sir Walter Ro∣berts did disprove most of them by the certificate of Sir Charles Herbert and others. M. Attourney Generall being present at this debate, and of counsell for the Bill thus preferred in his Maje∣sties name, was pleased to say, that in respect of the contract which Sir Walter Roberts had from his Majesty, and the Order made by the Lords of the Parliament up∣on his petition, if Sir Walter Roberts could either by reason or demonstration satisfie their Lordships judge∣ments, that the worke which he had undertaken was feacible, and that being done it would be sufficient to supply all those places with good and usefull water which were to be supplied by it, he thought fit, that he should have the doing of it before any other, neither should he stand much upon the security: but if he could not do this, then it was fit he should give good se∣curity for the performance of what he had undertaken, if he would go on with it.
Upon this motion of M. Attornies, M. Ford offering security for the work which he proposed, and the Lords conceiving that security for the performance of a worke was better than any demonstration of reason, did order. That if Sir Walter Roberts should give good security for the performance of the Aqueduct which he had un∣dertaken, he should go on with it. Sir Walter upon this resolution of the Lords, did ad∣dresse himselfe to the Court of Aldermen, and did in open Court acquaint them with the severall propositi∣ons which had been made to his Majesty and the Lords of the Parliament, concerning the supplying of London and other places with water. One by himselfe, who had contracted with his Majesty to bring certain springs of clear and excellent water, from Hoddesdon in Hartfordshire to London, Westminster, and other places adjoyning in a close Aqueduct of Bricke, Stone, Lead, or Timber. The other by M. Ford, who proposed to bring part of the River of Colne from Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire to a Conserve at S. Giles in the Fields, in an open trench or cut (as Middletons was,) and from thence to disperse it, to serve the said places, and did desire them to declare their opinions, which of the two workes would (as they conceived) be best for their City. After some debate, they all agreed that the close Aque∣duct would be far more usefull and beneficiall to them, than an open River (as Middletons was) could be; since they wanted not water so much, as good water, and to bring more such water, as Middletons was, would be no benefit to them, because they which had Middletons wa∣ter, were fain to be at a great charge to buy Conduit water, Middletons not being fit for many uses.
When they all thus agreed, that a close Aquednct would be far better for them, and for all whom it con∣cerned, than an open River, Sir Walter did make this re∣quest to them, that for the good of their City, the bene∣fit of the worke, and the satisfaction of the King, and the Parliament, that the money raised, and given for this Aqueduct should not be misimployed, they would be pleased to take the same into their care and custody, and see it expended upon the worke as it went on, And to in∣vite them to consent to this, he told them, they should have it at a very easie rate, at five per Cent. The Court after some private consultation, did make this answer to Sir Walters request. That if his Majesty, and the Lords of the Parliament should thinke it fit, they would be willing for the good of the worke, to be our Treasurer for the money, and to let us have it, as we wanted it; but to give any interest for it, that they did not thinke fit, seeing they gave none for Pauls money, or any other monies put into their hands for pious or publique uses. Sir Walter having received this answer from the Court of Aldermen in approbation of this worke, not long after preferred a petition to the Lords of the Com∣mittee for the Aqueduct, and in it tendered such securi∣ty for the performance of the worke, as their Lordships did approve of, as appeares by nine of their hands sub∣scribed to his petition. About the same time he also preferred a Bill in the House of Commons, to have an Act of Parliament for the better effecting of this publike good worke, which Bill hath been twice read, and is referred to a Committee. When M. Ford saw that neither his petition, nor bill
did prevail, but that Sir Walter Roberts went on still with his worke, he deserts them both, and makes now a new proposition, which he hath lately  out in print, and that is to make a Navigable River from Rickmans∣worth in Hartfordshire to S. Giles in the fields, which is a worke not to be done without a charge infinitely greater than the profit, there being so many great hils and val∣lies between those two places, besides the ground at S. Giles his Church, being above 60. foot higher than the naturall course of that River at Westminster; And the making of his River Navigable, will not make his water better, but worse, and will onely multiply his charge, but not his profit. And if the County of Hartfordshire did oppose his first proposition, which was onely to take so much wa∣ter out of the River of Colne, as would supply London, Westminster, and their suburbs, because the taking of so much onely out of that River, would (as they concei∣ved) much prejudice all their Mills standing upon it, and deprive them of that benefit, which they now have by them, and by flowing of their lands, they have much more reason to oppose this new proposition, which is to take a greater out of a lesse, a Navigable River, out of a River which is not Navigable. And though he pretend, that he will not shrinke the River of Colne halfe an inch, nor prejudice their Mills, or hinder the flowing their lands, yet I doubt Hartford∣shire men, whom it concernes, will hardly beleeve him; and the argument he brings to prove it, and to satisfie them withall, is a convincing reason to prove the con∣trary: for a Hatch of four foot wide upon a good fall, will carry away more water than is in this River, so
much M. Ford is mistaken in affirming that by such a Hatch he will not take away the fortieth part of the water thereof. And for the benefit which he pretends the Cities of London and Westminster, and other places will receive by this new Navigation, it will be so little to them who have better Navigation already by the Rivers of Thames and Lee, than any M. Ford can make from Richmans∣worth, as it will not be considerable, the lands border∣ing upon these two Rivers, being sufficient to receive ten times as much soil, as these two Cities can make. Neither doth Hartfordshire afford any commodities to supply these Cities withall, which may not be had as well, and as cheap from other Counties. And the worke undertaken by Sir Walter Roberts and others, which M. Ford would overthrow to bring in his new Navigation, will be a worke of far greater be∣nefit to those Cities, and places, (which want good water more than Navigation) than another Navigable River can be. And this worke as it is proposed and in∣tended by Sir Walter Roberts, will be a very great benefit to the City, and no prejudice at all to the Countrey; nay, it will be a benefit to some parts of it, viz. to such houses, townes, and villages, as want good water and lie near it, and to those owners and farmours through whose lands it shall be carried: for these shall have a full va∣lue paid them in hand for so much of their land as shall be cut and used for the worke, and yet shall have the pos∣session and profit of it, and so shall sell their land and yet enjoy it; and those may be supplied with excellent water from this Aqueduct which is no small benefit to such places as want it. And for the damage which any
can receive by it, it wil be only in cutting & soiling their lands, and carrying materials for the worke over them whilest the same is in doing; and for this being paid as before, more than a full value, it changes the name and nature of it, and makes it of a damage a benefit and o∣ther damage than this no man shal receive by this work. For first, Sir Walter Roberts will take no water out of any Rive, and therefore no way prejudice Navigation. Secondly, he will divide or take away no mans ground, but onely make a cut through it, and fill it up again, so as men shall ride, go, or carry, plow or sow over it, as they now do, and make the same profit of it in every respect. Thirdly, before they begin to worke in any mans Land, they will compound with him, and give satisfa∣ction for the damage they shall do him. This worke being well done with good Brickes, and other materials, will not fail in many ages, unlesse it be in some few places, where it must be carried above ground, and there it may very easily be amended, when it shall fail; neither can any man be much prejudiced by it, if a breach should happen in it, since the water may at any time upon an houres warning, be turned in∣to his naturall course where it now runs, and the Aque∣duct laid dry, by sewing the pond where the springs rise, to which end there shall be a large gut laid at the bottom of it, to draw up and to sew the pond upon any occasion. And this alone will sufficiently secure all the Lands through which this Aqueduct shall passe, from any damage or danger of being flowed by it. And for the better satisfaction of all whom this worke con∣cernes, the manner how it is intended to be done, is here expressed.
First, the Pond in which the springs do rise shal be few∣ed, the mud therein cast out, the land waters shut off, and all things else removed that may annoy the water. This being done, the Pond shall be walled in, and the springs raised as high, as they will rise without loosing any part of them; when it appeares how high they will rise, then the Pond shall be emptied, and paved at the bottom with Bricke or Stone, and the bottom of the channell laid levell with the bottom of the Pond, and carried from thence, upon an exact levell, (or with as little fall as may be given in so great a length of way) to the Conserve at Islington. This channell shall be made of such bignesse, and strength, as it shall receive, and carry away all those springs, and as many more if need be, as faste as they rise, and shall be made with such morter, and covered at the top two foot thicke at the least, with so good earth, and so well rammed, as it shall hold water as well as a pipe of Lead. It shall also have vents given it in very many places, to make it run the more swiftly, and to discover the de∣fects, if any should happen in the worke. This Aqueduct being thus made, and the springs walled in and brought under ground in a close vault or channell of Bricke so made that no part of them can soak through, or break away, the water will rise as high as the Conserve at Islington, as it stands, in the Pond at Lynch mill; and though the channell be made upon an exact levell, yet the water will have so much fall as is be∣tween the top of the Pond, and the bottom of the chan∣nell, and the channell being by this meanes kept alwayes full, will be far stronger, and freer from danger of decay.
At either end of this Aqueduct shall be a double set, or grate made to keep out whatsoever may annoy or hinder the passage of the water, and to suffer nothing but water to go in. And by this worke thus done, the Cities of London and Westminster, and other places adjoyning shall be con∣tinually, and plentifully served and supplied with excel∣lent good water, fit for any use, either for dressing of meat, for washing, baking, brewing, or drinking. The security offered for the performance of this worke is this. First, the money raised and given for it shall be deposited in the Chamber of London, or in such other safe hands as the Parliament shall appoint. Secondly, Sir Walter Roberts and his partners will make the worke, and the charge of it certain, before they demand any money; by finishing part of the worke at their owne charge, and bringing all the water part of the way, and part of the water to London, The first where∣of will shew the charge of the worke, the second the certainty: when they have done so much of the worke, as shall make the charge, feacibility, and certainty of it appear, they will desire to be paid for it; and with that money they will go on and finish so much more thereof, as that will finish: and so from time to time they will perfect so much of the worke, as they demand money for, before they demand it. Besides they will give their bonds and covenants to finish the worke in a con∣venient time, and to performe the contract made with his Majesty. And this we conceive to be better security for the performance of a worke, than any by bonds or lands can be; for no security can make a thing feacible, that is not so in it selfe; and this being feacible, there can
be no better way to ascertain the doing of it, than this is. Security for payment of money is one thing, securi∣ty for performance of a worke another. That which is good security for the payment of mony, may be no good security for the performance of a worke: and on the con∣trary, that may be good security for the performance of a worke, that is not good security for the payment of money. For instance: an ignorant rich man under∣akes to do a worke which he understands not, nor hath ny skill in, and gives security by bond, and covenant o performe it: this though the man be a good man, is no good security that the thing shall be done, because he nowes not how to do it, and perhaps hath undertaken hat which is not to be done. On the other side, a poore rtificer, that is an honest understanding man, and his rts-master, undertakes to do a worke that will cost 000. pounds, whereas he is not worth perhaps 1000. ence, and gives his bond and covenant to performe it. This is good security for the performance of this work, and better than the other, because this man is both able and willing to performe what he hath undertaken, and is bound to do, which the other is not, but hath un∣dertaken and bound himselfe to do that, which is not to be done, and therefore may and must forfeit his bond, but can never do the worke, which would be M. Fords case, if he should give security to bring a Navigable Ri∣ver from Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire to S. Giles in he fields, and to deliver the water thereof as pure, as it s in its owne nature, which is absolutely impossible, and he other not feacible without a charge far greater than e profit. And now I will adde a word or two in an∣ver of those objections, which are made against this orke; which are these three:
The first, that these Springs falling into the River of Lee, and containing so great a quantity of water, as 12000. Tun in twenty four houres, the taking away of them will preju∣dice Navigation upon that River. The second, that if any breach should happen in this worke after it is finished, and should drowne or spoil mens Corne or Meddowes, how shall they be satisfied for that damage? The third, that the whole profit of this worke, if it be ef∣fected, will not answer the rent of 4000. pounds a year re∣served to his Majesty? The two first of these are made by the inhabitants of Hartfordshire. The last by Sir W. Middleton, and M. Ford, who oppose, and would hinder this good worke, to them all I hope I shall give full and satisfactory answers: and to the first my answer is, that the River of Lee is Na∣vigable to Ware, which is 5. or 6. miles higher than Broxbourne, where these springs fall into it. That between Ware and Broxbourne, there fall into this River of Lee two other Rivers, containing four times as much water as these springs which we take away, and yet the River is navigable two or three miles above the place where these streames fall into it. That this River before it comes to Broxbourne, is di∣vided into two branches, and yet is navigable notwith∣standing, and these springs which we take away fall into that branch of Lee which is not navigable, & not into the main River, untill that branch fals into it again, that this River where these springs fall into it, is 80. foot wide and 8. foot deep, and the water which we shall take from it, is onely a Mill-stream, which it hath not alwaye neither, being sometimes for four houres together pen up by the Millar, yet is the River navigable neverthelesse all that time, as well as when the Mill goes.
Now whether a Mill-stream cut off from a River that is 80. foot wide, and 8. foot deep and navigable 5. or 6. miles higher than where these springs fall into it can at all prejudice or concerne Navigation, I leave to the judgement of those that are judicious in matters of this nature; and will onely say this, that the same objection lies more strongly against Sir William Middletons worke and M. Fords proposition. Sir William Middletons water being taken from springs which did fall into the same River 5. miles higher than where these fall in. And M. Ford proposing to take his new Navigation out of the River of Colne which fals in∣to the River of Thames about Stanes, and will exceedingly prejudice Navigation upon that River between Stanes and London. The Bargemen many times wanting water now between those places; and if he take away so much as will make a Navigable River in another place, they must needs want so much more as he takes away; and Na∣vigation upon Thames is of ten times more consequence than this new Navigation can be, which is an objection against his worke worth the answering, and not yet an∣swered. And if the taking away of a Mill-stream from a Navigable River shal be admitted for a prejudice to Na∣vigation; this will be an objection against all Aqueducts as well as this, since there is no water but fals into some Navigable River or other, before it comes into the sea. Besides, if the taking away of these springs from this River would be some small prejudice to Navigation up∣on it (as it will not) yet it were Damnum sine injuria, since we take them not out of the River, but divert them an∣other way before they fall into it. And though to take water out of a River to the prejudice of others be not
lawfull, yet it is lawfull for any man that hath springs rising in his owne Land, to divert or convert them to what use he will, or else no man might erect Mils or bring water to his owne house. I have been the more large in answering this objection because prejudice to Navigation makes a great noise, and such as either cannot or will not understand what is prejudiciall, and what is not, are apt to beleeve, or at least to pretend a prejudice where there is none. But I am confident, that such as can judge, and come not with a prejudicate opinion, will be clearly satisfied with that which hath been said, That the diverting of these springs cannot by any possibility prejudice Navigation upon the River of Lee into which they now fall; but to satisfie the Countrey and all whom this worke con∣cernes more fully, that there is no intention to prejudice them by it, Sir Walter Roberts will undertake at his owne charge to make Navigation upon that River below Brox∣bourne, where these springs fall into it, better than it is above that place, so as they will give their free consent to this publique good worke, and will not put him to any unnecessary charge or trouble, and he doth hope and presume that all that wish well to the common good will be ready to afford him their furtherance in it, which he shall strive and endeavour to deserve of them. And so I come to the second objection, which is a Quaere. How the Owners and Farmours through whose Lands this Aqueduct is to be carried, shall be satisfied for the damage which they shall receive by it. To which I answer, That every mans damage shal be valued by himselfe, or by such Commissioners as the Parliament shall appoint, and he shall receive full satis∣faction
for it before any worke be done in his land; and for any damage that shall happen afterward by any leak, or breach in the worke when it is finished, They shall have the same satisfaction paid them as soon as the damage is done, and valued. And this damage cannot be much, not happen often, because as soon as any such leak or breach shall be perceived, the waters shall all presently be drawne away out of the Aqueduct or channell, and turned into the River of Lee, where it runnes now, by a gut laid (as before) in the bottom of the Pond, till the said leak or breach shal be amended, and the damage satisfied. And most of those lands which we are to passe throughly upon a side-hill, so as there can be no danger of flowing their corne, hay, or grasse, though a breach should happen in the worke, and for water to run over land, and not to flow it, or stand up∣on it, is many times a benefit, and enriching, and can at no time be any great damage to it, yet what soever the damage be, it shall be satisfied as soon as it is done and valued, and before the breach be amended. These two objections concerne the inhabitants of Hartfordshire, and the owners and farmours through whose lands the Aqueduct shall passe, and I hope they are fully answered. The third and last concernes his Majesty and the under∣takers of the worke; and is made by Sir W. Middleton and M. Ford, who have left nothing unsaid, that might be ob∣jected against it; but rather than they would want objecti∣ons have at severall times objected things contrary one to another: for when this businesse was in agitation before the Lords of the Parliament, then the main objection, that these Gentlemen made against this worke, was: That these Springs did not yeeld water enough to supply those places that were to be supplied by them. When that was answered, and a Bill preferred in the
House of Commons, to have an Act of Parliament for the better doing of this worke, then they come with a contra∣ry objection; and pretend that these springs yeeld such a great quantity of water, that the diverting of them, will prejudice Navigation upon the River of Lee, which is 80. foot wide, and 8. foot deep, and navigable 5. miles  the place where these springs fall into it. But as  jection is very easily answered, so their opposition s a strong argument (whatsoever they pretend to the contra∣ry) that they conceive this worke to be both feacible and profitable to the Common-wealth; for if it were not both, it could not prejudice them, nor their workes, nor stir them up to oppose it as they do: and being feacible and good for the Common-wealth, I hope their opposition shall not hinder it. And whereas they affirme, that so great a rent as 4000. pounds a year cannot be raised out of this worke; If they will admit but this ground (which they cannot with reason deny) that men will be willing to give as much for good water, as they give now for bad, I will make it very plain and demonstrative, that the rents and profits of this worke will be above 10000. pounds a year. For 12000. Tun of water which is the quantity and proportion that these springs do yeeld in 24. houres, will plentifully serve above 40000. houses, which at 5. shillings an house comes to 10000. pounds a year, and the poorest men will not grutch to give 5. shillings a year for good water, which is little above a penny a week. And thus having at large shewed the feacibility and be∣nefit of this worke, and answered the objections made a∣gainst it, I shall be an humble suitor to his Majesty, and to both Houses, that we may have an Act of Parliament for the better doing of it, that we loose not the benefit of this year, having money & materials provided and ready for it. FINIS.
